Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.


Thursday, 19 September 2019

Parliament met at 3.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to apologise for the late start. We are grappling with the high desire by Ugandans to attend the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference. We have been trying to see how to manage expectations and satisfy everybody; it is a bit hard but that is what we have been trying to do. That is why I delayed.

Secondly, honourable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming a young man called Steve Ayeny. That young man is a filmmaker. He is the one who has made the film Kony: Order from Above. The film has been nominated to represent Uganda at the Oscars. This will take place at the 92nd Academy Awards later this year. The Oscars are the highest award in the film industry; it is like the World Cup. (Applause) 

This is Uganda’s first official entry. Among the conditions is that the film must be watched every day for seven days. It is going to premiere tomorrow at 5.00 p.m. at Cinemax, Acacia Mall. After that, it will be shown in the different regions and districts.

I would like to call upon Members to promote this film. The more it is watched, the greater its chances. Do you remember what we did with the Miss World? The more we voted the greater chances she got of winning.

Honourable members, the other matter is that we need to appoint a film commission. Film commissions, in many countries, assist in promoting films. I am glad the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is here. The issue about the film commission is very important. I wanted to let you know that Uganda is continuing to make news and we are very happy. We congratulate Steve Ayeny and we wish him well. 

Members, there will be no sitting tomorrow - we shall be free –so from here, you can just go to Cinemax and watch the premiere and give support to the young Ugandan. Thank you very much.

3.22
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a school in my island called Sigulu Seed Secondary School. Two days ago, terrible wind blew off all the roofs. The students are now learning in classrooms which are open and some are under trees and yet the rains have come. 

That same school had some new buildings that were being built by the Ministry of Education and Sports, using the World Bank money. However, from 2008 to date, the buildings are not complete. 

My prayers are:

1. 	The Ministry of Education and Sports should take over to make sure that these classrooms are roofed.
2. 	The ministry should also explain why the construction that began in 2008 is not yet complete. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter is serious. As you are aware, the islands are hard to reach and hard to stay in. Therefore, anything that interferes with their wellbeing is a problem. Is the Minister of Education and Sports able to say something about that seed secondary school?

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have taken note. I am just getting the information right now. I am going to follow it up and report back.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

3.24
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise a very important matter concerning the fatal lightning incidences in this country. 

The New Vision newspaper of 6 June 2019 reported that six people were struck dead by lightning in Bushenyi. In July, we lost two people in Ngora. Yesterday, we again lost people – a mother and a daughter – who were struck at about 8.00 a.m. About two months ago in Kiryandongo, they lost three students.

Madam Speaker, this is something that is very serious because these incidences are increasing. We would like the Office of the Prime Minister to come and explain to us why – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Can you state your prayers?

MR ABALA: I only have one prayer. I would like to ask Government to come and brief Parliament and the entire country why there is an increase in lightning and what should be done so that our people are safe. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, concerning the schools, I think as far back as the Ninth Parliament, this House resolved that all the schools should have lightning arresters. I do not know whether that has happened. As for the general public, I do not know. Which minister is responsible for arresting the lightning? 

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Madam Speaker, I am sorry for what has happened. However, we have started installing lightning arresters in schools that did not have. We do not have enough resources to cover every school, but for all the new schools that are being constructed, one of the conditions is to have a lightning arrester installed before students are allowed in. 

As for the area that he is referring to, I will get more details from him and report back to you.

THE SPEAKER: Is it the Minister of Water and Environment who is responsible for the lightning arresters, other than the ones for schools - on the roads, in churches?

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I think it resides in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development because every building is constructed following guidelines. When you are building, you get a plan and other guidelines that accompany that. As Government, we will again try to address this matter, which has been raised on the Floor, and we shall come back and update the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development will come and address us on the incidents of lightning around the country and provide solutions. We give them a fortnight to do that. 

3.29
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, but which is also international in nature –(Interjections)– Yes, something can be national but at the end of the day, international. 

Government had prioritised the design and construction of the Jinja-Kampala Expressway. Contractors came, they submitted bids to Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and a report was given to us, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. However, we have heard that Government has shifted from the earlier position and is now removing the road from their list. 

I say it is a matter of international importance because all the trucks which go to Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and elsewhere use that road. Driving from Kampala to Mukono on the current road takes five hours. Most of the other roads have been worked on but this road, which feeds the country economically, has been neglected. 

My question to the Prime Minister and the ministers of finance and works collectively is: Why are you shifting the earlier position of working on the roads, especially in the east, which feed the national economy? –(Mr Tinkasiimire rose)- I take the information. 

THE SPEAKER: No. Don’t you know what you want to ask from the Government? 

MR WALUSWAKA: Hon. Tinkasiimire, I am well informed. (Laughter) May I know from Government why they are shifting from the earlier position and why they are targeting eastern Uganda in particular where poverty indicators show that we are suffering the most in the country? Is it a deliberate effort to leave the easterners stunted; can I know from Government? 

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we do understand the importance of the Kampala-Jinja Expressway. We know the benefits that it brings to the economy. It is still part and parcel of the priorities of this Government. 

I think what hon. Waluswaka has heard is a discussion on the source of funding for this road. Otherwise, we are prioritising it to be taken on under a Public-Private Partnership (PPP). That is the route we are taking. Earlier on – (Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, the clarification I would like to get from the honourable minister is about why he is now choosing to go for a PPP yet we received a loan request and I think we were at the point of signing contracts with the African Development Bank (ADB). How has he abandoned an already finished contract to start afresh? Why are you abandoning the ADB loan and now taking on a PPP? 

The information I wanted to give to hon. Waluswaka is that we have received information that the contractor who was to sign under the ADB loan is not friendly to the powers that are ruling this country. They want the Chinese to be the ones to do it, so the process has to reverse and that is why are now shifting to a PPP. Why don’t you tell us the truth?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think I am now alarmed about a PPP for that road. Who is really going to invest in roads? No! Honourable minister, I think you must have a very good reason. Why do you subject that road to a PPP? Who is going to offer to put money in that road? It is not even a toll road.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, what we are talking about is a toll road. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it going to be a toll road? 

MR BAHATI: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: You still have to build the road first and then we put a toll station there. It is not an attractive prospect. It will be a very long term investment for a PPP.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the question which has been asked here is whether Kampala-Jinja Expressway is still a Government priority or whether we have shifted priority. It is still a priority for Government. What we have not concluded is how it is going to be financed. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, I raise this with pain. You are aware, Madam Speaker, that whenever issues concerning the eastern region come here, finance –(Interjections)– Yes! There is Busolwe Hospital, for example; up to now, the money is there but the ministry has not done anything. 

Hon. Bahati, do you want us to be unruly here? Madam Speaker, I think the Prime Minister should come and give a statement on that road because it is a very important road. 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: I have information as to the proposed PPP that is going to be used for the Jinja Expressway. I know it is not good to mention names of companies, but there is a local company that has almost finalised the feasibility studies for that road as a PPP. For your information, they are not Chinese; they are Europeans. 

It is a high priority. We are expecting this road to be done anytime now as the minister has said - (Interjections) - The contract will be signed. We have our own consultancy on that road and many of the people have been compensated. 

MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a question that the honourable finance minister is deliberately dodging to answer. The earlier commitment was that this road was going to be financed by ADB and I think the World Bank. Hon. Tinkasiimire has asked what happened to that arrangement to make you move to another arrangement. 

Can you tell us what happened to the ADB arrangement, because ADB expressed interest in financing that road as part of the northern corridor as it does not only feed Uganda? What happened regarding that arrangement for you to go for a new one?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What is happening in this country is very unfair. We have approved loans on this Floor for the roads that have been done on the other side. I was a member of the Committee on National Economy and I decided to leave simply because loan requests are brought here and approved. 

Madam Speaker, you expressed concern on this Floor about how long it takes for you to cross from Namawojjolo to Kampala. We who come from that part of the country suffer. Public-Private Partnerships are private arrangements and you cannot force anybody to come and carry out a project under a Public-Private Partnership. 

There was an arrangement for ADB to come and finance the road to the east but you are now saying that you are putting it under a PPP. That is a private arrangement and you cannot force anybody to carry out a project under a PPP. I do not know what this Government is doing to the people of the east.

Madam Speaker, I think we should mobilise the people of the east - those who come from across the Nile - and tell the Government that they must construct this road. We have been waiting for a long time, so that road must be done. What we contribute to our economy is enormous; we feed many parts of Uganda and even our neighbours but what have the people of the east got? We must force the Government to carry out this project and work on this road so that we do not keep suffering. Thank you.

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Waluswaka, who raised this matter. We are talking about guests coming to this country tomorrow and some parts of the east are tourist areas. We have the new bridge that people want to go and look at. We have hills and cultural sites that we need guests to go and tour.

When Government wants us to pass a loan request, they come here and sweet-talk Members of Parliament. However, after passing the loan request, should you get stuck somewhere, you do not want to come back to Parliament.

I would like to propose that we do not pass any loan request until Government reverts to what we decided as Parliament. Why shift the eastern road? There are many Members who use the road from Namugongo and other areas such as Kireka. One takes about five hours on the road - (Interruption)

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whenever we get a good road contractor like Reynolds Construction Company (RCC) working on the roads to the east, immediately they start work, Government changes and brings somebody who comes to do shoddy work, and we know those companies. Can we stick with the identified companies? Once it is said that RCC is working on the Mbale-Tirinyi Road, they should be allowed to continue instead of being shifted only to bring fake contractors and transfer the good contractors to areas they know. Thank you.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is no doubt about the importance of this road. There is no doubt that the existing road is saturated. There is no doubt that we need to construct a new road. However, on the Floor now, we are getting different views – the Chinese are going to do it; it is going to be done by PPP.

Madam Speaker, I beg that you order the Ministry of Works and Transport to come and tell us the truth on Tuesday and we debate from that position. Is it the Chinese or will it be done by PPP? We are now debating what we do not know. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR ANGURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The road we are talking about is very important, not only to the economy of this country but also to the region at large. I am talking as a Member of Parliament representing a border, which facilitates an international relationship to the east. 

The numbers of trucks that are economically empowering us have continued to grow. The statistics I would like to give this august House is that we receive 2,000 trucks crossing through Malaba border every day. If we are to add those crossing through Busia - about 500 – you can see that we need a road and we should have had that road yesterday. 

It is very unfortunate to hear that for a road that should have been started on, there has had a change of position to a PPP. Assuming we do not get these people to agree, when shall we have this road?
 
Madam Speaker, I thought I was the only one suffering with the traffic jam; it is very bad. In procurement, we call that “waiting in motion” - a situation where you stay in one place for 10 hours. How much are we losing in terms of business? 

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)  

MR ONYANGO: Thank you very much, my brother, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give my brother is that the road we are talking about is very important, as he has said. When we look at the connection that we have from the coast to the entire country, this is the only road that links us to the coast. 

A lot of roads are being worked on - flyovers and expressways - in other parts of this country. However, ignoring the eastern route is actually causing more trouble. All trucks that move to Kabale where the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes from, pass through the east. Shifting the goalpost is actually going to be more destructive to the people of this entire country. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR ANGURA: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by not undermining our country; we are a growing economy. However, I would like to inform you that immediately you cross over to Kenya these days, you will find that the roads have been widened from Malaba up to Mombasa. I wish we could follow suit. Those people are now complaining that they move well while in Kenya but when they cross to Uganda, our roads are not doing well.

The PPP that the Government is thinking about will delay the construction of this road. Let us get the ADB loan and work on this road to give the people who come from the east the opportunity to enjoy faster movement, which will translate into business. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I do not only come from the east; the temptation for me to talk like a person from the east, which I am, is greater than my resistance.

Madam Speaker, I also live in Mukono. Recently, I had a discussion with some lawyer friends. They said it should be official and recognised that one of the family planning methods is to take people to live in Kireka and beyond Mukono. You leave very early, no morning glory –(Laughter)– and you come back very late and there is no evening glory because of the jam. 

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, we have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. If that is the plan, we need to know. In fact, if you have not yet produced children, do not stay that side. We need to know whether Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is planning against people from that side. 

Construction of 85 kilometres - We have approved loans here for other things. If you want things of that magnitude to fail, take them for PPPs. We know that PPPs are still a struggling source of financing and do not guarantee that the money is there. Do you want us to give examples of where PPPs have failed? Why do you take us lightly?

I am even one of the Project Affected Persons (PAP) on this road; I live near where that road is supposed to pass. The person who said they have been compensated should know that I have never received such compensation. For many years, we have not used the land. The stress is on the people yet that is their only hope. 

I thought hon. Bahati would be listening because he is the only minister of state for planning. What kind of planning is this? Is this family planning or planning for the people of this country? We need this to be done. If you want to reduce the population of the people from the east, kindly tell us.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on this matter, I will take off my gloves. (Applause) You cannot experiment with people from the east with a PPP. Everywhere else in the country, we have got loans but for that side, you want a PPP. This is unacceptable and we do not want it. We want the right answers. When are you going to build the road? We do not want experiments.

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two points.

First, we have heard the voice of the people’s representatives. We would like to therefore ask for time so that we come to the House when we have finalised all the arrangements to construct Kampala-Jinja Expressway.

In addition, there is the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR), which stretches from Malaba up to Kampala. We will be coming back to the House if you can give us two weeks –(Interjections)- We want to come to the House with a concrete position on this matter. Looking for finances is not a one day’s work. We shall come and inform the House on the route we are taking. However, Kampala-Jinja Expressway remains a priority of this country and it will be constructed.

THE SPEAKER: Come back with an answer in the first week of October.

3.54
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter I would like to raise concerns the growing election violence in Hoima being meted by the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Hoima and hon. Karubanga.

On the 17th of this month, the RDC of Hoima and the Minister of State for Public Service banned all radio stations in Hoima from hosting one candidate, Asinasi Nyakato Adyeri, without proper explanation. The following day, the supporters of Asinasi Nyakato held a peaceful demonstration. From the peaceful demonstration, they were met with a lot of teargas and flying bullets. 

There was also an incident that happened where one young man called Aguda was abducted. He was pushed into a numberless Premio car, driven and owned by a man called Amanya, who is the Chairman of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) in Bujumbura East. This morning, he was discovered dumped in Kinyara Sugar Plantation half dead. He is now undergoing treatment -(Interjection) 

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, there is increasing tension, particularly being led by two people: the RDC of Hoima and the Minister of State for Public Service. My prayer is that since this is a civil activity, where we want free and fair elections, Government should prevail on these two persons during this election, in order for us to have a peaceful election.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Prime Minister is here; maybe he can say something about that.

3.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND THE LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the credentials of the NRM on free and fair elections are well known. They are historical and very strong and there is no debate about that. Secondly, any one causing some problem contrary to the law would be doing so on his or her volition. Thirdly, we have just heard from hon. Tinkasiimire but we would like to know the other side of the story so that we can have a more objective assessment. 

Nevertheless, Government will follow up this matter and if anything has been done contrary to the law, appropriate legal steps will be taken.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.58
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern.  

About two to three months ago, Government released money for honoraria for Local Councils I (LCIs) and they receive it once a year. However, the people who received it were from the Local Councils (LCs) that were in existence in 2001. Since then, new LC zones have been created because of population growth.

Districts like Kyegegwa, where I come from, Kamwenge, Kyenjojo and others have new chairpersons who did not receive anything, yet they were duly elected and have been in office for more than a year. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That would be the Ministry of Local Government or Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The newly elected LCIs have not been paid since they took office.

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we will work with the Minister of Local Government and then come back to brief the House on how far we have gone. However, we shall take action immediately.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance should help clarify this, now that we are talking about honoraria for LCs. In some areas, they have been taxing them. They earn Shs 10,000 per month; now that they are paid Shs 120,000, they are taxed. Government needs to come out clearly on this. Even if your tax base is very narrow, must you tax Shs 10,000 per month? Please, give some hope.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, hon. Oboth is not only a lawyer but a senior Member of this House. You know that issues regarding taxation rest with this House. Whatever tax laws that we pass is what we apply because we cannot do otherwise. If you would like the allowances for LCIs to be exempted, then we must do that. However, as we speak -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is Shs 10,000 a month taxable?

MR BAHATI: Yes -

THE SPEAKER: I do not think this House has ever authorised you to tax Shs 10,000.

MR BAHATI: You authorised us to tax consolidated allowances.

THE SPEAKER: Consolidated allowances of Shs 120,000?

MR BAHATI: Even if you are earning Shs 50,000. Unless we come back to reverse this and exempt them, we cannot do much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if that is the position, we must bring a motion here to exempt them specifically. You cannot tax Shs 10,000.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, it is good that this has come to your attention. Even the Shs 15,000 that sub-county councillors receive is taxed and the argument is the same - as long as it is being drawn from the Consolidated Fund. However, technically, it falls below the taxable threshold and that is where we have issues.

In addition to what they have raised, we had elections that took place in Nebbi and new sub-counties were created. However, they are not operational because the Secretary to the Treasury wrote to the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) that the sub-counties came after the budget process. What happens to the remuneration for the LCIII chairpersons and the councillors who were elected? That should have also been answered by the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, he is talking about the newly created administrative units in Nebbi. What did you say?

MR ANYWARACH: We had by-elections where all the newly created sub-counties had their LCIII chairpersons and councillors elected –(Interjections)– and also town councils in some other districts. Government wrote to the new sub-counties saying that they would become operational in the next financial year. Now, what happens to the remuneration for the LCIII chairpersons and councillors, given this position?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, in that situation, if an LCIII chairperson was elected and the councillors are serving, then it is the responsibility of Government to devise means on how to pay them because they cannot be in office and they are not paid. If we allowed them to be elected, then we have the responsibility to pay them. So, we will work on that.

THE SPEAKER: Can those Members who are affected submit in writing to the minister so that he knows which sub-counties have been affected?

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. To add to what hon. Anywarach said, the Secretary to the Treasury, Keith Muhakanizi, wrote to Chief Administrative Officers saying that the new sub-counties should go back and start operating under their mother sub--counties. 

That is now causing confusion because they have elected LCIII chairpersons. These sub-counties were also passed by the Ministry of Local Government about three years ago, and they have been starting in phases. Now, they are being told to operate under their mother sub-counties. People now think that we, the politicians, deceived them with sub-counties which do not exist, yet we have the minutes.

MS AMULE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The scenario in the newly created Local Councils III is ugly. They wrote the letter that the honourable member talked about after the old sub-counties had passed their budgets which did not include the sub-counties that were curved out. This means that there are no social services that will be delivered in these newly created sub-counties. This leaves us in a dilemma.

When I went to my district, I attended a burial where the Chairman LCV was telling the leadership of the new subcounties that if they do not want to bow to the old chairpersons whom they left, they were going to die of hunger. This is ridiculous.

THE SPEAKER: There is no budget provision in the old sub-counties; it cannot be there. 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Anywarach, for bringing up this matter because it affects the entire country. It is not only Padyere that is affected but it is the same in Ngora.

The new sub-counties were all forced to go back to the old sub-counties but at the same time, there is no budget provision for them. All this is happening, yet elections were conducted by the Electoral Commission for all the LCIII chairpersons of the new sub-counties. The Electoral Commission can give us the whole list. 

That is why I appeal to Government that when we are not ready, we should tell Ugandans that we are not ready, other than causing this type of uncoordinated movement of troops. It does not help us. The LCIII chairpersons have not even received their motorcycles countrywide; they are still complaining about their motorcycles. 

Let the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development come out and explain this because in most cases, it is them that sit on most of these matters. They should sort this matter out once and for all.

Taxing Shs 10,000 per month should not even be an issue. How do you tax Shs 10,000 per month? This man gets Shs 120,000 at the end of the year and you are telling me you are taxing him! It is an embarrassment.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is why I said one of the Members should take this matter up – maybe the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development – and bring a motion here to exempt those categories from that tax. We cannot live on their backs. It is not right.

Honourable members, submit the list of the sub-counties to the minister so that he addresses them. Also, Mr Prime Minister, we established those administrative units and we caused elections; they cannot go back. 

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, as colleagues have said, clearly there was incoordination. In fact, Cabinet has recently taken a decision that no administrative units will be created unless its financial component has been approved, in order to remove this type of situation. 

Secondly, the overall ministry responsible for ensuring that local governments are properly coordinated is the Ministry of Local Government. Unfortunately, I do not see any colleague from that ministry here. I do wish to propose that next week, the Minister of Local Government comes to this House and explains the position Government has taken to ensure that this repeated mess is properly sorted out and we can concentrate on other things.

There is a bit of uncertainty about people who have been elected to these positions or are campaigning for these positions. They also need a categorical statement from Government so that the country is clear on this matter.

4.10
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a matter of national importance concerning four villages in Busia Municipality - Mawero East A, Mawero East B, Sofia A and Sofia B. 

It is now nine months down the road and these villages do not have electricity. I remember one time on the Floor of Parliament I proposed that we would rather donate these four villages to Kenya since the opposite villages in Kenya have electricity which is imported from here. I, therefore, remind the Government of Uganda through the Prime Minister – good enough whenever he talks, our ministers listen and take his orders – that these four villages have no power due to lack of a transformer. 

Insecurity has now increased. You remember these are the villages where guns were stolen twice, a vehicle was stolen once and the district engineer of Busia was also shot at. All this is because of the darkness.

I request Government to give these four villages special attention. Good enough, Mr Prime Minister, these villages support and vote for the NRM 99 per cent. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is directed to come and report to this House about when she will install a transformer in Mawero East A, Mawero East B, Sofia A and Sofia B in Busia Municipality. She should report back to this House within a fortnight.

Honourable Members, that is the end of the matters of national importance. We are going to the Prime Minister’s Time. However, I want to just announce that the 21st National Prayer Breakfast will be held on 8 October 2019 as usual. It will start at 7 O’clock in the morning at Pearl of Africa Hotel. As usual, the Guest of Honour will be the President, Mr Yoweri Museveni. The Speaker will host it. The keynote speaker is Pastor Johnny Enlow from the United States of America. The theme is, “The Power of Character in Leadership” from the Book of Titus:2:7-8.

Honourable members, we might be on recess at that time, but put that down in your diaries. Also, confirm your participation by 25 September 2019. There will be forms in the lobby; please indicate whether you will attend. It is only those who confirm who will be given invitation cards in their pigeonholes. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, on 26 September 2019 at 8 o’clock in the evening, all of you are invited to a dinner in honour of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) delegates. The venue will be here at Parliament. We shall be in our parking lot. Your invitation cards have been placed in your pigeonholes. So, get ready for that activity and maybe some kyamucation afterwards. Thank you.

There are a few matters – I think hon. Oboth and the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development want to say something before we go to the Prime Minister’s Time. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter in relation to the electoral reform Bills. 

On 25 July 2019, the Government tabled five pieces of legislation: the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2019; the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2019; the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2019; the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2019; and the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2019. 

Madam Speaker, as a committee you gave us an opportunity to go and consult at the sub-regional level. The committee members were able to travel to 14 sub-regions and we remained at the district level where we interacted with a few of those who were able to come. The interactions were very informative.

Madam Speaker, the purpose of rising on a procedural matter is to seek for extension of time. We have been meeting several stakeholders after we came back. Today, we met the Electoral Commission. The Uganda Local Governments Association was also supposed to be here. We still have a number of stakeholders who are willing to come in; some are intending presidential candidates or even civil society organisations like the Interparty Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD). 

We have, however, run out of time and we would like to receive all their views, especially on these electoral reforms. We shall be able to conclude the hearings after the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC). That is when we will also get the time to write the report. Therefore, we are seeking for an additional 25 days so that we can conclude this exercise, which has generated a lot of interest from the general public and other civil societies. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, will the 25 days include the hearings, writing and presentation of the report?

MR OBOTH: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is asking for 25 additional days to be able to complete their work. Is there any objection?

MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The House has granted you the authority. We wish you well in that very big national duty. Thank you very much.

Let us quickly go to item No. 6. Under item No.4, we will re-designate Members - hon. Baryayanga - and then we will go to the Prime Minister’s Time. We shall then come back to the third item. 

MR KINOBERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is that on 4 September 2019, I raised an issue here under matters of national importance and the minister was directed to report to this House as fast as possible. It concerns the theft of medicines at Kibuku Health Centre IV. These drugs were impounded from Mukono on 27 April 2019 and the District Health Officer of Kibuku, who was part of the stealing of the medicines, was arrested and taken to Mbale Central Police Station.

Madam Speaker, the issue here is that since 27 April 2019, no one knows where the medicines are and patients are suffering at the health facility. The case is not proceeding. Therefore, my prayer is that let us take the medicines back to the facility since photos were taken. The public is being punished innocently and up to now, the minister has not yet reported to this House. 

Therefore, the procedural matter I am raising is that would it not be procedurally right, since the minister is present in the House, for the minister to give us an update on the status of the case? Also, since the Prime Minister is present - I have been following up on the issue of the beds which were picked from Kibuku Health Centre IV in February. He directed the Minister of Health to bring back the beds but up to date, the beds have not yet been brought back. Those are the procedural matters I am raising.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Health here, but at the next sitting, the minister should come and report on the action taken in respect of those drugs which were impounded in April. Thank you.

Honourable members, I propose that we first defer item No.3 and allow the Prime Minister to respond to Members’ questions. We will take 45 minutes on the question time and as is our practice, those who are able to ask last time should not even try to stand up, so that other colleagues can get an opportunity. I have the list here so you cannot dodge me.

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

4.20
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is a Government policy that every subcounty should have a secondary school. In the financial year 2017/2018, Government took over 100 seed secondary schools in this country and one of them happens to be Agidak Seed Secondary School in Amolatar District. However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to date, no single intervention of infrastructure development has been undertaken in Agidak Seed Secondary School. 

Could you update the country on the fate of the 100 seed secondary schools that were taken over by Government in the financial year 2017/2018 in relation to infrastructure development? Thank you, Mr Prime Minister.

4.21
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, it is true that some secondary schools are still wanting in terms of infrastructure. However, Government has mobilised resources to build secondary schools in subcounties where there are not. 

Secondly, to ensure that in sub-counties where the infrastructure is indeed wanting, it is also covered. The money is being borrowed specifically for this purpose and we are in the final stages; I am sure of getting the money into our Treasury. Thank you.

4.22
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern has to do with the health centre IV for Kyaka South Constituency. 

In March 2019, Members of Parliament from Toro sub-region had a meeting with the President. He categorically told us that in this year, they did not intend to build health centres IV but they would build one in Kyaka South with the help of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), liaising with the Office of the Prime Minister. This is simply because we are overwhelmed by the number of refugees.

Madam Speaker, I have since then been moving up and down to the offices and through the corridors of the Prime Minister’s office to see if I can get this pledge put into effect. I would like to hear from the Prime Minister when the construction of the health centre IV for Kyaka South will begin. The district has already passed the resolution as to where it should be constructed. I have no one to deal with or link up with in UNHCR or in the Office of the Prime Minister. I would like to be guided so that I can push for it.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the people of Kyegegwa must be saluted for harmoniously living with their African brothers and sisters who are in distress. His Excellency the President is right in saying UNHCR should work with Government to improve the health facility, including having a health centre IV. I do not have the specific details but I will work with hon. Kafuuzi to follow up the presidential pledge and work with UNHCR to ensure that this health centre IV is indeed constructed.

4.24
MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in the budget of 2017/2018, under the Ministry of Education and Sports, some schools in our district were promised that lightning arresters would be installed. However, we have tried to move up and down and to date the lightning arresters have not been installed.

Do we have hope that these lightning arresters will be installed? Recall they had been covered in the budget of 2017/2018 and schools in my district were among the beneficiaries. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA:  Madam Speaker, I am informed that Ndugu Muyingo gave an authoritative answer on this matter. However, for the interest of clarity, I would like to say that Government is handling this in a phased manner and you will be covered under the appropriate phase.

4.28
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister whether he is aware that the trained comprehensive nurses are not doing a good job. I say this because they are given bits and pieces of training in nursing, midwifery, paediatrics and everything, and at the end of the day they are not specialised in anything. 

They are not doing good job especially in midwifery. Many women die in their hands. Are you aware of this? Should we continue with comprehensive nurses instead of training real nurses and midwives who know their job very well? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, definitely, I am not aware. Suffice it to say that the point she has raised is an important one. When the programme for comprehensive nurses was conceived, the idea was that these nurses confront so many challenges and it was good if they can handle deliveries and other issues. Therefore, the concept was a very good one. 

However, if there are gaps as hon. Baba Diri has said, this matter will be brought to the attention of the Ministry of Health regarding those areas. In case those gaps exist, the ministry will ensure that they are corrected.

4.28
Mr Edward ssembatya (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2006, the President pledged to tarmac Bombo-Kalasa Road via Ndejje main campus. I am happy to report that that road is one of the 25 roads Government confirmed to work on this financial year. It came out on the list that was displayed in the New Vision newspaper of 17 May 2019. Currently, there is some work going on, on a small scale, involving construction of the drainage system at Bombo. 

May I know from the Prime Minister whether this is part of the bigger programme that we are expecting? I asked Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) officials but they did not give me a clear answer. Has the work started? If not, when should we expect it to start?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am not sure whether I understood what you would like the Prime Minister to say. I am lost.

4.29
Ms maria goretti ajilo (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, time and again this House has been pushing for food security in this country so that our people do not starve when there is drought. We have been pushing Government to construct silos. Right now, the harvest is going on, people are also planting and we expect a good harvest in the next season. We expect these silos to be in place so that people have food security.

I would like to know what the position of Government is as far as silos are concerned.  Thank you.
 
DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Government strongly supports the establishment and construction of silos to promote food security and also trade. However, it is also true that Government does not have adequate resources to engage in serious construction of silos. Therefore, Government has encouraged the private sector to invest in the construction of silos. I am happy to say that quite a number of people have responded positively. 

4.30
Ms rehema watongola (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to first of all thank Government for the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) programme. However, in my constituency and district, Government is again killing the elderly –(Interjections)- Yes; they are killing by adding sickness to the elderly.

The project requires that all the elderly should go to the sub-counties to get Shs 50,000. There are those who can neither walk nor move by bicycle; so, the person assisting the elderly must hire a vehicle to take that person to the subcounty. Is Government aware that instead of bringing life to these people, you are killing them? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as colleagues say, I am definitely not aware of this. Secondly, it can never be the aim of Government to kill her citizens. The primary role of Government is actually to protect the lives of her citizens.

Nevertheless, regarding the matter being raised of mobility and access to the funds being given, if there are practical problems, these can be addressed by Government to see how best those who are unable to move can easily be assisted. It is something that Government is going to take up.

4.33
Mr alex burundo (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 20 August 2019, Government was put to task to explain to Ugandans why there are increasing road accidents that have claimed many lives of Ugandans in different parts of the country. 

Recently, two accidents occurred in Bugiri when a Kenyan-bound bus had a head-on collision with a trailer and a number of lives were lost.

In addition, last week along the Tirinyi-Mbale Road, a Kampala bound taxi had an accident and many lives were lost. It is painful for one to wear a suit and tie, intending to travel to Kampala, and from nowhere they pronounce you dead.

May I know from the Prime Minister what the Government is doing to rescue Ugandans who are being killed by reckless drivers?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Didn’t we ask one of the ministers to come and address that issue? We are expecting an answer from the sector minister. 

4.34
Mr Abraham byandala (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I must thank Government for upgrading one of my health centres II to health centre III status. 

However, I was there yesterday and construction has stalled. Secondly, there is no provision for lighting, either by electricity or solar. There is also no provision for water and a pit latrine. So, what type of health centre are we going to receive? How are we going to operate it when all those things are lacking?  Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I would like to salute Ndugu Byandala for being on top of the situation and inspecting projects undertaken by Government in his constituency. He is being consistent.

Government has standard health centre III plans. If this one departs from the standard plan, measures will have to be taken to ensure that it fulfils what a health centre III should be. It should include all the things that are essential. I cannot see a health centre III with no access to water or a pit latrine. I think there is a gap. You may need to also look at the plans a little more. An interaction with the Ministry of Health may also be useful.

4.36
Mr roland mugume (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have got information from a whistle blower –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those who asked questions last week should please keep your seats. Allow other Members to ask.

Mr mugume: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I got information from a whistle blower that most of the CCTV cameras around Kampala City are not functioning. More so, there are no experts to operate them. Can you tell us exactly what is on the ground?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, there may be one or two CCTV cameras that may have faults but as far as the information I have indicates, the CCTV cameras are generally working well. In addition, I must say, they have helped us a great deal to track a number of criminals who have been involved in some ghastly activities.

Therefore, really, our concern now should be to ensure that we expand the network of CCTV cameras so that our security can be enhanced and criminals can be caught without too many problems like we have been having in the past. Therefore, let me assure my brother, Kaginda, that the situation is under control. On the question of experts, they are available.

4.38
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, your Minister of Local Government announced some time back and told Ugandans about towns that were to become cities - Mbarara, Fort Portal, Gulu, Arua, Jinja and Mbale. These towns have to prepare for city status. Some went and bought land from National Forestry Authority in order to expand. 

When is Government going to bring a Bill on the Floor of Parliament about the de-gazetting, so that we prepare for city status?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is good some announcements have been made, so that there can be better preparation for these places to become well-planned cities.

Secondly, the issue of the forests is a matter that has been discussed and reviewed by Parliament and Cabinet for quite some time. We did find that there were some possible irregularities in the way some of these forests were handled, either in terms of getting plots in them or in terms of relocating them to other areas. 

The ministry responsible for environment is further reviewing this matter. It was raised recently but it is being further reviewed so that a paper is brought to Cabinet and subsequently, information will be brought by the minister to this august House on how to manage and handle those inner forests in urban centres.

4.41
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on 10 July 2019, while welcoming our national team from the Africa Cup of Nations, His Excellency the President of Uganda pledged one million dollars as a bonus to the participating Team Uganda. Many Ugandans welcomed this news and even Parliament thanked the Government for the gesture.

Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, may I know the progress of this pledge by the President? We might get in the same situation as the one when players went on strike during the Africa Cup of Nations. During the weekend, Uganda Cranes is playing Burundi and some players have begun complaining about that pledge by the President.

If you give them a good answer, it would give them some hope and they would play during the weekend, expecting to get their money on a given date. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, if His Excellency the President made a pledge when he met the players after their quite good performance in Cairo, it is clear to me that this pledge will obviously be fulfilled. However, this was done after the budget and it, therefore, takes time to organise that pledge to be paid. 

As for the details of when it will be actualised, this information will be got either from the minister responsible for sports or from State House.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I hope that the President can remember the She Cranes. He has not given them anything, yet they performed very well. Please, remind him about the She Cranes. It is very important.

DR RUGUNDA: The Speaker’s message will be conveyed accordingly. (Laughter)

4.43
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is in regard to the fishermen on Lake Kyoga. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for the last two years, fishermen on Lake Kyoga have been tortured and beaten. However, it is unfortunate that our Government has not gone there to listen to their issues. They are against illegal fishing but they want their issues to be listened to. 

First, they were stopped from fishing. On top of that, they are picked, taken to the northern side, beaten and brought back. The Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) always tells them that they get orders from above.

For us as a region, we have tried to look for the President so that we address the issues of the fishermen but we have not got an opportunity to talk to him. However, our colleagues on Lake Victoria in Buganda region and the others at least have got the opportunity to meet the President and their issues have at least been listened to. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why are the issues of Busoga and the people of Lake Kyoga not listened to?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, when the wananchi speak to the honourable Member of Parliament, they have really spoken to Government and indeed, that is why this matter is being discussed in this very august House. The voice of the people has spoken through you.

Secondly, concerning orders to UPDF from above, yes, it is true orders are given from above. However, these are orders to protect fish and ensure that the lakes are protected so that the fish industry can be resuscitated. 

The matter of people not being treated well, being beaten, cannot be an order either from the President, from the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF) or from authorised leadership. I believe that if this has happened, it may be some misdemeanour by some officers or men, which matter needs to be followed up, investigated, and dealt with accordingly.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think you are really treading on slippery ground on that issue. Since February 2018, we have been complaining about that issue but not a single soldier has been taken to court. All these voices from Lango, Amolatar, Kyoga - Rt Hon. Prime Minister, just admit that it is Government policy to kill, drown, beat and torture. Why are you not taking action? Why is no one taking action, Prime Minister? I am sorry, of course it is not your docket but you are the Prime Minister. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as said earlier, the aim of Government is to protect people; it cannot be to harm, hurt or beat them. If, however, it has happened, that is errant behaviour. 

The Speaker is right that this matter has been raised a number of times. With your permission, Madam Speaker, I will ask the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to come to this House and give a more detailed response to the persistent issues that colleagues have raised on this very matter. 

MS AMULE: Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for Government to continue denying the facts, that it is not only illegality in the fishing industry that is being curbed, when we have evidence of people that have died and people with wounds? We have held meetings, including some with you. We have pointed fingers and said all sorts of words in this august House. 

On top of that, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is it procedurally right for you to say that Government issues orders, yet atrocities are being committed and the same Government does not issue orders to avert these criminal acts that the army officers are committing against the people in the lakes? When some of us speak like this, it is not because we do not support Government but we are here because of the people. 

This evening, I received a call. It is on this Floor that we asked for a ferry to carry people from Amolatar – (Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I ask for your protection. 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Allow the honourable member to express herself. 

MS AMULE: We asked for a ferry to carry the people of Amolatar to the Kwania side across the lake. We are a peninsular; we only have one exit and one inlet in Amolatar. The people of Amolatar cross from Kyoga to Kwania using boats. 

This evening, I received a call from one man, who is doing the transport business. He is not fishing and he is not carrying anybody with fish. When he was found with motorcycles and everything else, he was arrested, rounded up and beaten. Here, we are speaking as though nothing is taking place. Are we in order? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, even school children have been arrested when they are going to school in a boat.

4.50
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like the Prime Minister to clarify this: What could be the possible reasons as to why our foreign minister, hon. Sam Kuteesa, was denied a visa to go and attend the United Nations (UN) General Assembly? What could be the reasons behind that? As a country, how are we going to lose out? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I have no information at all on what my brother, hon. Sebaggala, is talking about.

4.52
MR GODFREY WATENGA (Independent, Lutseshe County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Due to heavy rains in Bududa, the Bubulo–Bududa 28km circular road has been damaged. As we talk now, it is impassable. My colleague, hon. Nambeshe, can bear witness because we now reside in Mbale Town and no longer reach Bududa.

We know that this is the responsibility of the central Government. The last murram on that road was put in 2003, when I was still a young boy. It is now 16 years down the road. What is Government’s take on this as we wait for a long lasting solution? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: With your permission, the minister is here - 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. That is from the horse’s mouth. 

4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. That road is among the roads that Uganda National Roads Authority is responsible for. However, we had a framework contract which expired. It is one of the roads that will have a new contractor in the next one or so months. It is one of the roads that the President has directed us to work on, to uplift it to tarmac standard. I think resources are also being found to make sure that there is a lasting solution for it. 

4.54
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Prime Minister, Government is doing a lot of expansion work at Entebbe Airport. We recognise a lot of attention has been given to passenger terminals. However, the other part of the project is in the cargo section, which contributes about 30 per cent of the revenue. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have received complaints from some of the stakeholders. The expansion in the cargo area is very minimal. The warehouses being constructed are much smaller. There are three handling companies - Fresh Handling Ltd, National Aviation Services (NAS), and DAS Handling. They have been requested to share one warehouse, which is practically impossible because we are expanding the airport. 

One of the perishable products that we majorly export is fish. It has not been catered for because the cold stores that have been procured are below the required temperature; they can only store from 2 to 10 degrees. Fish temperatures are below minus two to five degrees. 

What is the Government doing to address this? There is a complaint that the fish exports are going to go down because the provisions for the cold stores are not there. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, for the last few months, the Ugandan horticulture exporters and Government have been having discussions on how to address this matter. As I speak, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) has given them ample room and space. In fact, the private horticulture exporters have thanked CAA and said they are happy with the new space they have been given. That used to be a problem in the past but it has now been solved. 

4.57
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do love the Prime Minister’s question time. However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I always hear questions that were asked way before being asked again. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is it possible for you to help the august House get to know the achievements we have got from the Prime Minister’s question time by relaying them to us, maybe on our iPads. This would help so that we do not ask the same questions over and over again. We would also get to know the achievements of the NRM Government. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the custodian of the answers and records is the Clerk. It is the Clerk who can give you information on what has been asked. He cannot keep it. I do not think he can answer that.

4.58
MR TONNY MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we appreciate the efforts Government is putting in in ensuring that our rural communities get electricity. However, there are parts of this country which are situated in mountainous areas. My constituency has sub-counties that are only accessed through very steep roads which can only handle light vehicles. If we have trucks ferrying heavy poles, it is not possible for them to climb and reach there. 

We know that there is a project ensuring that every sub-county is reached and connected to the national grid. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like you to assure the people of Uganda, specifically the people from Mahango sub-county and other parts that Government has provision for them. They are not squatters but valid citizens of this country and they need to benefit from that service. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, when the honourable Member of Parliament talks about difficult and hilly areas, the Prime Minister has some idea about what he is talking about. It is true Government caters for these people and extra efforts are made by the ministry concerned to give more support. 

We expect that some new scientific methods are being worked out where there will be even better ways of maintaining and keeping the roads in those difficult areas. However, the point is very well taken.

Before I sit down, the honourable minister responsible for youth has informed me that President Museveni pledged $1 million and paid Shs 2 billion. The remaining part of the money will be paid later.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, as we close, yesterday hon. Mwijukye asked a question about the situation of the former Inspector General of Police, Gen. Kale Kayihura. He said that sanctions have been stamped against him and there has been no message of either solidarity or concern by the Government. We said it is a big one, which you ought to answer.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that the American Government has taken measures against the former Inspector General of Police, Gen. Kale Kayihura. These measures are being studied by Government. A meeting has been called next week with the ministers responsible for defence, security, internal affairs and the Attorney-General, to have further examination of this matter so that Government handles it from a position of knowledge. The Government will keep this august House fully posted on what is happening on that matter.

5.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Northern Bypass kicked off in 2004 and it is just 23 kilometres. When should we expect it to be completed? 

I would also like to know when we are going to have the board of directors for the National Children Authority. It was sometime back in 2016 when the law was amended but to date, that board does not exist. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when you hear us asking the same questions that were asked before - When you commit yourself here, do the work. We have urban divisions for higher education and some of them do not have seed schools. What should we tell our people? At one time, in Pece Division, I was told that what was to go towards a school was sent to Sacred Heart, yet Pece Division does not have any school? There is one school, which the parents are struggling with. 

There are very many issues. When you answer them, make sure that you also follow through, to ensure that work is done, so that we do not come here again with the same questions, like the one on fisheries. The fishermen depend on the lakes for their livelihood. Now, the soldiers have taken over the lakes and other water bodies. How do you expect Ugandans to live? 

Let us help our people better. When you answer those questions, follow them up and make sure that the implementation is done. If it is not done, we will come here again to disturb you because our people disturb us too. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has raised a number of issues. 

The issue about fish is taken very seriously. However, I would like to also remind colleagues that some of the fish factories that had been closed - four of them actually - have now been reopened because of the increase in fish in our lakes. Somebody gave an impression that in Lake Victoria, things are being handled better than in Lake Kyoga. The policy is one - lakes of Uganda. It is not a question of this lake against that lake.

The point of treatment of the wananchi is taken seriously. As I said, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs will come and make a statement on the matter.

On seed schools, it is true that there are some divisions that may have no seed schools. The policy of Government is to ensure that both the rural and urban areas get quality schools.

On the question of the Northern Bypass, it is true that there has been a problem with the Northern Bypass. The problem mainly has been with land acquisition. There are problems related to land, which are common to all of us. However, I am happy that many of those problems have been resolved and construction is on course. Work is in progress and I would like to propose that my sister spends some time and inspects some of the work that is being done. 

On the question of having the board for the National Children Authority, yes I expect this to be done soon. Names are ready from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for submission to Cabinet for consideration. Therefore, the board will be formed very soon.   

THE SPEAKER: Members, we have used up the 45 minutes of question time. 

RE-DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 184 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

5.07
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): On behalf of the Rt Hon. Speaker, and in accordance to Rule 157(4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to re-designate the following members to the following standing committees: 

    1. Hon. Julie Mukoda Zabwe from the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters to the Committee on Climate Change.
    2. Hon. Naigaga Mariam from the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters to the Committee on Climate Change.
    3. Hon. Latif Ssebaggala from the Committee on Climate Change to the Committee on Human Rights. 

I also beg to re-designate hon. Silas Aogon from the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to the Committee on Agriculture. I beg to re-designate.

THE SPEAKER: I think there is a small problem; one of the members you have re-designated is from the NRM party. 

MR BARYAYANGA: Madam Speaker, I beg to delete hon. Mariam Naigaga’s name from the list that I have just read. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Independent Members who have been re-designated be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Is the Government Chief Whip for the NRM here so that she can attend to the others? Maybe we shall do it next week. 
Honourable members, there was an issue on the budget that hon. Onzima wanted to raise; he is seeking for assistance. 

5.10
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Madam Speaker, there is irregularity on issues of budget, particularly the budget concerning local governments. We did not realise this until it was brought to our attention by Uganda Local Governments Association (ULGA) and Uganda Urban Authorities Association (UAU). 

The argument here is that when the budget process starts, local governments submit their budgets to the finance ministry to be approved. When these budgets are submitted and approved, they are brought to Parliament for appropriation. 

When we did appropriation here, there were a number of challenges that included irregularities where the figures, which were appropriated were below what was submitted and approved by finance ministry. For example, what was approved for Kira Municipality is Shs 9,000,500,000, but when it came to appropriation here on the Floor of Parliament, the figure which was presented was Shs 126,000,000. That means that in the four quarters, Kira Municipality will be receiving about Shs 31,000,000 which is way below and they cannot do anything with it. 

For the case of Mukono Municipality, what should have been appropriated for them is Shs 4,651,000,000 but the figure brought here was 708,000,000. 

These irregularities do not affect only a few municipalities. Very many of these municipalities are affected and some districts too. 

We had a joint meeting with Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, ULGA and UAU on 29 August 2019. The resolution we had as a committee was that if this was an error during appropriation, it can only be corrected through an Appropriation (Amendment) Bill. 

We accordingly had requested the finance ministry to Table an Appropriation (Amendment) Bill as soon as possible. However, since then they have kept quiet; nothing has happened. There are also some districts and municipalities that have been appropriated more money than what should have gone to them. 

That, therefore, means that those that have received more money are stuck because that is not the money that was meant for them. Those that have received less money are also equally stuck. So, in this quarter, there is nothing that local governments are doing. 

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development argued that they would initiate some kind of supplementary. We had however, said that a supplementary can only happen when these local governments receive excess money where they can call their councils to approve this supplementary. 

Otherwise, in this situation, if it was an error during appropriation where we appropriated the wrong figures, we thought it would best be corrected through an Appropriation (Amendment) Bill. 

However, since then the finance ministry went silent yet the local governments are financially suffering. So, I thought this is a serious matter that we need to take a decision on as Parliament. That is why I seek your attention, Madam Speaker, to give us a way forward. They approached us as a committee; it did not come through your order. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me study the issue and I will give my ruling in the next sitting. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IRREGULAR RECRUITMENT OF NON-NATIVES ON THE QUOTAS OF OTHER DISTRICTS DURING THE RECENTLY CONCLUDED RECRUITMENT EXERCISE BY UGANDA POLICE FORCE

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will make a statement regarding the alleged irregular recruitment of non-natives on the quotas of other districts during the recently concluded recruitment exercise by Uganda Police Force. I believe, by now, this statement has been uploaded onto your iPads. 

On Thursday, 12 September 2019, Members of Parliament raised issues regarding the recent recruitment of Probation Police Constables (PPC) and the Learner Assistant Inspectors of Police (L/AIP) across the country. 

General allegations that the process was marred with irregularities such as corruption, recruits coming from other areas than the recruitment regions, people ferried from one district to another for the recruitment exercise and others, were raised. 

Specific allegations relating to malpractices were also raised regarding Mayuge, Kumi, Ngora, Tororo, Buyende, Kapchorwa and other districts. 

This statement is being made in response to the undertaking by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister on Thursday, 12 September 2019, that the minister would respond. We have divided this statement into three parts. One is a general report by the Uganda Police Force describing the mandate and process of the recruitment itself. 

This part of the report contains annexures, mainly:

    a) Annexures A-B – the advert for the recruitment;
    b) Annex C – selected candidates for the Probation Police Constables (PPCs) per district;
    c) Annex D – summary of selected candidates by number for the Probation Police Constables per district;
    d) Annex E – summary of selected candidates by region for the Probation Police Constables;
    e) Annex F – a summary of selected candidates for the Learner Assistant Inspectors of Police per region.

Let me present this report and as I said, a copy is already on    your iPads. I will lay the annexures on the Table.

Madam Speaker, this is the report of the 2019 Uganda Police Force recruitment exercise, as introduced.

Having received the necessary authorisation of Government in the Financial Year 2018/2019 as well as the relevant funding, Uganda Police Force conducted the recruitment exercise of 5,000 persons for the positions of Probation Police Constables (PPCs) and Learner Assistant Inspectors (L/AIPs), in the months of July and September 2019 in two phases. This was in accordance with the legal frameworks of the 1995 Constitution, the Police Act and the Police Standing Orders.

Recruitment process 

The exercise was organised in two phases. Phase one was conducted from 29 July to 4 August, 2019 while phase two took place from 30 August to 3 September, 2019. The exercise targeted the recruitment of 4,500 PPCs and 500 L/AIPs in the specialties of ICT (250), Inspectors of Vehicles (20), Medical (80) and Forensic Officers (150). The exercise was coordinated by 10 coordinators who were at the level of directors of police.

Allocation of district quotas 

In line with the constitutional requirement of a nationalistic Uganda Police Force, each district was allocated a quota, which was determined on the basis of the 2019 district population estimates as provided by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics and computed as follows: the quota was determined by dividing the estimated number of people in the district by the total number of the national population and multiplying it by 4,500. This was specifically done for the Probation Police Constables.

I would like members to note that the population quota is not based on natives, tribes or clans but on the residential population in a given area as computed by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics.

Phase One 

This phase of the exercise was conducted across the entire country. It was conducted at designated centres at the district/division headquarters by 29 teams, which were constituted and approved by the Police management after thorough vetting. 

Membership of the recruitment team 

The recruitment team was constituted as follows:

    a) Chairman, who had to be at the level of Assistant Commissioner of Police or Senior Commissioner of Police.
    b) Vice-Chairperson, who had to be Regional Police Commander whose rank had to be Superintendent of Police or Senior Superintendent of Police.
    c) Secretary, who was at the rank of Senior Superintendent of Police or Assistant Superintendent of Police.
    d) One Crime Intelligence Officer, who had to be Assistant Inspector of Police or Superintendent of Police.
    e) Two Medical Officers (male and female) who had to be at the level of Assistant Inspector of Police or Superintendent of Police.
    f) District Police Commander of the area, whose rank had to be at Assistant Superintendent of Police or Superintendent of Police.
    g) One instructor, whose rank had to be Assistant Superintendent of Police or Senior Superintendent of Police.

Members of the District Security Committee, specifically the district DISOs and RDCs, were co-opted on the team for the purpose of vetting and identification of the applicants to ensure that the right applicants were recruited and only people ordinarily resident in the area were recruited.

Recruitment criteria 

    a) One must have been a Ugandan and had a valid National Identify Card or National Identification Number (NIN).
    b) The person had to have no criminal record.
    c) The person had to have a Uganda Certificate of Education with at least two credits in English and Maths at the same sitting.
    d) One had to be physically and mentally fit.
    e) The age limit in this first phase was between 18 and 22 years and they must have been duly endorsed with letters from the LCI of the area where they stayed as well as recommendations of the area LCs II and III and the RDC. This was to ensure that the people who were recruited were actual people of the area.
    f) They also had to have an application letter in the person’s own handwriting demonstrating that he or she can actually write.

The minimum requirements for L/AIP recruitment were:

    1. Must be a Ugandan citizen.
    2. Possess a diploma in the relevant field: Clinical Medicine and Community Health, Orthopaedic Clinical Medicine, Public Health, Dentistry, Environmental Health Science, Pharmacy, Information Technology, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Telecom Engineering, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration, Forensic Science and any other diploma with a bias in Biology, Chemistry, Physics and Mathematics, Mechanical Engineering and Auto-motive Engineering.
    3. Be physically and medically fit.
    4. Aged between 18 to 25 years.
    5. Duly endorsed recommendation letters from LC1, LC2, LC3 and RDC.
    6. An application letter in own handwriting.

These were the criteria for recruitment in the first phase.

Second Phase

At the end of the first phase of the exercise, many candidates did not qualify on account of academic qualifications and age. Out of a total turn up of 19,291 applicants in the first phase, 2,496 applicants were identified to possess the requirements and had passed the interview for the position of Police Probation Constable while 307 applicants, were identified to possess the set requirements and had passed the interview for the position of Leaner Assistant Inspector of Police. This therefore, left a gap of 2,004 people to be recruited as Police Probation Constable and 107 positions for Leaner Assistant Inspector of Police respectively.

In the second phase, informed by the phase one findings I have read out, the failure to attain the required target and considering the need to fill the force's manpower gap through this recruitment using the released funds, the Policy Advisory Committee of the Uganda Police Force, met on 21 August, 2019 and resolved to conduct another phase of recruitment under a reviewed criterion so as to attain the force's recruitment target of 5,000 personnel, as I indicated at the beginning.

Arising from that review, the second phase criteria were adjusted as follows: The rest remained. You had to be a Ugandan and have a national identity card. However, on qualifications, the following were the requirements:

    a. A Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) with either a credit in English or Math at the same sitting. At this phase, this qualification was dropped. The applicants needed one rather than both but at the same sitting.

    b. The age limit was adjusted for the Probationer Police Constables from 18 - 25. The age limit for the first phase was between 18 - 22 years old. This was done in order to get more people. For the Leaner Assistant Inspector of Police, the adjustment was only one; the age limit was adjusted from the age of 18 - 28. Copies of the adverts for both phases of the recruitment are appended here and I will be tabling them later.

Qualifying applicants from phase one taken up in phase two

You will note that because of these adjustments, there may have been people who reported in the first phase at the recruitment centres at the districts. However, since the qualifications were stringent, they did not qualify. When these qualifications were adjusted in phase two, some people qualified.   

With adjustments in the recruitment criteria, 1,397 applicants from phase one, were found to be qualifying for recruitment under phase two from the interview record. These were automatically recruited from the records of the interviews, which were held in the first phase at the district levels. The new advert therefore, specifically required persons who had participated in the first phase of the exercise not to turn up because there records had already been captured in the first phase of the interview at the districts. 

Having taken 1,397 persons, out of the shortage of 2,004, it left a balance of 607 positions to be filled through the second recruitment, which was conducted at the Police Training School, Kibuli, although administratively decentralised. Desks were put for central, western, south western, northern and eastern regions in Kibuli. Five recruitment teams were constituted to handle this phase. 

The decision to hold the exercise at Kibuli centre was arrived on basis of lack of a budget to go back to all the districts for a fresh countrywide recruitment for the required 607 persons. A total of 2,235 applicants turned up for this recruitment at Kibuli from the various districts of the country. 

The methodology used for both phases were as follows:

    a. Screening of applicants

The recruitment started with the screening of applicants by verifying their documents to ascertain their nationality and home districts, academic qualifications and age of applicants. Applicants with satisfactory documents were registered and a serial number was allocated accordingly. They were identified and given serial numbers to proceed to the next stage. Those whose academic qualifications were not satisfactory were disqualified at that stage. Additional verification of these academic papers will continue to be undertaken when these candidates report for training.

    b. Physical assessment; they were made to do some physical exercises including road runs.
    c. Written aptitude test.
    d. Oral interviews.
    e. Medical examination.
    f. Rating of the candidates on the basis of their final score.
    g. Selection of successful candidates on the basis of the district quota.
    h. In case of failure to secure the quota from a district, such positions were secured first from the district of the same region. For example, if you did your recruitment in Arua District Headquarters, the number of people who turned up and qualified were not enough to fulfil the quota for Arua District; the balance of that quota was transferred to the districts in West Nile region. In case there was a deficit remaining, successful candidates from the rest of the country were considered in order to attain the overall national target.

Results of the recruitment exercise

At the end of the exercise, the following results were attained:

A)	Out of the candidates who applied for Probation Police Constables from both phases of the exercise, 5,400 were assessed to have passed the interviews, of which the best 4,500 were selected on the basis of overall scores of their performance as indicated below:
(i) 	Selected applicants from Phase I  2,496
(ii) 	Selected candidates from Phase II 2,004

Shortlisted applicants by district:

(a) 	The list of names of the selected applicants per district is attached and I will be tabling it and the people who were taken out of this for each district. I will also be tabling a statistical summary of selected applicants by district as appendix (d)

There is also a shortlisted applicants’ summary by region so in the appendix there will be a list per district, region and for the various people who were selected. This is for the Probation Police Constables.

The shortlisted applicants for the position of Learner Assistant Inspector of Police; 575 applicants were assessed to have passed the interviews out of the two phases of which the best 500 were selected for the specialties on the basis of overall performance as indicated below:

        1. Health workers quota was 80, 54 of them were male and females were 26 making a total of 80. 
        2. Inspectors of vehicles; their total quota was 20, 18 were male, two were female making a total of 20. 
        3. Forensic services experts were 150, 128 were male, 22 were female and the total was 150. 
        4. In the ICT field had a quota of 250 a total 219 were male and 31 were female. The corresponding list of names of the selected applicants will be tabled as appendix (f).

General observations out of the recruitment exercise:

    a) There was overwhelming turn up for recruitment in districts of the northern and eastern regions, districts from the central, western and Karamoja regions registered low turn-up.
    b) Difficulty in achieving the threshold for female candidates was noted due to the low turn-up of female applicants in the majority of districts.

Although most interested applicants had registered for the acquisition of national identity cards, at the time of recruitment majority of them had not received them. This was resolved by demanding National Identification Numbers from their ID application forms to NIRA. We all know that once you apply to NIRA it gives you a National Identification Number on that form pending the processing of the actual national identity card.

A number of applicants turned up with forged academic documents. However, screening of the shortlisted candidates is continuing at the training school to ensure that whoever is admitted for training meets the criteria for recruitment and later on appointment.

The entire screening process goes on even during the training process both for medical, academic and any other issues that you require until you are formally appointed in writing.

Vetting upon reporting

The selected candidates started reporting at Police Training School Kabalye on 14 September, 2019. By 17 September 2019, 4,911 personnel had reported for training who included 4,432 Probation Police Constables and 479 Learner Assistant Inspectors of Police.

At the end of the reporting deadline of Saturday, 21 September 2019, the candidates had to undergo further vetting to ensure that they were the suitable persons for enlistment into the Uganda Police Force. This vetting will cover:

            a) Identification documents; that is academic papers, national IDs, and recommendation letters as I read from the village up to the Resident District Commissioner and thorough medical examination. As I said in the introduction to my report this is the document describing the process and I thought it is important. 

The second part of my report regards the issues of the two districts of Mayuge and Ngora, which we have extracted in detail.

There are many other districts; we could have extracted from but it will be a voluminous exercise. We thought we could do these two examples because they were mentioned on the Floor here and secondly, they will show the kind of documents in which the recruiting team relied on. I will be tabling all these documents.

I will read one from Mayuge; this is a confidential application but I thought since it is already a public document, I could read it.

This was an application from Mayuge by somebody called Bagende Faisal and he applied through the LCI chairman, LCII, LCIII, the Resident District Commissioner and all of them endorsed and this copy is in his handwriting.

He was applying to join Uganda Police Force and the rest of the details. He signed it and includes his two telephone numbers.

This was the kind of document we went through and it will be useful for members to know why their people applied and were left out.

Then there was one from Ngora; Okwapin Emmanuel who also applied through the same process and got his endorsement from the LCI up to the Resident District Commissioner. He said, “I hereby forward to the above named” this was a recommendation from the LCI but his own application together with his picture is also available.

This document also includes, for the record, successful applicants from Mayuge arising from these handwritten applications so in this document if you find that there was a successful person and you do not find the application then that was forgery. The same applies to Ngora.

There is also a list of the people who were successful arising from the applications, which were also included here. I will be laying them on the Table.

Responses to general and specific issues which were raised by some colleagues in the House. 
Madam Speaker, the first issue is that the recruitment was marred by corruption. Our response is that; unfortunately, no report of specific case being perpetuated by any member of the recruitment team has been filed at our offices. It remains difficult for us to follow this. However, if members have any specific allegations - if you prefer to bring it in a confidential manner, we will receive it.

These allegations have, however, been noted and the Director of Crime Intelligence has been tasked to verify any such allegations and initiate investigations. So, the police are taking their own actions. We have also asked the members with specific allegations and evidence or reasonable rumours to come out so that we can follow them up.

Secondly, there was an allegation that names that appear on the shortlist are not names of the people from the area where the people were recruited from. Our answer is that it is a requirement for all applicants to possess duly endorsed recommendation letters from the LC1 chairperson up to the RDC. This is what I proposed and I am going to table it. 

There is no better documentation on which recruitment teams could rely to identify the residents of the areas. The recruitment team had no authority to reject applicants with unfamiliar names but duly recommended by the local authorities. By local authorities, I mean from LC1 chairperson up to the RDC with no other source other than these. 

However, there could be circumstantial evidence; for example, the name Obiga is a Lugbara name. If there are so many Obigas in Mbarara and there are not too many indigenous names, then that is a circumstantial indication that there could be Obigas who were ferried to Mbarara from Terego. It is also possible somebody went to Mbarara and produced many Obigas. However, that is the circumstances that would be proofed.

Thirdly, there was an allegation that people were ferried from other districts to another area, leaving those who are in that area not considered. Members of the District Joint Intelligence Committee were co-opted - as I read on the recruitment team - and they were tasked with conducting thorough vetting of candidates and to advise on their suitability for their recruitment. 

No slot belonging to a particular district was given away before all the qualified applicants from that district were considered and exhausted. Where a district failed to fill up its quota, such position would first be secured from a district from the same region with extra applicants. In case the deficit remained, successful candidates from the rest of the country were considered so that the target number was achieved.

Then, there were some very specific queries from colleagues. Hon. Robert Ntende raised the following issues: He said 165 applicants who qualified were listed and their names were taken to Kampala by the interviewers. He added that out of the 62 names that were shortlisted, only 24 applicants are from Mayuge. The other 38 names are of people who he does not know. Maybe these are the Obigas.

Our response is that Mayuge District had a total of 61 slots and all were filled including an extra slot allocated because of a deficit in the region because it had more qualified candidates. In other words, Mayuge had more than 61 candidates and we had to borrow a slot from other people in the region to make a total of 62. 

All the 62 shortlisted candidates duly presented endorsement letters from LCI, LCII, LCIII and RDC. That is why I have their names here so that I can table them. This was the basis of admission into the recruitment process. I refer you to Appendix A.

Hon. Elijah Okupa had a general concern that the second phase of the recruitment should have been taken back to the rest of the country and not done centrally at Kibuli. He added that it inconvenienced the majority of the young Ugandans. To a great extent, we agree to this observation. It would be difficult for people to come from Karamoja, Arua and the other distant areas.

However, the argument given by the police management, which we, at the political level, sympathised with, is that the decision was taken because the recruitment budget had been exhausted in the first phase and there were still 607 positions to be filled, as I had explained earlier in my presentation.

The projected turn up for this phase was much less than the first phase. In other words, they are pleading that the budget had been exhausted and if we were to deploy all the teams back in the districts to look for 607 people, they would spend more money, which was not available and the process would be delayed. At the political level, I must say, we tended to understand this condition and we take responsibility for it.

Hon. Silas Aogon from Kumi said tough recruitment criteria, especially the requirement of credits in mathematics, deterred interested applicants. Again, he added that people were ferried from outside the district. He also added that nobody on the shortlist of Ngora District is from that district.

The criteria arrived at is because of a thorough analysis of human resource challenges facing the force and it made it necessary to recruit people who had passed mathematics. It had always been a requirement for police recruits to have passed mathematics as police work is so diverse in nature, some of which requires officers to have a good foundation in mathematics.

No official on ground reported about people being ferried from outside the region. However, some leaders facilitated some applicants to reach the recruitment centres and this was within the various areas. People of different calibres - parents, political leaders and religious leaders - facilitated the applicants to reach the recruitment areas.

On the issue of no person being from Ngora District on the list, we are saying Ngora had 18 slots but 34 applicants were shortlisted. All the 34 shortlisted candidates presented duly endorsed recommendation letters from the LCIs, LCIIs and LCIIIs from various areas of Ngora District and this was the basis for admission in the recruitment process. As I said, I am tabling that application in hand writing on the Table.

Hon. Fredrick Angura, raised the concern on the recruitment age of 18 to 22 years that limited interested applicants. The criteria were arrived at after a thorough analysis of the human resource challenges facing the police. 

I would like to add that the reason why in all recruitment there are criteria established is to limit. That is the whole purpose and that is why it is not left open. Whether it is about age or academic papers or about the height of a person, that is the entire purpose of criteria; depends on what we want to achieve.

Hon. Fredrick Angura, raised another issue that every district should get a copy of its shortlist for verification by the Gombolala Internal Security Organisation. We are pleased to provide this list. First of all, the lists have been sent to all the district police headquarters and they are now public documents. Honourable members are encouraged that they take further verifications. If the copies we have in Parliament are not enough, they will be available and if you would like to look at the head written applications and verify them from the police archives, we shall be willing to help you do so.

This is important for us as the political managers because you never know the issues raised by the members are correct yet we may not be able to do all that, and you may have very viable information which can help us.

Hon. Robert Musoke from Buyende said that the recruitment teams did not involve the district leaders. Of course this is not correct. Members of the district security committees specifically District Internal Officers and Resident District Commissioners were co-opted on the teams for the purpose of vetting and identification of the applicants to ensure that the right applicants are recruited. Remember every applicant had to come with a letter of recommendation from LCI to LCIII who we also considered to be district leaders.

Hon. Robert Musoke also said that he doubted whether the 18 people shortlisted from Buyende are Ugandans. All the shortlisted 24 applicants from Buyende District duly presented endorsed recommendation letters from LCI, LCII, LCIII and RDCs from the various areas, which was the basis for the admission into the recruitment process. The only problem here could be; one, if these LCIs were not Ugandans or if they are doing things other than what they are supposed to do.

Finally, hon. Lukia Chekamondo said that the people who passed the interviews were given numbers. However, that when the shortlist came out, some of those who had been given numbers were not on the shortlist. Remember I told you the point at which people are given numbers. Once the applicant’s academic documents were certified and so their documentation was correct, they would be given a number to proceed to the next phase. In other words, at that point they had not necessarily passed but going for the next phase.

This was a procedure for every applicant who participated in the interview to be issued a registration index number for their identification. The number was not an identity for those who had passed interviews but rather for the applicant having the minimum requirements to be allowed into the rest of the process. Passing of the rest of the interview stages qualified one for selection depending on the district performance and district quotas.

Madam Speaker, those are the responses to the general and specific issues, which were raised by honourable members. 

In conclusion, the Uganda Police Force set up to recruit candidates nationally across the country on allocated quotas that were deliberately designed to provide the maximum inclusion of Ugandans in the service of the Uganda Police Force, which hoped to recruit and train the best interested cadres.

Therefore, the process of screening for those best cadres will continue even during the training period. We appeal to Members of Parliament and the general public with any adverse information to this process to freely come forward now and in the future to help us perfect this process. The Minister of Internal Affairs and the Uganda Police Force will take the necessary action to redress any misgivings. 

Madam Speaker, yesterday, hon. Anywarach asked a question and you directed that I would answer today. That question was related to people who had reported to the training school but were asked to go back. Yes, it is one of the requirements - as I said the screening will continue. Even at the point of reception of people who are reporting, we want to know whether these are the right people who were recruited, whether they were recruited correctly and they are the right Ugandans.

Therefore, some people may report without the documents that made them to be recruited. These will be asked to go back. It does not mean that they will forfeit their positions and they will be asked to come back.

We have also said that those who do not have national identity cards but they had applied to NIRA for them; it is not their responsibility that they do not have those cards. Therefore, we have taken it upon ourselves - we are requesting all of them to give us their list and we shall go to NIRA and extract their NIN and still go back to ensure that they are properly processed.

I now would like to lay on Table the following documents:

    1. The appendices that I had mentioned as A, B, C, E and F in my presentation regarding the adverts for the two phases.
    2. The lists of persons who were recruited.
    3. The summary of persons who were recruited regionally.
    4. The statutory analysis of the shortlisted applicants per region. 
    5. Appendix F, which is the shortlist of Learner Assistant Inspectors of Police.
    6. I would also like to lay on the Table the list of successful applicants from Mayuge, as an example and because it was specifically mentioned as well as copies of the handwritten letters of the applicants on which the admissions were based.
    7. I would like to also lay a list of selected applicants from Ngora District and photocopies of the handwritten applications that they submitted for the purpose of the recruitment. I beg to lay.

As I said, the rest of the documents are on the members’ IPads. We shall be very grateful if they can use them to help us perfect the system. Thank you.
 
THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Obiga Kania, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, for that very elaborate response that includes exhibits.

Honourable members, I would like to propose that you study these documents. If there is anything wrong with them, you will come back. For now, let us take the minister’s answer.

Some of the documents are at the district with the District Police Commanders (DPCs). For the Member of Parliament for Ngora, you have everything now. Thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE AVAILABILITY OF LAND IN JINJA EARMARKED FOR THE MAHATMA GANDHI CONFERENCE CENTER TO BE SITED AND THAT IN ENTEBBE

6.08
The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some time back, we were directed to get land for the construction of the Mahatma Gandhi Convention Centre. 

When we indicated that we had got land in Entebbe, some problems arose. Later, the Government of India opted that they wanted to build it where ashes were sprayed in memory of Mahatma Gandhi.

In the middle of that, another request was brought by the Indian High Commission for land for the convention centre in Entebbe and for another building in Jinja, not for the convention centre per se. The building in Jinja is supposed to be in memory of the burial site and to be a tourist area.

We gave priority to the land required for the convention centre. Uganda Land Commission sat and has availed land in Entebbe under minute number ULC40/2019A8. Communication has been forwarded to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, which is to hold the title on behalf of the convention centre. At the moment, it is this ministry that is supposed to forward the information to the Indian High Commission, if they are ready for construction, and also for sub-division of the land.

Therefore, we are waiting for any information from the ministry and the Indian High Commission to proceed with showing them the site but the communication has already been sent. I beg to lay it on the Table.

On the issue of land in Jinja, I wrote to Jinja District and they indicated to me that there is land at the shore of River Nile, which is adjacent to where the ashes were sprayed.

That land was allocated to an investor but they indicated to me that the leasehold has expired. Part of it still has a running lease so we are waiting for the land board to advise us on how we can handle the land at Jinja.

Unfortunately, I received information and a letter that the chairperson of the Jinja District Land Board has resigned. I now have to liaise with the district chairperson for designation of at least one of the members to be the chairperson of the board so that they can proceed with transacting business. I will then be able to notify the ministry on the status of that land.  Thank you.

Mr mwiru: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was in this House when the Prime Minister of India promised the construction of the convention centre at Jinja. He did not talk of a building. 

Secondly, regarding where the Prime Minister promised to construct the centre, it was at the source of the Nile. When you get to the source, there is a signpost reading, “Source of the Nile” for whoever bothers to read. 

What has happened unfortunately is that individuals obtained certificates of title past that signpost. I think this is the reason why there was a shift in the construction of a convention centre from where the Prime Minister promised to a different place. 

The minister is busy promising us a building in substitution of a convention centre. I am wondering, in light of what is taking place, whether it is not prudent for us to expunge that promise from the Hansard of this House. This is because what is going to be built is not what the Prime Minister promised in this House.

Further, I have had the benefit of interfacing with the Minister for the Presidency, hon. Mbayo, over the same matter. If there is a Government, there is no way individuals can acquire certificates of title where there is a signpost clearly showing that this is the source of the Nile. 

I thought that the honourable minister was coming to inform us that she has obtained information surrounding the source of the Nile and that for whoever has a title, she has issued notice for cancellation so that we proceed with the development. 

I am only wondering whether, in light of what the minister has told us regarding the building, we should still maintain on our Hansard that the Prime Minister of India promised a convention centre in Jinja. I seek guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know why sometimes Government acts in a shabby manner. I have seen us give big tracts of land to investors free of charge, moreover to foreigners. However, this is something of a bi-lateral nature; a donation from a brother Government but we are wondering whether or not there will be land.

This morning I had a meeting with the Indian High Commissioner. He was telling me that the land, which he has been shown is in parcels; they are not even together. He said, “What they are showing me is not what we want”.

Can the Government deliver? You have the capacity to acquire land for a public purpose. This convention centre is for a public purpose. I hope we can get some good answers.

MR MWIRU: The people who got those titles have promised that they want to be compensated so that they allow this development to go on. However, there is a signpost “Source of the Nile” and that is where it starts. I thought this was also important.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, when Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed Africa and the World through this august House, the Indian Government offered to put an international convention centre at the Source of the Nile in the memory of Mahatma Gandhi. 

I would like us to resolve the confusion which arose. That because Government had earlier committed itself, it came here- I can tell you, at the right time we will get it on the Hansard. Government had committed itself to another investor to put an international conventional centre elsewhere. That alone was also very unfortunate.

In this era and time, when we are talking of developing the other parts of Uganda, regional cities, revitalising tourism in Jinja, why would anybody in Government move against such a bilateral offer to revitalise Jinja which we know has been killed?

Before we even go to the small debate, because the debate on land is redundant; the debate on land should not be the topical issue. The issue is that the conventional centre for Jinja -Rwanda is expanding; it is a conventional centre. It has a franchise of chain hotels; but in Uganda, we are saying the Government of Uganda has committed itself to only one investor for a conventional centre; that is very unfortunate.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request Government to come back and allow what the Prime Minister of India offered to Uganda; the land matter in Jinja; for God’s sake, how can a whole Government of Uganda, which engaged in a land giving bonanza to, for example, to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) hotels, which hotels we have never seen - how can they fail to accommodate such an important project and yet we are saying we need to promote tourism?

I would want us not to - I have also interacted with the Indian High Commission about that matter. The original intention of the Government of India is not in Entebbe - it was Jinja. It is now being brought here in Kampala. Other interests, which are not national are persuading India to put this project in Entebbe.

Can we remember the other parts of this country including Jinja and other regions and give them what is due to them? Government has not given them any project to revitalise Jinja, but India Government is giving one. Why are we failing other regions from taking off? 

Madam Speaker, I request that this matter be given further investigation so that it is resolved once and for all. However, the international conventional centre should be put in Jinja as it is was captured on the Hansard.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the people of Jinja requested that the port in Jinja be revived, the Government moved to Bukasa. We have facilities in Jinja, which just need attention, but the Government said let us move to Bukasa and forget about Jinja.

6.20
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What are our Government’s priorities? It is now over a year since the Prime Minister of India gave us that donation. He promised that he was going to construct a magnificent centre in Jinja. I am a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee. What the minister is presenting is quite different from what Foreign Affairs is telling us; unless the minister’s statement was produced three hours ago. By lunchtime, Foreign Affairs was still saying that they do not have anything. Madam Speaker, Foreign Affairs was just a coordinating institution, but the lands ministry was responsible for this project.

Madam Speaker, doesn’t it ring a bell that someone has promised to construct a magnificent centre free of charge and then we dilly-dally around. Madam Speaker, I cannot be convinced that ever since the Prime Minister was here, we are still searching for land. The land is there, but I think we must remove the veil and see what is behind this confusion.

Madam Speaker, about Entebbe land, there was a big piece, but we are getting rumours that mafias are fighting for the same piece of land. They wanted to give the same piece of land to Foreign Affairs for that construction, but they refused. They said the plan that they had for the magnificent centre could not be accommodated there because the land was small.

Madam Speaker, I request that we reject what the minister has brought and investigate why there is that kind of delay in the implementation of this project. Otherwise, we are going to have personal interests overtaking national matters, which we cannot accept as Parliament of Uganda.

6.23
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It would be important that investments are distributed evenly. I see that there are many investments within Kampala, Wakiso, and Entebbe. It would be prudent that such an investment goes to another region for purposes of regional balance.

Madam Speaker, I know that land, which is being talked about is not private land, but Government land. We also have an opportunity and a privilege that the area that is being talked about is represented in this House.

In addition, the honourable member from the area, hon. Mwiru, has clearly indicated that there is a problem with the land in question. What I would expect from the honourable minister is to say: “Look, this is the size of the land and the title holders are one, two and three.” Tell us when those titles were acquired and whether they acquired them legally.

There are many petitions on land that have been presented on this Floor; both private and Government land. I think if a Prime Minister of a nation makes a commitment to another country and the country does not respect it, it may be taken as unserious. Next time, when we go there, they will think we can make promises and not fulfil them. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence. I think the Committee on Physical Infrastructure should visit Jinja and look at the piece of land that the honourable minister is talking about. They should bring a report to this Parliament so that Parliament can address the matter from an informed position. It should be done as urgently as possible so that then Government can see what to do in the near future. 
That is my view, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am surprised that title deeds were issued there. That is a world heritage site by UNESCO. It is protected so how can they get title deeds? If they are there, they should be cancelled. 

6.27
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I pray that this debate only remains on record here, otherwise, it is vulgar.

I have been around my sister, the honourable minister, for a long time. When she is not sure of where she stands, I can tell. I sympathise with her. I can read her demeanour when she is not so sure about her surroundings. 

Madam Speaker, like you just stated, under the law, the registrar of titles has powers to cancel any title erroneously issued. I would like to imagine that there will be conversation immediately after here from the minister to the registrar of titles to consider circumstances under which these titles were issued and immediately cancelled for starters – (Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we are talking about land at the Source of the Nile, which has been given out and given titles. At the same time, we are making reference to ministerial statements. 

Madam Speaker, I have spent time trying to look for the ministerial statement in our iPads but it is not there, and yet it is very important statement we are discussing.

Secondly, we are talking directly to the senior minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. We cannot guess. If she knows the person in whose name that title is given – this is Parliament of the Republic of Uganda - can she lay on Table that title deed? We want to know who owns that company and who the individual is. Is it the Kyabazinga of Busoga? (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, are we proceeding right when we are talking about fundamental matters that touch on our inheritance, without substantive information laid on Table, upon which to base our decision? Are we proceeding right? 

THE SPEAKER: The honourable minister indicated that some of the land was given to an investor. I think we would want to know who that investor is so that we can take a decision. As we have indicated, the place is protected so how can we have anyone have title deeds? Please conclude. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with hon. Nzoghu that Parliament addresses itself on this. For example, the land of this entire Source of the Nile is reducing. Before you know it, the Source of the Nile will be some slum of sorts. Can we have an idea of how this land has been melting away? Are insects eating it? May we know the people owning land here? This is in order for us to have a better conversation on how land has been changing hands illegally. 

Nevertheless, for starters, immediate cancellation is feasible and attainable even tomorrow morning, Madam Speaker. 

6.31
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Prime Minister of India, H.E Narendra Modi, did not come to Uganda as an investor looking for land to put up a convention centre and so forth. He came here as an honoured guest with the 21 gun salute and red carpet. He came here as a head of state to this country.

In appreciation of the welcome he received, after even addressing us here, he offered to build a memorial centre for Mahatma Ghandi, a national of India. 

It is really very distressing to hear from the minister and you, Madam Speaker, that the land available there is now in bits and pieces. What kind of country are we? (Laughter) We are offering bits and pieces. This is not being very serious. What message are we sending to the Indian Government? Following the state visit of their head of state to Uganda – 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Allow hon. Baba to contribute. 

MR BABA: What message are we sending to the Indian Government and the Prime minister of India? Following his visit, we are treating his offers very casually by bits and pieces of land.

Madam Speaker, I believe this House should demand from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development that the ministry goes to rectify the allocation of this land as promised by Government both in Jinja and in Entebbe. This is in order for the Prime Minister’s offer to be fulfilled as soon as possible. 

India is capable of building up these two centres within a year, given their level of commitment, historical connection in this country and the role of Ghandi in our liberation throughout Africa and so forth. I am sure they want to fulfil this project. Therefore, let us take it seriously; get back to the drawing board and get this land available by whatever means. 

I agree with hon. Nzoghu that the Committee on Physical Infrastructure should be instructed to follow this up and come up with a report to Parliament about the availability of these two pieces of land in Jinja and Entebbe. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Before I invite hon. Amoding to take the Floor, I would just like to remind the minister that hon. Modi spoke to Africa from here. He did not speak in any other Parliament on this continent. It was here. Therefore, we must deliver whatever he did. He spoke to Africa from here. All the commitments to Africa were from this House. It is a very serious issue.

6.34
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Perhaps the minister wants to be reminded that India is not just any other ordinary partner for us as a nation. It is a fast growing economy in the world right now. We have to look to such partners in terms of our economy, which is stressed financially, but also in terms of partners that can work with us. An offer from such a country, which is actually free of the ties that we receive from many other countries, should not be taken lightly. 

In fact, if I was a Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, I would be running around to ensure that – I just wanted to speak to hon. Amongi. Let not those mafias cause you to make mistakes and spoil the good record you have.
 
I imagine you know that this land is perhaps in somebody’s name but you have come to this Parliament and you want to gloss over that issue, instead of telling us the truth. 

This is a historical place and it is the heart of Uganda. The Source of the Nile is this country’s identity. Therefore, I think no other person in this House would take that matter lightly. 

Madam Speaker, as a Parliament, I think we are at loss of words. Most of the time, when such issues come to the House, we indeed wonder whether we have a Government because such a place is a heart of our nation. Most of the things spiritually, which are performed in this country, they go to the Source of the Nile. Everybody is battling for the heart of the country. No wonder, it is significant to this country.

Madam Speaker, the minister is also aware of the way to acquire public land and it is very clear. On such a matter, we would like to support you, honourable minister. If you need to cancel – these are titles which clearly need to be cancelled. Before we assign the committee responsible, I think that would be a waste of time. 

The matter is clear and we need to lay before the House and find out whether the land is encumbered and who the person who encumbered it is. God forbid if it is the Kyabazinga of Busoga; it cannot be.

As a Parliament, there are things that we cannot really tolerate. We are talking about the heart of Uganda and the offer from the Indian Government; a bilateral agreement should be expedited. This is an opportunity for Jinja to get that investment and support the region, not only in tourism but also in the development and creation of jobs. I second what members are saying. This is an issue of cancelling of a title but also an issue that should be taken with the importance that it deserves. I thank you.

6.37
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much because this is a very important item. I clearly remember on 25 July 2018, at 10.55 a.m., the Prime Minister of India visited this House and was seated exactly where you are. At that time, you were seated the other side. This matter did not take place outside the House but here in this House.

As a way to update my minister, I would like to read. When the President invited him to speak, he said: “I thank you, Your Excellency, for visiting us and I invite you to address us.” (Applause)

The Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi, said: “Your Excellency, President Yoweri Museveni; Your Excellency the Vice-President; Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker of the Ugandan Parliament; honourable ministers, honourable members of Parliament, excellencies, brothers and sisters.

I am deeply honoured by the invitation to address this august House. Your presence, Madam Speaker, reminds me of my Lok Sabha, which also has a Lady Speaker. I also see a large number of young Members of Parliament here. This is good news for democracy.  

In opening the State House to the celebration of Diwali, you have lit up the many strands of ties that connect India and Uganda. Among these, the most sacred is the site at Jinja, at the source of River Nile, where a portion of the ashes of Mahatma Gandhi were immersed. In his life and beyond, he is one with Africa and Africans. At the sacred site in Jinja, where a statue of Gandhi now stands, we will build a Gandhi Heritage Centre. (Applause) As we approach the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, there can be no better homage than a centre to remind us of Africa’s role in shaping his mission that even inspired Africa to freedom and justice, and the universal and timeless values of his life and message.”

Madam Speaker, having read what Narendra Modi said here, when you compare exactly with what the minister has said – this one is on our record here in Parliament. I did not get this from Ngora but from the Parliament of Uganda. (Laughter)

We do not need to distort facts because it is bad manners. Earlier in the day, we were talking about the Jinja Expressway and how they are changing from African Development Bank to Public Private Partnership. They are now bringing Entebbe, which the Prime Minister of India, who is very sober - and he spoke from there and he was not reading a speech. If you are now talking about Entebbe, which was in the programme, this type of arrangement – First, I would like you to help me to inform the minister that what she has presented is null and void.

Secondly, I know the certificate could have been issued after Modi had said that they were going to build a heritage centre in Jinja. We must know the company and officers, who were involved in issuing this certificate to that company. At the same time, they must be dealt with administratively and properly so that they understand the language of Government. If we are going to ignore this scenario, we are going to be embarrassed and the Indians are watching. We are about to approach the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi and I do not know what we are going to tell the Indians. When our President goes to India, what will he say? That we do not have land, yet we are donating land to people whose interests we do not understand?

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the land in question, whereas it was allocated to individuals, they have not even complied with the initial period in the lease. There is nothing they have put in terms of development at the place other than holding pieces of paper as their certificate of title. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: They are speculators.

MR ABALA: They heard Modi speaking from here and they started running around. Madam Speaker, as I conclude, the report, which the minister has brought, we should not treat it as a proper report. That report has very many gaps and we should reject it so that the minister gets to know and tomorrow, she follows with the records.

We should not go far wasting resources of Parliament to send a committee there; the information is actually here. What are they going to get? The minister must tell us who these people are and afterwards, the process starts and the centre is built in Jinja, not Entebbe. Entebbe was not there; those who are talking about Entebbe, I do not know what their interests are. 

We should talk about Jinja because the statue is already there. In the next few days, the Commonwealth Parliamentary team will be visiting the source of the Nile, Jinja. Assuming, they ask for Mahatma Gandhi’s Heritage Centre, what will we say? I might be there and we shall go to Kamuli. 

Madam Speaker, what will the members talk about? Those questions are serious – (Interruption) 

MR BIRAAHWA-MUKITALE: We are going to have delegates going to Jinja. The Indian delegation as a member of the Commonwealth, they will ask when we are taking them around Jinja, where the site for the Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Centre is. What shall we answer? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, may I add that the Speaker of the Lok Sabha is coming with a delegation of 92 people. It is therefore, a serious issue. 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, you have now talked about 92 people, who might be 100 tomorrow because there is still time. 

If they are 92 and they will go to Jinja because they have interest in where the man’s ashes were poured, that is why we should not talk about Entebbe but Jinja. Thank you very much. 

6.46
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very strange. If this was a loan processed by this House, you would see everybody supporting because the conduit would be complete. However, this is now a free offer, an opportunity for people from Jinja to promote tourism in Uganda. When will people from the East also benefit from this?
We should begin to speak about this because we are being treated like another class of Ugandans. This country is for all of us. Very soon, Jinja is going to be a city. These are some of the facilities that should be there. This is the way we are going to attract tourists to Jinja to let the people in Jinja also benefit them. 

You are now talking about Entebbe. What report do we give to the Prime Minister? How shall we begin saying that because of this and that we shifted to Entebbe? The Prime Minister’s issue is very clear. He said it should be at the source of the Nile. It has its heritage connection. 

As Ugandans, we need to sober up and be fair to this country. All of us belong to this country. Jinja also needs to grow. If this was to be in Kampala, by now, it would be in advanced stages maybe even at roofing level. 

However, because the Prime Minister’s money is coming directly to the Indian community and they are going to process this, there is no eating. Now they are giving less attention to it. This is making the country lose.

6.48
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, you are holding a very hot potato in your hands. You have to leave a legacy. If you become selfish, then the future will also discuss you the way we are discussing this. 

When it comes to land, the people who take public land, where interests of the country are, are big people in Government. This makes me remember Shimoni Demonstration School and Primary Teachers College. The children came and cried when examinations were around the corner and yet, it was eventually taken. 

Why do we do this? Land can move from individuals to the public but it should never move from public land to individual land, especially this one. When did this investor – he was probably a minister here in the Government, and probably a minister of lands – you are also the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Learn to leave a good legacy. I think you have the power to de-register and have this land taken back to the public. That ground should be put to good use; people should stop being selfish. 

Butabika land has been grabbed by selfish people. You will pay the price. It was said yesterday that whatever we do, we must learn that it comes with a price. Today, we are discussing the former minister, that is the price – his name and legacy. What will his grand children say? 

Let this land come back and let the centre take the centre stage instead of individuals. We cannot discuss individual in this matter. Public takes precedence. That individual must know that he is acquiring that land fraudulently. We are already judging ministers even when God says we should not judge. We are judging how selfish ministers are trying to accumulate things.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. I seek that you guide this House. To begin with, a matter has been brought in this House. Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct for this House to develop a motion that starts with a preamble that in this House, on the 25th day of July 2018, Prime Minister Modi said this? Secondly, that land must be available so that you arm everybody concerned with the necessary – (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Order. Allow the Member to speak, please. Let him make his proposals. 

MR MUSUMBA: What I am saying is that everything that has been said should be reduced into a motion, then you arm whoever you would like to direct to perform. As a Parliament, you will have the instrument of arms to do so. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: It is a good proposal but why should we reduce ourselves to coming here to say, “by the way, do you remember, on 25 July, he was here, this is what he said.” He said it and the Hansard is here and clear.

Please, Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, take action according to what the Prime Minister said. There was no Entebbe. He talked about the Source of the Nile in Jinja. That is what is on the Hansard. We do not know anything about Entebbe. Please, give us a way forward. 

6.54
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of Entebbe was received by me under a presidential directive in writing. What I was made to understand is that there is a convention centre, which should be with hotels for purposes of big Government functions and then, the Gandhi Heritage Centre. The Gandhi Heritage Centre is supposed to be in Jinja while Mahatma Gandhi Convention Centre is supposed to be in Entebbe. 

I proceeded on that basis because I have no mandate on foreign relations. Constitutionally, the person who handles foreign relations of this country is the President. When the President directs me to give land in Entebbe for the Mahatma Gandhi Convention Centre and land for the Gandhi Heritage Centre in Jinja, I act as per the order and directive of the person who manages the foreign relations of this country. 

Therefore, I can only say that if this House strongly feels that it disagrees with him on the position, I can discuss that position. However, on the issue of Mahatma Gandhi Heritage Centre, we are handling the cancellation of the title. I had already instructed the District Land Board to sit and withdraw the minutes because under the law, the controlling authority, which is the District Land Board, is supposed to sit and withdraw the offer. After it is done, they forward to us and we are able to do it. It is only when they fail to do that, that we can invoke section 91 of the Land Act and give our reasons if they do not cooperate. 

However, they were willing to cooperate and rescind that position for us to cancel the offer and get that land back for the Gandhi Heritage Centre –(Interjections) That is why I said that unfortunately, when they were supposed to act – Jinja is a very interesting district, which I do not want to discuss here. 

People who come from Jinja know how difficult they are on land issues –(Interjections)  No, I do not know about that one. When they were meant to do it, they went into other things, which ended in a problem, where the chairperson of the District Land Board has resigned. Since the matter is very urgent, if the Board cannot sit, we can still go direct on the basis of section 91 and issue the notice on our own and then, be able to cancel that one. Those are my proposals, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, considering that it has been more than a year since the Prime Minister gave us that offer and nothing has happened, I think it is the position of this House that you invoke section 91 immediately and deal with the issue for us to get the land. (Applause) We hope to hear an update from you within a fortnight.

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, notice has to be given and it is a 21-day notice. If we are to take 21 days, those are three weeks. Therefore, I can be able to report back by 20 October.

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, please, take note of that commitment and requirement before this House. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT’S COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO ADDRESS YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT

6.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity given to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social development on 9 August 2019 to prepare and present to Parliament a comprehensive plan to address youth unemployment in Uganda. You realise that this is one of the most important issues in the country and I would like to thank the House for the opportunity given to us and to assure you that I did not take the assignment lightly because it is one of the critical areas that I hope to address and overcome, where possible.

Cabinet looked at the draft as per the Rules of Procedure of Parliament for the ministers and has now implored the National Planning Authority and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to harmonise the plan with me. Therefore, I request for three weeks to be able to present the plan to the House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, should we expect the plan in the third week of October?

MS NAKIWALA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Item No. 5, the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is not here again. Item No. 5(2), the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is not here again. Let us go to item No. 5(3).

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED ON THE MURDER OF A ONE OPIO SAMUEL IN NGORA BY UNKNOWN ASSAILANTS RAISED BY HON. DAVID ABALA 

7.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, it is true that the police found the body of an adult in Ngora and it was identified to be that of Sam Opio. I have asked them to give me the particulars. Apparently, he was killed because matches and other items were found next to his body. The Police are doing further investigations to see whether they can identify the actual cause and possibly, it will take a longer time to find the killers, if he was indeed, murdered. 

Therefore, I beg for more time because this was one of the bodies identified without any individual nearby and witnesses are not coming forward. Maybe, I can give you the progress report in two or three weeks. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you hoping to come back in a fortnight? 

MR OBIGA: Definitely, in a fortnight, we will have a better position on how far we will have gone with the investigations, whether there are suspects and whether we have established the actual cause of death.

THE SPEAKER: You will report just before we go for recess, in the first week of October.

MR OBIGA: Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL GRADUATE SCHEME BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: They are not available. Let us go to Item No. 8.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO DEVELOP A STRATEGY TO CONSERVE THE SHEA NUT AND TAMARIND TREES IN UGANDA AND TO FACILITATE THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN FORMULATING A REGULATORY FRAMEWORK ON CHARCOAL PRODUCTION AND TRADE

7.04
MS GORETTI AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Madam Speaker, I rise on a motion for the resolution of Parliament urging Government to develop a strategy to conserve the shea nut and tamarind trees in Uganda and to facilitate the local governments in formulating a regulatory framework on charcoal production and trade. It is moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS objectives XXVII (i) and (iii) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, obligate the state to promote sustainable development and public awareness of the need to manage land, air and water resources in a balanced and sustainable manner for the present and future generations, the state shall promote and implement energy policies that will ensure that people's basic needs and that of environmental preservation are met;

AND WHEREAS Article 39 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 and Section 3 of the National Environment Management Act, Cap. 153 provide that every person has a right to a healthy environment and that every person has a duty to maintain and enhance the environment;

AND WHEREAS Section 3(2) of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 8/2003, provides that the Minister or a District Council may, by statutory order, in respect of public land, declare a particular tree or group of trees on that land to be a protected tree or trees subject to such controls as the minister may specify in the order;

AWARE THAT there are laws that have been enacted in Uganda to ensure environmental protection and forestry conservation including the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, National Environment Act, Cap 153, the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 and the Local Government Act, Cap. 243;

FURTHER AWARE that Government formulated a number of environmental protection policies including the National Environmental Management Policy, the National Forestry Policy, 2001, the National Forestry Plan, 2002, the Energy Policy of Uganda, 2002, Renewable Energy Policy of Uganda, 2007, Biomass Energy Strategy, 2014 and Decentralisation Policy 1997;
NOTING THAT much as Uganda has attempted to formulate laws, strategies and plans, which are to be used in conservation of forests, development of alternative energy sources as well as biogas, these plans make no long term solutions for the development of Uganda’s charcoal value chain, which is the major threats to vulnerable tree species such as the Sheanut and tamarind trees in Uganda;

CONCERNED THAT energy policies in Uganda place much emphasis on modern and advanced energy resources for a population that is largely dependent upon firewood and charcoal and therefore, fail to address the core threats facing vulnerable tree species in Uganda;

FURTHER CONCERNED that the Forestry Policy 2001 lacks a clearly defined strategy for its implementation, though it addresses a number of issues concerning charcoal production;

ALARMED THAT unless the Government declares the Sheanut and Tamarind trees as endangered species and comes up with a clear implementation plan for the forestry policy, the National Forest Plan and National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, the Sheanut and tamarind tree species will suffer extinction;

COGNISANT THAT the sheanut and tamarind trees have enormous benefits including producing Shea oil used for medicinal and cosmetic purposes to treat ailments such as malaria, tooth defects, diarrhoea, soap making. The tamarind tree on the other hand is a native plant best known for its fruits, which contains about 30 per cent sticky edible pulp rich in micro-nutrients like calcium, phosphorous, Vitamin A and C and tartaric acid.
	
APPRECIATING THAT tamarind has a rich source of essential amino and fatty acids, which are vital in animal feed formulations; the leaves are used as vegetables and it contains 4-5.8 per cent protein, essential in the alleviation of malnutrition in impoverished countries and can go a long way in mitigating nutritional as well as medicinal gaps.

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that it urges;

l. 	The various Government ministries to facilitate the local councils in making and enforcement of byelaws for the regulation of Uganda’s charcoal production and trade.
2. 	Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to carry out research in order to propagate the two plant species for large scale community planting.
3. 	The Ministry of Water and Environment to come up with a clearly defined strategy for the implementation of the National Forestry Policy, aimed of addressing issues concerning the drastic effects of charcoal burning as far as conservation of the Sheanut and tamarind trees is concerned.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by several Members. Can you justify?

(Motion seconded.)

MS AJILO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The two plants I am talking about are indigenous and natural tree species in Africa and some other parts of the world.

I will start with the shea tree. It grows naturally in Africa and other parts of the world. It is mainly found in the dry savannah belts of Africa. You will find it in West Africa especially Senegal, Sudan in the east up to the foothills of the Ethiopian Highlands.
In Uganda, the shea nut tree grows mainly in the east, north and west Nile region. There are local names for it in different regions. 

The gestation period of the sheanut is between 20 to 30 years. When it matures and begins to bear fruits, it can bear those fruits up to about 200 years.

Madam Speaker, there are high values of these plants apart from their fruits and oil that can be eaten. It has therapeutic properties. The shea nut is a very soothing moisturiser. As we were growing up, our mothers used it on babies and children because of its soothing moisturising effect. Even now, ladies use them for their skins.

Shea butter is used in making cosmetic products such as soaps, creams, lotions, hair oils among others. In some parts of the world, the back of the tree is used as an ingredient in formulation of traditional medicine.

Apart from these uses, the shea nut tree has heavy economic values and it is gaining global demand because of its potential uses. 

In West Africa, there is a report about Burkina Faso, where Shea nut tree has contributed a lot to the economy and it has provided a lot of employment to the women since normally, it is the women and children who are involved in gathering of the nut and its processing, to the extent that in Burkina Faso, the women have formed a cooperative society mainly for shea nut production and sale.

Even in Uganda, shea nut is gaining a lot of momentum. There was a report way back in 2014 by the Daily Monitor where a company in Gulu called Gulu Nanak, which was carrying out value addition and export of shea nut.

It was employing directly about 40 Ugandans and indirectly 2,000 farmers who were supplying the shea nut to the factory. Overtime, a number of companies have come up and cottage industries have picked up doing the shea nut business, which means that if it is taken seriously, it can help to improve household income and help to get our people out of poverty.

The tamarind tree, on the other hand, is also a native plant of tropical Africa. It is a multi-purpose tree that grows wildly in Uganda mainly in the eastern part of the country including Teso, parts of Busoga and west Nile. You will find the names of the tamarind tree in Luo it is called cwaa, in Ateso you will hear apedur, in the bantu dialect, it is called omukooge.

It is important to note that whereas I have mentioned those other areas, it is known that the tamarind tree can grow in most parts of Uganda especially in the semi-arid and arid areas. It is particularly suitable for the cattle corridor, which stretches from Karamoja to Isingiro. 

Tamarind tree takes between 10 to 15 years to start bearing fruit and it can bear fruits for up to more than 50 years and it can survive for about 150 years.

Virtually, every part of the tamarind tree is utilised for food production and medicinal purposes. Its fruit is on high demand in the catering and food processing industries for example in making healthy drinks, producing alcohol, jam and spices.

In some countries, the tender leaves are used for making salads. In some countries like Nigeria, we are told that the roots of a tamarind can be used for treating leprosy. In India, we were told that the roots are used for treating heart diseases. Studies have also revealed that tamarind is rich in various vitamins. For example, if you have 100 grams of tamarind, you will have 36 per cent of vitamin B1, 35 per cent of iron, 23 per cent of magnesium, 16 per cent phosphorus, a good percentage of vitamin C and others.

These are minerals and vitamins that we need in our bodies to be healthy. It is a fact that in Uganda, malnutrition is a big problem that is a cause for concern. Therefore, I believe that the consumption of tamarind can be one of the remedies against malnutrition. It can also be used in the management of certain ailments such as diabetes. It can also be used in boosting immunity and reducing weight among others.

Like the shea nut tree, global demand for tamarind products has also increased, thereby boosting its economic value but most importantly, these two tree species contribute a lot to the large forest cover.

Apart from those benefits, they have a contribution in environmental protection because they act as barriers to soil erosion.

In spite of their nutritional, medicinal, economic and other benefits outlined above and given their long gestation period, these two tree species produce very hard wood and because of that, they are now very attractive to timber dealers and charcoal burners hence their threatened extinction.

The onus is on this august House to rescue these plants from extinction. I pray that this House supports this motion and resolves that the relevant and various Government ministries facilitate the Local Government councils in making and enforcement of bylaws for the regulation of Uganda’s charcoal production and trade.

Secondly, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries facilitates the propagation of the two plants species for large scale community planting.

The Ministry of Water and Environment should also come up with a clearly defined strategy for the implementation of the national forestry policy, aimed at addressing issues concerning the drastic effects of charcoal burning in as far as the conservation of shea nut and tamarind trees is concerned and if you will declare a total ban on the cutting down of these trees. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite hon. Atiku, the seconder, to use a few minutes. The mover has done a good job.

7.22
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion for doing 80 per cent of the work. This was a long overdue motion and we would like to thank you for according it space on the Order Paper so that it goes on record of Parliament.

It will also sound a clear message to Government on what needs to be done to these two endangered species of trees that are of both economic and medicinal value to this country, particularly the people of northern, eastern and west Nile.

Yesterday, you recognised a gentleman who was seated in the gallery, Mr Gerima Mustafa, who wrote to you last year when he was undertaking another initiative under his foundation; The Rwenzori Conservation Initiative. He is an environmental activist who embarked on walking across the country.

Last time, he walked from Kasese to Kampala to create awareness on the vulnerability of the snow that we have in Rwenzori Mountain. The snow is disappearing because of climate change, due to the cutting of trees, which has changed the rainfall pattern and also raising temperatures.

This afternoon and thought that, maybe, today, we would not reach the item but nonetheless, he had come to observe his motion because last month, hon. Acidri and I flagged him off from the steps of Parliament as he embarked on walking the more than 540 kilometres on foot to Arua to raise awareness on the dangers of cutting the sheanut and tamarind trees for charcoal burning. I would like to report here that the gentleman walked that distance in 14 days. He went to Arua and came back successfully. We should really applaud him.

Madam Speaker, along the way, he carried the message, right from Luweero through Nakasongola and Karuma; through the Murchison Falls National Park, he was escorted by the game rangers and he was received by a mammoth crowd in Pakwach, where he started spreading the message. 

Along the trek up to Arua, all the districts leadership from Pakwach, Nebbi, Madi Okolo and Arua embraced him and he used the opportunity to sensitise the communities and to also commit to establishing initiatives to ensure the protection of the shea and the tamarind trees from which the communities are deriving a livelihood. 

Those of you who have been traveling to Arua, the moment you cross from Nebbi, you see people – there are actually products that you will see along the road that people sell. The charcoal is unfortunately derived from cutting the shea trees. The oil that is stored in empty water bottles being sold by children and women is also a product of the shea trees.

This walk – 

THE SPEAKER: Is that moo-yaa?

MR ATIKU: Yes, it is. Even here in our canteen, it is served.  Madam Speaker, the products of these two tree species are also – if you see tamarind - those of you who go to health clubs or saunas in Serena or Sheraton, you will actually find the tamarind juice being served to people because it has medicinal values and health benefits. I will not elaborate on those. 

However, the mover of the motion is appealing to us, starting with this Parliament, to look at how we can conserve these two tree species.

I would like to report here that when Mr Mustafa Gerima walked this distance to pass his message, he attracted people who had been adding value to the products of these trees for industrial purposes. One such entity is Nile Tropical Industry, a group that is making sunscreen lotion that is used by people living with albinism because of their skin complexion. The company came to Mr Gerima and asked what they could do. 

I am glad to report that I have volunteered to be a patron to Mr Gerima’s initiative to ensure that we carry this message practically. From next year, we want to redo the 500 kilometres he walked by planting shea and tamarind trees starting from Pakwach going backward to Arua. If we could plant 500 kilometres of shea and tamarind trees, you can imagine what that will mean in the next 20 to 30 years. 

Therefore, I am appealing to this Parliament to help amplify this message. I also urge Government to come in because entities like the National Forestry Authority, Uganda Wildlife Authority and the Ministry of Water and Environment need to come up to support this kind of initiative by investing in propagating these tree species and raising the seedlings that could be given to communities for planting. This is an investment both for economic purposes and the environment.

I second the motion. We have partnered together to form a trust fund that will be called, “Endangered Species Conservation Trust” that we shall use to coordinate whatever efforts we can to ensure that we protect the existing trees and also ensure that we expand the conservation of these endangered species.

I would like to thank the mover of the motion for bringing this motion. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Thank you, the mover and the seconder of the motion. Hon. Atiku, I have a plan that some of the delegates coming to the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference should plant trees when they are here. Do you think the tamarind and shea trees would grow in this side of the country?

MR ATIKU: They can grow anywhere.

THE SPEAKER: So, can you arrange for some seeds so that during this conference, -

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, I am going to ensure that we get about 100 seedlings delivered. Thank you.

7.30
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Maria Goretti Ajilo and hon. Atiku for moving and seconding this motion, respectively. I thank you for giving me the opportunity to say something. 

Many people have always asked me the reason my skin is very smooth and beautiful and I have always told them that the secret is shea oil. (Laughter) I am sure the mover of the motion, hon. Ajilo, can bear me witness because last year, at the beginning of the year, she asked me the same question. I told her shea oil is the reason. She actually asked me to give her some of the oil and I gave her a sample of what I extract at home to use. That is what I use on all my children and it is the reason we have beautiful skins.

So, this is an opportunity for all Ugandans, if Government could empower the communities with shea trees, to come up with industries that could support the shea products. 

Shea trees produce edible fruits. Oil can also be extracted from the raw or roasted nuts. The oil we get from the roasted shea nuts is normally used for preparing dek ngor, lapena or angira. My honourable colleague from Amolatar also knows it. Actually, there is a variety of how the northern people and the eastern people – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My point was to request the mover of the motion to amend the prayers in the motion to urge Government to empower the local communities to ensure they are able to come up with small industries to make by-products from the shea and tamarind trees. We can make oil, body lotions, jelly and soap from shea nuts. If I had known this motion was on the Floor, I would have brought on Table the different products that can come out of the shea nuts, including bathing soap.

Madam Speaker, I would like to stand strong to support this motion and urge this House to support it too so that we promote the products from the shea trees. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to confirm that the shea tree has a lot of uses. When we had the AGOA exhibition here, people brought soap, creams and lotions made from shea nuts here. Many of you did not attend the exhibition but they were here for two days. Anyway, now you know. 

7.34
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This motion should have come yesterday. If you moved to northern Uganda, part of west Nile and eastern Uganda, you will realise that most of those trees are almost extinct. People are cutting those trees like nothing.

The central Government should work together with local governments by giving them support. It is quite unfortunate that right now, the central Government is very busy welcoming industries that use charcoal. This is an indication that indirectly, the central Government is encouraging charcoal burning in Uganda.

In Jinja, we have one of the industries called Steel and Tube Industries and they are the ones buying charcoal at a very high rate. Right now, the price of charcoal per bag has gone very high in Amuru District. They drive big Lorries into the bushes and buying charcoal at the tune of Shs 60,000 to 80,000 per bag.

Madam Speaker, the central Government is making charcoal business very lucrative and very many people are abandoning other businesses. That is why the rate of charcoal burning is very high.

Sometime back, we launched an operation in Amuru. The district local government arrested very many trucks carrying charcoal and logs. At the end, we had big shots in Government, including ministers, calling the district local government officials in Amuru and giving them orders never to arrest those trucks carrying charcoal.

It is very important that we support this motion so that we protect these tree species. They are very important for the betterment of our country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I went to Lamwo last year with hon. Lanyero and the Speaker of the council took me aside and said, “Madam, I want you to know that the big people in this country are the ones cutting the shea trees.” When I asked for the names, he declined to tell me. However, later, one of them came to my office and told me a name of a minister in this Government. 

7.37
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues to support this motion urging Government to conserve the endangered species of trees that are running the risk of being extinct.  It is very unfortunate that the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Minister of Water and Environment are not here. However, I am reliably informed that if these trees were massively planted in Mount Elgon Sub Region, some of the natural calamities that we are experiencing would have been reduced because they have taproots that can easily anchor the soils firmly in the ground and reduce some of these landslides and erosion that are washing away the alluvial soils. 

However, such ministries would be on the forefront of facilitating lower local governments to make by-laws and even higher local governments like districts to make ordinances that would help in the protection of these species of trees that are an endangered. 

If research was to be conducted by these line ministries, if efforts would be facilitated, it would encourage massive planting of these trees in areas that are experiencing challenges of climate change. We are experiencing a change in rainfall patterns and the whole planet earth is in a fever because - (Member timed out.)

7.39
MR LAWRENCE MANGUSHO (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you for the opportunity, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to support the motion as moved by the honourable member. The species being talked about, like they have said, take too long to grow and have a long life span.

From research, those trees that take long to grow and take long to die give very good charcoal. That is why they are targeted by the charcoal merchants. They actually produce the best charcoal and that is the reason for this extinction of the species. The shea nut and the tamarind are now being talked about because of the value they have.

However, even these other trees in other areas of the country that take long like that are being targeted for especially by the charcoal merchants and so, the motion has come at a very timely situation. 

Therefore, we need not only to support the motion but also to take actions on the recommendation talked about by the Members, especially the Government side. We should come in to ensure local governments pass these ordinances. However, these should not only be in regard to the two species but also charcoal is generally doing a lot of havoc to the environment of the country and so, something should be done. This calls for fast-tracking of our rural electrification, which would have helped to –(Member timed out.)

7.42
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion. However, I would like to move that the House includes other species, which are extinct especially the Africana Afzelia tree species, which are being depleted yet it is very rare and only found in Northern Uganda.

Government issued a ban against the cutting of these tree species but the problem is that we have Ugandans who do not listen to the directives, which are always issued. That is why a colleague here said that in Northern Uganda, the authorities had come up in a bid to try to restrict charcoal burning but they met resistance because there are certain Ugandans who benefit from this trade.

Madam Speaker, you can imagine that Uganda is a country in East Africa that is doing well in exporting charcoal to the neighbouring countries like Kenya and Rwanda. We have a lot of charcoal at our border exit points like Busia; it is a trade, which is booming. It is very unfortunate in this era that we can pride ourselves in selling charcoal to a neighbouring country. 

The major problem, which is causing all this, is a lot of impunity in our country. Many of the local governments in Northern Uganda passed ordinances to restrict charcoal burning but the implementation has been a problem. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.44
MS MARGRET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion. The mover of the motion has explicitly explained to us the importance of these trees. The most important thing we need to raise is how to conserve these trees and what Government can do.

In fact, people do not know the importance of these trees; the oil or seeds as mentioned. It is, therefore, very important to have massive sensitisation. We should tell them that it is not only about charcoal but also the fruits, seeds and roots so that they are aware.

Secondly, Government should own these trees. We can move everywhere and do research. Why don’t we move and, if possible, count these trees one by one so that we label them and Government owns them? This will enable people to know that they belong to Government. When they see that they are benefiting from these trees, they will stop cutting them.

We should also learn to propagate these trees. We are talking of very many years but these were planted many years ago. That is why they are here. We can plant now so that the next generation also benefits. If people can plant rubber trees and maintain them, why not also plant these so that we have beds and plantations of these trees, which are protected rather than these wild ones? 

Nobody can stop people from cutting trees. However, if we have planted them in plantations, they shall be protected and will be cheaper.  (Member timed out.)

7.46
Mr Apollo masika (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of this motion. I would like to tell the Members that at one time, I was appointed a manager by some foreign companies in the charcoal buying industry.

These trees are very important because I moved from here up to Congo Brazzaville and Niger in West Africa looking for the same trees with some people who sponsored me through these companies. I discovered that they were looking for charcoal and we used to buy it but I did not know what they intended. They had machines and were pounding this charcoal into fine powder. They would make blocks of 1000 kilogrammes and load it into containers going back to Asian countries. 
When they take this charcoal, they make medicine out of it. Others are used to make components for rockets, televisions and other important machines. They are very expensive. Even locally, people pound this charcoal and use it for constipation and other maladies. 

Therefore, we may be looking at it as a simple thing but I discovered that one tablet of this charcoal is around Shs 5,000. We are talking of oil for smearing and eating but people make billions of dollars out of our property.

Therefore, I am in support of the people who talked of planting of these trees. We should plant them in plenty – (Member timed out.) 

The Speaker: Please conclude.

Mr masika: If these trees are planted in Uganda and we study them, we will discover their vast properties. As a result, we could harvest billions of dollars out of our trees. Thank you. 

7.48
Mr Emmanuel KALULE (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must confess that I do not know what shea butter and tamarind trees look like. However, from what the honourable member has pointed out, I have been persuaded to support this motion because of the very many uses of these trees.

We appreciate that one of the diseases we have in our Government is failure to implement. We normally take ages to appreciate a problem. When the honourable member was contributing, she said that people are destroying these trees because they are burning charcoal. However, for ages, we have been talking about this programme for briquettes. We can manufacture these and stop the burning of charcoal.

Briquettes can be made out of anything. We grow maize every year. After removing the maize, all that stuff can be used to make briquettes but nothing is being done. That would be one of the ways of stopping the burning of charcoal but Government has not come out to promote briquette making.

I would also like to agree with my colleague, hon. Baba Diri who pointed out that we need to start plantations of tamarind and shea butter trees because there is no way you can protect these trees when they are growing wildly in the bushes. How many soldiers will you put to patrol the forests so that they – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Conclude.

Mr KALULE: The solution is for us to begin plantations of these trees so that we can protect them in an orderly manner. I think this is where the department of forestry has got to come in and start plantations of these trees. Thank you.

The Speaker: Maybe, we could also do our own plantations in our constituencies instead of waiting for the Government. I am going to start one.

7.51
Mr Fredrick angUra (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to confirm that charcoal is one of our export businesses these days, at the border. This charcoal is ferried from very far and it is actually a very lucrative business at the border. This is all because of laxity on our side.

On the Kenyan side, I remember that in the past, many drivers crossing to Uganda would come with a bag of charcoal on their trucks. However, these days, no one is allowed to move with charcoal from Kenya to this side. It is many bags of our charcoal going that side instead.

Madam Speaker, I am familiar with the tamarind tree but not the shea butter tree. Whenever there has been compensation, like the other time when we had the Chinese compensating our people around Dongsong, whenever they came across these trees, the compensation rate was raised. People would ask, “Why is this particular tree compensated at a higher rate?” Maybe that informs us of what hon. Masika has said, that this tree is known to be very important out there but we are not aware of its value.

These days, when we cross to Busoga, tamarind is one of the products that our people are selling and they are benefitting a lot from it. We have recently had juice factories that have opened and one of the – (Member timed out.)

7.53
Mr alex burundo (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need to inform the august House that the reason the big shots in Government are being mentioned in the shea nut tree trade is that they are exporting these trees to China and earning a lot of money. 

In fact, I was almost tempted. Somebody came and tipped me that there is a very lucrative business in the trading of shea trees. When you get a trip of a trailer, you can invest Shs 20 million and at the end of the day, you can get Shs 50 million in return.

Being a law abiding citizen, when they talked about trees, yet, I am very passionate about the environment, I had to shy away from that business. Honestly, this business is very serious and it is booming. People are benefiting from it and it is high time we stopped this dubious business, which is destroying our environment.

I think the world has gone crazy. I do not know whether it is because of poverty. We should not only protect the Shea tree and Tamarind, you even find people cutting mango trees - it is really very unfortunate. It is high time Legislators rose up in arms to see that we protect the environment; otherwise, things are running out of hand.

I am reliably informed that between 1990 and 2015, 122,000 hectares of trees were destroyed annually but at which rate are we planting them? I am told we only plant 7,000- (Member timed out.)

7.55
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of the motion about these medicinal trees. If you recall, in 2017, the World Health Organisation issued a statement that all medicinal trees, which are organic must be promoted and planted on large scale, especially in Africa.

We have got very good opportunity because our soils can still support the growing of organic medicinal plants, including trees. Therefore, it is incumbent on the Government to see that they put measures to stop the malpractices, which are causing extinction of these trees.

As we talk about the environment, let us also bring in Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) because people are illegally exporting charcoal to the neighbouring countries. As a measure, they should put high taxes to prevent culprits from doing this dubious business.

Madam Speaker, I am in support of acquiring seedlings so that these trees can be planted widely in Uganda and not only the north or eastern regions. We can also have seedlings and plant them everywhere. This would be a very good cause for protection of the environment and it would bring about value for money. I rest my case, Madam Speaker.

7.57
BRIG. FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and the seconders. I have googled and they are saying that this tree especially has more than 22 benefits. They have motioned right from feeding, health, cosmetic and medicinal.

I have heard a lot about the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development. I thought that due to the benefits of this tree, perhaps it is high time we put money in this.

Madam Speaker, a part from the benefits, we have always heard about China and how it grew out of cottage industries. The shea tree and the tamarind are some of the areas that can be exploited in the homes and women could do a lot of work.

When you look at the chain around these trees, the collectors of oil, the traders who will trade in it, the processors and the distributors, it shows that there is a long chain and work around these two trees. This is the reason we should support and urge the Government to take up this and put in money. It should not leave it to the people.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, you are proposing an amendment to our resolutions?

BRIG. BYEKWASO: There is already a Global Shea Alliance. Therefore, if the Uganda Government could support, we would be a beneficiary. Madam Speaker, this is also an obvious case of potential sources of foreign exchange, which we badly need.

I think it was around 2017 when one of the youths was reported in New Vision –(Member timed out.)

8.00
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion. I wanted to confirm one thing that Makerere University did a study on shea products. They discovered that 100 per cent of shea oil is from shea nuts. They also produce wood and timber, the bark is used for treating malaria, toothache and diarrhea. It is also used to produce fertilisers.

If we protect these trees, I am very sure and confident that in few years, Uganda will be doing well. They also get wax from the bark of the tree for treating cut wounds. I, therefore, support that the shea tree should be protected and supported.

Madam Speaker, I have been planting this tree in Ngora. I have been telling people that I must be an example. Therefore, that is why I have been planting this tree. I support my colleague in planting shea tree and tamarind. In addition, what is important is that we must protect.

She was talking about foreign exchange. Some companies have been exporting shea nuts to different countries. There is a company called KM International Trade. They export to German, United States of America, Poland and Kenya. They are getting money at the expense of our locals. Therefore, one way of promoting international trade is by us planting, preserving and protecting these trees because we should be able to see the benefits that come out of these trees tomorrow. I support my friend who brought this motion.

Madam Speaker, the last thing I want to say is that we should be able to put it in our budget since we are protecting an endangered species of these trees. It must be in our budget to show that we are serious. If we do not put it, it means that we are just talking without being serious. That is my appeal to the House. During the budget process, this should be one of the items we should strongly support.

THE SPEAKER: The Committee on Budget is instructed to take that into account as they work on the budget; we need seed money.

8.03
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to associate myself with the mover of this motion and those colleagues who seconded it.

Madam Speaker, when I was young, in 1970s and early 1980s, the only major source of destruction to these trees was feared to be tobacco-growing industry. Charcoal burning was not much of a problem because tobacco growing and charcoal burning do not cause as much destruction as the modern people who have joined this trade.

Most of these trees, which have taken 30, 40 or 50 years to grow are so thick that no axe can pull them down. However, there are now modern men and women who are engaged in lucrative business where they are using power saws to cut down these trees.

These trees are a lucrative business in Malaysia where many of them are used for gun butts and in the ship construction industry - it is not a cheap or ordinary person who goes into this business. 

There are those who are well placed in Government, who even go and are given an enabling environment by security around them such that even if you are a local authority, you cannot penetrate their circles. 
More so, in Northern Uganda, where many of these trees are found, the danger even is that there is connivance between Uganda Revenue Authority and these big men and women. They first go across to Sudan or Congo, obtain sheets from there and come in with these sheets ostensibly that they have brought these logs from the neighbouring countries, when these logs lie here in Uganda.

Three months back, I was in Midigo subcounty in Yumbe District. I went to Kerwa and everywhere I – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute on the huge heaps. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, these are things, which were offloaded from trailers, not just ordinary lorries. They use cranes for loading and offloading them. Even some of the vehicles failed to pull them and they ended up getting stuck. In the end, when I asked the police officers at the scene, they told me that these business men had claimed that they brought these logs from South Sudan whereas not. They even went up to where these trees were cut from. 

Even if we are here in this Parliament making all these, Government needs to get involved because it knows those who are involved in this trade.  

I want to be on record. The only local authorities that I can give thumbs up are those in Teso. Go to Amuria, Kapelebyong and Usuk. The moment you tamper with the shea tree and attempt to cut it, you are fined a goat, which is very expensive for a villager. They are exemplary. In that way, everybody fears to touch these trees. 

As a country, if we are to conserve nature and invest for the future generation, Government needs to get committed to planting and conservation of these trees. This should not only just be on paper but Government should be seen physically protecting these trees. That will be –(Member timed out.) 
8.06
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (MS BETTY AOL): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the mover of this motion, which I support.

During my primary school days, whenever I was at home in my village, we used to feed a lot on the shea tree fruits. It was for the children. At that time, we used to get back from school while hungry and we would branch and collect those fruits. 

I was very happy with Uganda National Road Authority when it said that they would like the roads they constructed, for example, the one from Gulu to Kitgum, to have shea trees planted along the roads. This will help people who feel hungry to feed on them. The oil will also be very useful to people. If the gestation period is 20 years, we need to protect what is available right now. The fine of the goat for cutting this tree was respected in Acholi region but people do not honour it anymore. 

Therefore, I do not know whether it is the cultural leaders who are not enforcing some of the community based laws or by-laws in order for us to keep what is important to us. Right now, I cannot only say it is poverty because if it is poverty, then, all of us have to really protect these trees. 

The poor women use the oil and sell it; so, it helps them a lot. However, the poor men just want to cut and sell the charcoal. This charcoal –(Member timed out.) 

8.09
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (Jeema, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in associating myself with this motion.

I wish to make two recommendations in support of the motion. In 1991, Uganda signed the convention on international trade against endangered species of both flora and fauna. Unfortunately, since then, no effort has been made to ratify that convention. It has never been domesticated. 

Therefore, my recommendation is that we can only give justice to this motion, if we recommend that efforts be made to ratify that convention. Once it is ratified, domestically, we make a national legislation that seeks to protect the shea tree and other forms of endangered species of fauna or flora, as we may like it. 

Once that is done, it means international trade in shea trees will be illegal and criminal. If it is interstate, it means we can even invoke the auspices of the International Court of Justice. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

8.10
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the challenges we are facing as a country is lack of alternative cheap sources of fuel for cooking. It seems there is little research going on countrywide on options that can be available so that we are able to save the environment. 

Recently, when there was a display here, I had an opportunity and visited one of the stalls with a stove. It was very interesting. They had some kind of stones for cooking, not charcoal and so, I got interested in it. They look like clay. They said if you filled one charcoal stove, you can cook food for the whole family. This could be one of the areas we need to implore. 

Such people should be put at the forefront of marketing so that we can save the environment. They are just pure stones but once they catch fire, you can cook the whole day. This is one area I feel the experts should the country with so that we begin to propagate and sell this idea all round. 

If you look at most of our urban centres, you will notice that 80 per cent of the population use charcoal as a source of fuel. This has made the problem worse. Rural –(Member timed out.) 

8.12
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the most elusive diseases in the world today is cancer. There has been so much trial such as chemotherapy and radiotherapy but the disease has remained. The research is still on-going but it appears, if you get interested in the literature, more of the research is tending towards the organic approach. 

Tamarind seems to be one of the leading organic ingredients that they seem to be focusing on now. This means that any country that will have an opportunity of having most of these plants all over its geographical blessing will have a higher advantage, knowing the costs involved with this disease. 

It is not just cancer but even the heart disease, diabetes and so many other diseases. Therefore, we must, as a people, see the urgency and essence as much as we can to protect, promote and provide for the planting of these trees. 

In addition to providing for them, we must as well preserve them because we can again keep on – I remember some time back, there used to be a campaign for planting trees but we started cutting. So, it appears that the preservation of the trees generally as a country –(Member timed out.)

8.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank you for the bold step that you took recently, to receive a delegation in your office that was intending to add value to the sugarcane in terms of the herbal value addition. This sends a signal that it is critical for us as leaders, to think outside the box other than putting it to Government. In our own communities, God made it in such a way that what grows naturally somewhere has value and has medicinal value, as alluded to by hon. Ajilo and hon. Atiku. 

To me, this brings an impression that the people in northern Uganda, according to the World Health Organisation, were highlighted as having a very high potential of biomedicine and a natural biodiversity, which is not anywhere in other regions in Uganda. So, they should take advantage of this great tree to ensure that they develop cottage industries that add value to this very important product, so that when the locals increase in usage of this tree, they will then plant and preserve it.

It is you who worked very hard to ensure that we have a law enacted by Parliament for the preservation and regulation of herbal medicine. That means that with the preservation of this tree, we can easily regulate the production of the shea nut products to the economic empowerment of our communities. 

It is also very important to remember that the alternative to shea nut butter is petroleum jelly. Gallons of petroleum jelly are brought into this country to go into the production of oil and vaseline. So, it is important that we come with a strong statement to promote this tree.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I wish to correct the Hansard and beg that you give us time in the next Parliament to bring up a formal report about the payment of the Uganda Cranes; whether the money got into their accounts as it had been planned. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall do that in the next sitting. Hon. Ajilo, there are the following proposals before we take a decision; One is that Government funds the promotion of these trees by providing a budget. We have asked the Committee on Budget to ensure that during the budget process, a vote is created.

The second is that we should join the Global Share Alliance. (Applause) The third is that we should establish cottage industries, where the trees are grown. (Applause) The fourth is that we ratify the convention as quickly as possible and follow by domesticating it locally. Do you have any problem with adding those to your resolution? 

Okay, honourable members, the resolution is amended by those four additions. I now put the question that the motion, as amended, be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion, as amended, adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development wanted to say something.

8.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Tuesday this week, we had a debate on the Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018 in this House. There was a minority report and you directed that we go and harmonise our positions and come back to the House. 

I wish to report that we have since harmonised and I have amended in conformity with what the minority report wanted. I discussed with hon. Waluswaka and agreed with the proposed amendments. 

We are ready to proceed to the committee stage at your convenience. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can you circulate the amendments so that we internalise them?

MR MUSUMBA: It is okay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I would like to thank you for the work we have been able to do. We have done quite a bit this week. Next week, it might be a bit complicated because of CPC. It may be difficult to hold sessions. I would like to propose that we convene immediately after the CPC to conclude our business. 

Otherwise, I thank you for the work and remind you that you are invited, among other things, to the opening ceremony on 26 September, at Munyonyo. The cards will be in your pigeonholes. -  Today is 19 September 2019. - Are you aware that you have pigeonholes here?

I would like to assure you that the cards will be in the pigeon holes. Honourable members, House adjourned to Tuesday, 1 October 2019. Thank you very much.  

(The House rose at 8.21.p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 1 October 2019.) 
