Wednesday, 18 September 2013

Parliament met at 3.49 p.m., in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the Vice-President, Members of the Cabinet, Leader of the Opposition and Members of the House, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I do apologise for the late start; we were in the Committee of Appointments vetting the board members of the Uganda Land Commission. As you know, the commission had expired and so, we took a bit of time. 

Maybe of importance to the country is that we badly need an enabling law for the Uganda Land Commission. They have been operating just directly from the Constitution, which leaves a lot to be desired. As part of my recommendations to the President, that is one of the things I am going to write. As of now, I am just alerting the Minister of Lands and the Attorney-General. If the Government side fails, I will ask Members of Parliament to prepare and move a Private Members’ Bill relating to the enactment of that law.

I want to make a slight amendment to the Order Paper to allow the Minister of Education and Sports to come in and make a small statement immediately after the presentation of the report on the corrigenda.  

I also would like to inform the House that our colleague, hon. Jennifer Mujungu, the Member for Ntoroko, is at Nakasero Hospital. I do not know what is wrong with her yet, but she is in room 318. In case members want to visit her, please do so.

Further, I want to announce that our annual National Prayer Breakfast will take place on 8th October. The chief guest will be the Head of State, President Yoweri Museveni, and the keynote speaker will be Dr Myles Munroe, President of Myles Munroe International of the USA. It will take place at Hotel Africana as usual starting 7.30a.m. So, indicate it in your diaries so that you are able to attend. Thank you very much.

I know that there are some Members who have some small burning issues; let us look at them tomorrow. I know they are burning issues but let us look at them tomorrow. Today we have a lot of work.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Order Paper that is before us needs some clarity. The last time you adjourned the House, you requested the Committee on Budget – you directed and the House resolved and even we met over the weekend to conclude the issue of teachers’ salary increment. However, I do not see it on the Order Paper, Madam Speaker. I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: The corrigenda report includes the education sector. So, when they come to report, we shall invite the Committee on Budget Committee to give their report.

Honourable members, in the public gallery we have members of the National Youth Council. Please, stand up. (Applause) There are very many of them. You are welcome to Parliament of Uganda. Also join me in welcoming public relations students from Ndejje University. You are welcome. (Applause) Let us now go to item No.3.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE CORRIGENDA ON THE BUDGET ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

3.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have got two corrigenda to present. I will start with the first, second and at the end of it, I will also give the report of the committee on the assignment as was given to us by the Speaker.

On 26 August 2013, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented corrigenda to the budget estimates of revenue and expenditure for financial year 2013/2014 to Parliament. Madam Speaker, you referred this to the Committee on the Budget in accordance with rule 161(3) (c) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The committee has considered the corrigenda and compiled this report that it now presents to the House for consideration.

Methodology

The committee studied the corrigenda and held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Findings

Purpose of the Corrigenda

The committee was informed that the corrigenda were intended to:
1. 	Cover salary arrears amounting to Shs 44,089,297,651.30. This is to pay government employees who had not been paid their salaries for the months of May and June 2013. The shortfall had been catered for under Supplementary Schedule No.3 of the financial year 2012/2013, but that schedule, Madam Speaker, as you may recall, collapsed for technical reasons. 

	The most affected sectors were education and sports, the Uganda Police Force, the Uganda Prisons Service and other central government institutions. The committee was informed that since salaries had to be paid, the amount of Shs 44,089,000,000 had to be included in the budget estimates of the financial year 2013/2014 so as to avoid a gap in the budget and future supplementary requests.

2. 	Correct errors within certain votes where funds were erroneously allocated to one item instead of another, that is, re-allocation within votes.

3. 	Declaration of appropriation in aid for some sectors that spend non-tax revenue that they collect at source.
4. 	Include donor funding that had not been confirmed at the time of drawing up the estimates for financial 2013/2014. This resulted from two reasons: 

One, following the suspension of donor funding in the course of the financial year 2012/2013, Government satisfactorily fulfilled donor conditions. As a result, some donors lifted the suspension and released the funds. 

Two, some projects like support to USE under the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Public Service Enhancement Project under the Ministry of Public Service had their projects lives shortened. This made it necessary to integrate into the budget estimates for the financial year 2013/2014 the funding that had been earmarked for future financial years.

Source of Funding

The committee was informed that the sources of funding for the corrigenda are as follows:
1. 	Appropriation in aid collected and spent at the source amounting to Shs 1.208 billion.
2. 	Donor funded projects amounting to Shs 116.72 billion.
3. 	Temporary borrowing from the Bank of Uganda amounting to Shs 44.089 billion. Here I want to mention that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has a memorandum of understanding with the Bank of Uganda to lend money for financing some budgetary items pending revenue collection by Uganda Revenue Authority.
4. 	A result of re-allocation from within votes amounting to Shs 5.891 billion. 

Madam Speaker, we provided a key under this table so that people can understand the abbreviations. I will go on to page 5.

Macro-Economic Effects of Additional Expenditure for the Financial Year 2013/2014

Madam Speaker, the committee was informed that the additional expenditure amounting to Shs 162 billion constitutes 0.26 per cent of GDP and will raise the budget deficit by 0.19 of the GDP. This would not upset the macroeconomic stability of the country. 

However, because the amount of foreign currency equivalent to Shs 116.7 billion will be an inflow into the country, it will increase the supply of foreign exchange, which will have a small but favorable effect on the exchange rate by improving the balance of payment. The Bank of Uganda may have to adjust slightly, its monetary programme to keep in line with inflation objectives.

Committee Observations and Recommendations

1. 	Education Allowance for Foreign Service Officers

The committee was concerned that it was decided two years ago to pay foreign service officers an education allowance amounting to US$ 2000 per child, covering four children, but that money has never been totally paid or budgeted for to-date.

The committee observed that the cost of living in many of the countries where our Foreign Service officers are stationed is high and that the officers find it hard to keep their children in school without this allowance. The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should urgently find the funds to cater for this allowance this financial year, 2013/2014.

2. 	Support to Universal Secondary Education under the Ministry of Education and Sports

The committee observed that according to the budget estimates for revenue and expenditure for financial year 2013/2014, funds under the support to USE Project are being allocated to some government-aided schools that do not offer USE services. The committee notes that this is an anomaly because when the loan for this project was presented to Parliament, it was passed on the understanding that it was meant to facilitate USE schools that do not have the requisite facilities. 

A big percentage of the funds under this project are, however, being allocated to traditional schools that already have some of the best facilities among the schools in this country. The USE schools that were the intended beneficiaries of this project are allocated less money yet they have very poor facilities. This creates an imbalance between USE and non-USE schools and as a result compromises the success of the USE programme.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in liaison with the Ministry of Education and Sports, should channel all the funds under this project to the intended beneficiaries. The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should follow up all the loan funds it disburses to ensure that the funds are spent on what they are meant for.

3. 	The 20 Per cent Salary Increment for Teachers

The committee was concerned that the 20 per cent salary increment that was promised to the teachers last financial year has not been included in the budget for this financial year. The committee was informed that a committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Sports was put in place to try and find the money. The said committee is now preparing its report to Cabinet.

The committee recommends that this issue must be handled to its logical conclusion within this financial year. Madam Speaker, I would like to mention here that our report will probably bring a logical conclusion to this issue.

4. Rent of Office Space by Government Ministries

The committee observed that the continuous renting of office premises by government ministries, departments and agencies is a substantial strain on the national budget. The committee was informed that a subcommittee of Cabinet chaired by the Minister in Charge of the Presidency has been put in place to look into this problem.

The committee recommends that the matter be handled expeditiously to avoid further leakage of funds that would otherwise be spent on unfunded priorities.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the corrigenda to the budget estimates for financial year 2013/2014 amounting to Shs 162,017,632,651.30. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Are you going to present the second one as well?

MR LWANGA: Yes, I can, Madam Speaker. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON CORRIGENDA NO.2 ON THE BUDGET ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

4.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Tim Lwanga): Madam Speaker, the second corrigenda – and I hope everybody has a copy- 

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: Order, members.

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, before I present this second corrigenda report, I would like to mention that the Youth Council Executive were among the people who appeared before us and they were allowed to also express their views. 

I request to lay the following documents on the Table that might be useful to the MPs in case they want to know more about what the corrigenda is all about: A request for Shs 19.2 billion as additional ceiling to the ministry budget from the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; a letter instructing the accounting officer for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to transfer Shs 6.4166 billion to the Youth Livelihood Programme; an explanation note on the Youth Livelihood Programme; – I recommend that Members get this note - and minutes of the Budget Committee meeting held on the second corrigenda.

Introduction 

On 10 September 2013, the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development presented corrigenda No. 2 to the budget estimates of revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2013/2014 to Parliament. Madam Speaker, you referred this to the Committee on Budget in accordance with rule 161(3) (c) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The committee has considered the corrigenda and compiled this report that it now presents to the House for consideration.

Methodology 

The committee studied the corrigenda and held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Findings 

Purpose of the Corrigenda

The purpose of the corrigenda is to relocate funds from vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to vote 018, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social development, in accordance with the resolution of Cabinet at its sitting of 4 September 2013. 

The funds, amounting to Shs 19.25 billion, are being moved from two programmes, namely, the Graduate Youth Venture Capital Fund and the Youth Venture Capital Fund under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Youth Livelihood Programme under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

The Youth Livelihood Programme (YLP)
 
The committee was informed that YLP is a five-year programme designed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development with the objective of giving effect to the National Youth Policy Framework, 2001 by enabling youth to develop socioeconomic and cultural skills and also to enhance their participation in national development. The programme critically aims at addressing the constraints that deter youth employment, targeting the poor unemployed youth by providing financial support to enable them establish income-generating activities, providing vocational skills and tools and providing youth with relevant knowledge and information for attitude change. The project will, therefore, encompass livelihood support, skilled development and institutional development.

Committee Observations and Recommendations

Total Amount to be transferred to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development 

The committee was concerned that the corrigenda presented to Parliament indicated Shs 12,833,332,000 and not Shs 19.25 billion that was approved for the Youth Livelihood Programme by Cabinet and presented to the committee by the Ministry Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The committee was informed that the reason the corrigenda presented to Parliament indicated Shs 12,833,332,000 instead of Shs 19.25 billion is because one-third of the Shs 19.25 billion, amounting to Shs 6.4 billion, was already appropriated to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development by Parliament under vote on account. The committee observed that the warrant issued by the Auditor-General authorising the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to spend the Shs 6.4 billion under vote-on-account could be cancelled and the funds transferred to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

The committee recommends that the Shs 6.4 billion should be transferred from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development within the law.

Implementation Strategy 

The committee was informed that the implementation strategy of YLP is based on a committed demand driven approach, where implementation units at lower level administrative units in the local governments will have a key role in the implementation of the programme. The beneficiary youth will be organised under youth interest groups or individual youth and will be the nucleus of the programme. 

At the local government level, the LCI chairperson shall have the role to provide guidance and qualification of youth interest groups and individual youth willing to participate in the programme. At the centre level, the YLP proposes the establishment of a dedicated programme management unit at the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 
Madam Speaker, I am reading this very slowly so that my colleagues can assimilate it. The committee was informed that the above implementation strategy of the YLP is based on the NUSAF II model. The committee was happy to note that NUSAF II was a success and for that reason they are optimistic that YLP under the same model will also succeed. 

The committee noted that in the past, many projects eluded the intended beneficiaries because the bulk of the funds were spent on operational costs and not on the project itself. The committee cautioned the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development against this practice and recommended that operational costs of YLP should not go beyond 10 per cent. 

Recruitment of Staff under YLP 

The committee observed that one of the components of YLP is to recruit staff; however, the committee does not agree that YLP needs to recruit new staff because there are already existing structures with highly trained staff at the local government level to deal with this youth programme. 

The committee recommends that funds under YLP should not be wasted on recruitment of new staff where they are not needed. The committee, therefore, urged the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to use the existing structures. 

Training of Youth 

The committee observed that another component of YLP was skills training for the youth. They noted that some youth have been trained over and over again in past programmes but have never accessed funds to try out those skills. The committee recommends that YLP should target the youth who are already imparted with skills but have never been facilitated to use them before proceeding to train new people.

Coverage of YLP

The committee noted that all districts in Uganda need to benefit from YLP yet the funds so far allocated to the programmes are meagre. The committee recommends that with a view to equity, Government should make deliberate efforts to roll out this programme to benefit all districts in the country. 

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the committee recommends that Parliament approves corrigenda No. 2 to the budget estimates for financial year 2013/2014 amounting to Shs 19.25 billion. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Can you now present your report.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now I move to present the report- 

MS AMODING: Rt honourable Speaker, there is a minority report to the previous report that has been read; I do not know if you can give guidance.

THE SPEAKER: I had not seen it. Present your minority report. It is attached to the main report on corrigenda No.2.

4.19
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move under rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to present before this House a minority report as a member of the budget committee where this corrigenda No.2 was presented on 12 September 2013. I make reference to the earlier discussion that the chairperson of the committee has raised in line with corrigenda No. 2, particularly on the Youth Livelihood Programme, vote 018 under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Permit me to say that I disagree with some of the components, and I want to raise them herein. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you recall that the Government allocated funds in the last two financial years and implemented the Youth Venture Fund, to a tune of Shs 25 billion. This was in partnership with financial banks. An additional Shs 16 billion was allocated to cater for the graduates as an addition to the venture fund in the financial year 2012/2013. This money had not yet been spent in that financial year pending approval of memoranda of understanding between Government and the financial banks. Another Shs 3.25 billion was allocated to the venture fund this current financial year. These two interventions were coupled with the Shs 16.5 billion which had gone to KCCA for the creation of work spaces in the city, a part of which KCCA used to finance youth projects. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, these different interventions by the Government were an attempt in the right direction, although as Parliament we wanted better modalities for their implementation. Mr Pius Bigirimana, the recently transferred Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, has now come up with a new proposal called the Youth Livelihood Programme, which is largely a community driven approach under NUSAF II- 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amoding, is he presenting as a Permanent Secretary or as Mr Bigirimana?

MS AMODING: He is presenting as the Permanent Secretary of the ministry.

THE SPEAKER: Say “the Permanent Secretary”; do not use his name.

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker and Honourable members, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is now seeking a transfer of the Shs 3.25 billion allocated to the Youth Venture Fund together with the Shs 16 billion allocated for the graduate fund to be transferred entirely to the Youth Livelihood Programme, which has a cumulative budget of Shs 265 billion over the next five years. This in essence seeks to scrap the Youth Venture Fund and the graduate fund which have just seen the light of the day. In my view, this is not the solution to the problem. You cannot have another baby by killing a living one. 

The proposal to transfer the already little money under the previous fund to the now Youth Livelihood Programme is an attempt to deny funds and resources, which had already been allocated to the other fund. This programme is not bad per se; it is a good programme because it comes in to address the gaps that were in the Youth Venture Fund namely, addressing the needs of the rural youth, the needs of the school dropouts, the uneducated and the unskilled. However, it cannot be designed based on a one-size-fits-all approach. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, as we know, the youth are not a homogenous group, so such interventions should be designed to reflect the fact that youth are not homogeneous. This, of course, implies that Government should have instead strengthened the programmes which are also running and have it run concurrently with the existing programmes, with the modifications that had been discussed with Members of Parliament representing the youth. 

I want to specifically relay these issues quickly, which need to be considered as we discuss this issue: One, the Youth Venture Fund has an inbuilt mechanism together with the graduate fund, which ensures that money is recouped from the borrowers and re-invested. First of all, it can be re-invested in the fund in terms of financing and running its sustainability. The can also spill over and be re-invested in the Youth Livelihood Programme, which currently will be coming back every financial year for budgetary allocation. In my view, this is a sustainable approach to ensure that these funds also run and they are self-sustaining with partnership from the bank.

Madam Speaker, the second issue I want this House to consider is that there is money already in circulation; about 5000 youth had already borrowed this money from the various banks. What is the future of this money? What also happens to the memoranda of understanding, which the banks and the microfinance institutions had signed in line with the Youth Graduate Fund and the Youth Venture Fund? 

I beg to lay on the Table a Memorandum of Understanding that was signed between the Government of Uganda, DFCU Bank, Centenary Bank, and Stanbic Bank on 1 February 2013 in line with the Youth Venture Fund. I beg to lay. I also want to lay on the Table a Memorandum of Understanding for the establishment of the graduate fund signed between the Government of Uganda, the Bank of Uganda and participating institutions which include: Stanbic Bank, Centenary Rural Development Bank, DFCU Bank, Bank of Africa, Housing Finance Bank, and other credit Institutions including Opportunity Bank Uganda, Post Bank Uganda, Pride Microfinance, Finca Uganda and Finance Trust Bank. This was signed on 2 April 2013. I beg to lay. 

Finally, I want to raise the fact that these contributions that the banks were making are bound to be lost by the withdrawal of Government. When Government allocates Shs 16 billion, the banks allocate an equivalent of Shs 16 billion which goes into expanding the scope from which the youth can borrow from. 

The other issue that is not part of the report but which I want to highlight is the fact that the youth are not homogeneous but also we need to look at this sector. The graduates are not the same as those in the informal sector or in the agricultural sector. The recommended investment options under the Youth Livelihood Programme largely cater for the youth in the agricultural sector and the informal sector. 

I want to highlight the kind of support, reading from the document that Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has submitted before the committees - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development youth livelihood programme support. These are some of the activities that the ministry is going to support: diary production in terms of livelihood support, high value crops, poultry, egg production, piggery, improved goats, aquaculture, integrated farming, labour-saving technologies like animal traction, apiary, agro forestry, post-harvest handling, value addition and marketing, buying and selling of produce. 

Those are the specific programmes the livelihood programme will support. That, in my view, does not cater for the majority of the other graduates who we have invested in in the education sector with the hope that they will transform the country as well. They might want to be in progressive sectors including industry and research and I think that their needs are not necessarily falling in this sector, which I consider the informal and agricultural sector. 

I conclude by saying that this Youth Livelihood Programme largely targets the youth that are in those sectors which I have highlighted above. It is my view, therefore, that the Youth Livelihood Programme is good but it should run alongside the other programmes that have been running and a good regulatory framework should be developed by Parliament, which will ensure that the funds are more equitable, are organised and run in a clear format. 

I also fear that perhaps this money, if we leave it loosely hanging, can be vulnerable to exploitation by some people who are used to using these funds. [HON. MEMBERS: “Bigirimana.”]-Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amoding, I just want to get clarification; is this replacing the other funds or it is complementary?

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, this programme is seeking to replace because if you remove resources from one programme to another, essentially you are denying the other programme resources to operate. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Can we hear from the chair of the budget committee.

4.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Tim Lwanga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I started reading the second corrigenda, I did mention that during the committee meeting, we had a representative from the National Youth Council. This council representative did inform us that they had consulted widely – (Interjections)- They had consulted widely –

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MR LWANGA: I think that information is important but let us go on to the report.

THE SEPAKER: Okay, let us receive the report and then we shall hear from the minister and have a short debate.  

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, on 13 September 2013, you tasked the Budget Committee, in accordance with rule 138 (2), to find funds –   

THE SPEAKER: He is reading the report of the consultation that we directed. Proceed. The reports are here. Let us receive this report first. The copies are being distributed. Please, proceed.

MR LWANGA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. On 13 September 2013, you tasked the budget committee in accordance with rule 138 (2) to find funds –

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Order, please.

MR LWANGA: You tasked the committee to find funds for a 20 per cent salary increment for teachers from the budget estimates for financial year 2013/2014. The directive arose from the debate on the report of the Sectoral Committee on Education and Sports on the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2013/2014.

Methodology

The budget committee held meetings with the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and made a detailed re-examination of the entire budget estimates for 2013/2014.

Findings

The committee paid close attention to discretionary expenditure items for possible cuts. These items included advertising, workshops and seminars, staff training, hire of venues, books, periodicals and newspapers, welfare and entertainment, printing, stationery and photocopying, telecommunication, travel inland and abroad, fuel, lubricants and oils and maintenance of vehicles and other equipment. The scenario for possible cuts excluded vote-on-account, which is one-third of the total allocation for these items, since this money had already been spent.

Statutory Votes, Missions and Local Governments

Madam Speaker, we came up with a total of Shs 513 billion for these particular items and we took off the 30 per cent, leaving us with a total of Shs 342 billion. We then applied tests onto this: five per cent yielded Shs 17 billion; 10 per cent yielded Shs 34 billion; a 15 per cent cut yielded Shs 51 billion; and 20 per cent yielded Shs 68 billion. 

Another scenario for a 1.5 per cent cut across the entire budget to yield Shs 136 billion, this being the amount that was required, was also considered and found untenable as it did not take into account the consequences of those cuts to planned programmes and activities. 

The committee notes that:
1. 	The education sector was unable to fit this activity in their MTEF ceiling during the budget making process.

2. 	Any cuts in the recurrent budget will have adverse consequences on development activities and programmes that are responsible for future economic growth. Therefore, there is no scope for budgetary reallocation within the current budget.

3. 	The only scope of funding salary increments over and above the four per cent already awarded to teachers and other public workers lies only with finding new resources.

4. 	The cumulative salary increment for teachers since last financial year - 15 per cent and then four per cent in this financial year - now stands at 19.6 per cent.

5. 	The other low paid categories of public workers such as nurses, police, army and others who have not expressed agitation also want pay reviews and need to be considered.

6. 	Since the time of the promise of 20 per cent pay rise for teachers, the national budget has shrunk by over Shs 500 billion on account of cuts in donor funding for the budget.

7. 	Last but not least, selective pay awards have been a major source of, and not a cure of, industrial unrest.

The committee, therefore, recommends as follows:
1. 	It is not possible to reallocate funds from activities in the current budget. Indeed, all tax proposals made by Government to raise revenue should be sustained.

2. 	In the future, all demands on the budget should be introduced early in the budget process to enable favourable competition among activities. (Interjections)

3. 	The scope for pay review lies in finding new resources to fund pay rises across all categories of deserving public servants. Government should explore measures to widen and deepen the tax base;

4. 	The Government should desist from selective pay awards and instead institute a salary review board, which is a sustainable method of pay review for public workers. The legal and regulatory framework for his body should be brought to Parliament this financial year to enable it commence work in the next financial year. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.
	
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a minority report. Let us receive the minority report. 

4.39
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. 

On 13 September 2013, the House resolved and the Speaker, in accordance with rule 138, ordered the Committee on Budget to find money for a 20 per cent salary increment for teachers from the budget estimates for the financial year 2013/2014. The directive arose from the debate of the report of the Sectoral Committee on Education and Sports on the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2013/2014.

As per your directive, the Committee on Budget held at least three meetings but disagreed on possible areas from which to cut and relocate funds. This is what has given birth to this minority report, moved under rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure. I will not read the rule. 

Methodology

The committee held meetings with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and made detailed re-examinations of the entire budget for the financial year 2013/2014.

Findings

The committee paid close attention to discretionary expenditure items and identified over Shs 68 billion, but to our surprise, the committee refused to effect it. These items included advertising, workshops and seminars, staff training, hire of venues, books, periodicals and newspapers, welfare, entertainment, printing, stationery and photocopying, telecommunication, travel inland and abroad, fuel, lubricants and oil and maintenance of vehicles and other equipment. The scenario for possible cuts excluded vote-on-account, which is one-third of the total allocation for these items, which has already been spent.

Statutory Vote, Missions and Local Governments

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, as you may see, different scenarios were presented to us and the committee discussed these scenarios – five per cent cut, 10 per cent cut, 15 per cent cut and scenario 4 of a 20 per cent cut that gave us Shs 68,454,271,671. Having found Shs 68.4 billion, what remained was for the committee to identify more areas for possible cuts and instead they opted not to. This is what we have done to help the House to make a decision in line with its directive.

Proposal to raise Teachers’ Salary by 20 Per Cent for Financial Year 2013/2014

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, if we take scenario 1, which already raised Shs 68.4 billion, then we move to scenario 2 here and we look at vote 002. We have decided to be very technical on this matter; we are looking at item 2282101, donations. If you look at the budget draft estimates that were presented, donations for the financial year 2012/2013 were a total of Shs 6.168 billion but this financial a year, donations have grown to a tune of Shs 80.82 billion for the President. That is State House – (Interjections) 

Madam Speaker, I want to beg the indulgence of colleagues to listen. We do not oppose donations and we agreed that donations are necessary, but it is time to donate to the teachers in line with the Constitution. 

Vote 002, item 24003, classified expenditure, for the financial year 2012/2013 had a total of Shs 2.4 billion. For this financial year we are talking about, it is allocated Shs 18 billion – (Interjections) – So, you can see the growth.

Under the Office of the Prime Minister, vote 003, there is a new item that had zero funds in 2012/2013 and this financial year it has a total of Shs 8 billion. We also have another item, classified, in 2012/2013 which had Shs 127 billion but this financial year it has Shs 295 billion. 

Making considerations less vote–on-account, if you at the donations, out of Shs 53.8 billion we are recommending reallocation of Shs 34 billion. From classified expenditure, less vote-on-account the balance is Shs 12 billion and we are recommending just Shs 4 billion. 

I think the Prime Minister’s Office wants to buy land and they have allocated Shs 8 billion. We have no problem but out of the money that they have taken, less vote-on-account they have Shs 5.3 billion and we are recommending removal of Shs 4 billion. They can pay for land next time because now they are in the new building of the Office of the President. Under the classified item, out of Shs 295 billion, less vote-on-account you have Shs 196 billion and we are just recommending a modest Shs 26 billion. 

If you add all that, you have new revenue, which is Shs 68 billion, and together with the item from seminars and travels, you already have Shs 136 billion to increase teacher’s salary by 20 per cent as directed by the House. (Applause)

The committee, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, justified their refusal to use this money for teachers’ increment –

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MR EKANYA: The committee justified their refusal based on the reasons below, which we find divisionary:
1. 	That the education sector was unable to fit this activity with their MTEF ceiling during the budget-making process. This is wrong.

2. 	That any cut in the recurrent budget will have adverse consequences on development activities and programmes that are responsible for future economic growth. Therefore, there is no scope for budgetary reallocation within the current budget. Madam Speaker, this is also wrong because when teachers get money, they spend it within the economy. [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”]

3. 	That the only scope of funding salary increments over and above the four per cent already awarded to teachers and other public workers lies in finding new money. Madam Speaker, on this one, the economy is growing at five per cent and the teachers’ commitment was made five years ago.

4. 	That the cumulative increment for teachers since the financial year has been 15 per cent and four per cent in this financial year. This is also diversionary, Madam Speaker. 

5. 	That the other low paid categories of public workers such as nurses, police, army and others who have not expressed agitation also warrant pay review and need to be considered.

6. 	That selective pay awards will be a major source of industrial unrest. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, on the basis of this observation, the committee made the following recommendations that we disagree with:
1.	 That it is not possible to reallocate funds from activities in the current budget. Indeed, all tax proposals made by Government to raise revenue should be sustained.
2. 	That in the future, all demands on the budget should be introduced early in the budget process to enable favourable competition among activities.
3. 	That the scope of pay review lies in finding new resources.
4. 	That Government should desist from selective pay awards.
 
Our recommendations

1. 	Teachers’ salary increment is not for teachers but for the children of those parents who are not privileged to take their children to private schools. (Applause)

2. 	The increment is to enable us address issues surrounding quality of education. (Applause)

3. 	The pay rise is to enable us have good health providers to manage our health system, engineers to build our roads, schools and bridges, among others - (Applause) - soldiers for our country’s security.

4. 	The pay rise is to try to create equity on the planet earth. (Applause)

5. 	Our proposals are as follows - I read them and attached them. 

6. 	Look at the scenario which the committee did not adopt.

7. 	We had presented another scenario of suppressing, which we withdraw;

8. 	Whichever is adopted, teachers will get the increment of 20 per cent. (Applause)

Appeal to Parliament

Rt. Hon. Speaker, the vote in this House today is about the future of this country. It is about those who voted for us and gave us the privilege to decide for them. While 99 per cent of their children go to these public schools, ours go to private schools were there are no strikes. (Applause) The same teachers and parents are our relatives, campaign managers, whom we shall plead with to vote for us in 2016. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, many colleagues may not understand that parliamentary power resides in the past; the Executive proposes, we approve or appropriate. This power was given to us by the teachers and the parents of these helpless people who cannot be here. I am appealing for a bi-partisan vote of no religious boundary, tribe or political leaning because the pupils, who are the ultimate beneficiaries of this vote, do not understand dogma - Vote with your conscience and vote for a better future of Uganda and our children. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, allow me pose this question to my honourable colleagues: Are you for quality education by rhetoric or by action? (Interjection) In this House, there is no single Member of Parliament who is ignorant. I will repeat that; in this House, there is no single Member of Parliament who is ignorant – who does not understand the value of quality education and better pay for teachers as one of the fundamental factors to the success of any nation. That is why I am convinced that all the colleagues across the political divide will vote for this proposal. That is why I am calling for a vote by roll call. I beg to move. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. May I now invite the Minister of Education to make a brief statement because they are all related to the same issue. Minister of Education, make your statement.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.52
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MAJ. (RTD) JESSICA ALUPO: Madam Speaker, this statement is made under rule 44(1) of our Rules of Procedure. 

On Monday, 16 September 2013, schools opened for the third term and some teachers did not report for duty as a result of a strike declared by Uganda National Teachers Union (UNATU). Honourable members, it is important to recognise that UNATU’s action is contrary to the provisions of the recognition agreement and relevant labour laws that categorise education service as an essential service.

Madam Speaker, the current strike by teachers has far-reaching effects on the whole education system, considering that the third term is an examination term in the education calendar for both promotion to higher level and transition to other levels. Government wishes to recognise and appreciate the efforts of heads of education institutions or schools and teachers who reported to their duty stations and have made all efforts to make the schools or education institutions operational since Monday.

Whereas Government still acknowledges its pledge to enhance salaries for public servants, it has been practically impossible to provide the 20 per cent for teachers this financial year. This is due to budget constraints and development priorities like electricity for all teachers, including –(Interjections)- mostly rural electrification for areas where most of our population lives; roads in places where most of our population lives, which will benefit the parents, students and pupils as well as teachers and Members of Parliament; provision of water for production as well as clean water for our rural population who are parents of these pupils and students; and other infrastructural development. 

In spite of these budgetary challenges, Government was able to provide a four per cent salary enhancement across board. In the subsequent financial years, subject to the availability of funds, Government will consider catering for salary enhancement across all civil servants. 

Meanwhile, Madam Speaker, Government continues to finance other welfare related initiatives for teachers like the construction of houses for teachers, -(Mrs Cecilia Ogwal rose_)- payment of hard-to-reach allowances, payment of 30 per cent salary increment to science teachers, -(Interjections)- contribution to teachers’ SACCO with a view to alleviating the plight of teachers. Finally, Madam Speaker, Government urges all teachers to return to school. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: She has gone. She has finished and there is no one on the Floor. Let us hear from hon. Otto.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance on three aspects: One, this Parliament passed a resolution that since permanent secretaries Mr Bigirimana for gender, Dr Kagoda for internal affairs and Dr Asuman Lukwago for health were involved in misappropriation of public funds, no further funds should be directed to their ministries. Madam Speaker, you directed that the Minister of Finance reports to this House accordingly. 

Today there is corrigenda No. 2 sating that Shs 19.25 billion be taken again to a ministry where Mr Bigirimana, who happens to be in the House right now, is PS. So the guidance I am seeking is this: What do we do with the other resolutions this Parliament made in relation to these three individuals?

Secondly, I would like to say this in my capacity as chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances. Hon. Jessica Alupo, on Wednesday, 31 August, on page 139 of our Hansard, reported thus: “The President, on the advice of both the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Public Service, gave a firm commitment that salaries would be raised across the board with effect from the financial year 2012/2013 and the increment was to be triggered over a three-year period. For example, 15 per cent salary increment in 2013, 20 per cent salary increment in 2014 and 15 per cent salary increment in 2015, with primary school teachers getting 50 per cent increment over the medium term, an increment which is higher than 30 percent that was originally demanded by UNATU -” This is an assurance made by the minister on the Floor of the House. Today, she comes to make another statement which is different from what she said earlier. 

Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on whether I am allowed to move a motion under rule 70 that the minister no longer be heard in this House. (Laughter) 

Lastly, this committee report was signed by nine Members of Parliament out of 26 – more than one-third - but who signed this report. On the last sitting of the Parliament, hon. Nyakecho Annet stood up on this Floor and said she supported salary increment for teachers – that was on Thursday. So the guidance I seek is, is the honourable member allowed to make a statement today and then come back the following day and change it? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you are alone on the Floor you may have some ideas, but when you meet 20 other members and you discuss, you may change your mind. So it is fine. Now, can I ask the Minister of Finance to respond to the other issues of the accounting officers. 

5.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable members, last week this Parliament directed that we look into the issue pertaining to the appointment of Dr Lukwago as the accounting officer for the Ministry of Health. This is because in the ministerial policy statement, the Committee on Health in this Parliament gave some information in regard to his propriety. 

Following this directive from Parliament, the appointing officer, that is, the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury, on the 18th of this month, wrote to the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Health, Dr Lukwago –(Interjections)– on the 18th of September 2012. I am reading a letter which is copied to Parliament. Allow me read the letter verbatim and then I lay it on the Table:

“Appointment as Accounting Officer for Ministry of Health
Reference is made to a letter dated 18 June 2013 in which you were appointed as the accounting officer for the Ministry of Health. 

Further reference is made to the report of the Parliamentary Committee on Health on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Health Sector for the financial year 2013/2014. 

Under section 8(1) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, accounting officers are designated by the Secretary to the Treasury prior to the approval of the Minister of Finance. However, in the above report, Parliament recommended that another person should be appointed as the accounting officer given the criminal proceedings against you by the Director of Public Prosecutions. 

In view of the above, and in the interest of natural justice, this is to request you to explain yourself before any further action is taken. A copy of the report of the Parliamentary Committee on Health is attached. I expect a response from you within a period not exceeding one week. 

Keith Muhakanizi,
Permanent Secretary, Secretary to the Treasury”. 

This letter is copied to the Speaker of Parliament, the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Health, the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Committee on Health, and to the state ministers in the Ministry of Finance. I beg to lay this on the Table. 

Madam Speaker, as far as the other two permanent secretaries who have been appointed as accounting officers are concerned, we have not received any document indicating that they have been implicated in impropriety. So we are responding to the directive that you gave to us last week. 

MR AYENA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Hon. Odonga Otto was very explicit about the resolution of the Parliament giving directives on what should be done in respect to those three permanent secretaries. A contradictory statement has just been made to this Parliament. The guidance I seek is whether a directive of this Parliament is subject to the discretion of the Secretary to the Treasury/ Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Finance.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe there must be some regulations through which processes must go before they are effected. So, I believe the Secretary to the Treasury is following the procedures. I do not think he can just wake up and say, “Get out of office”. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am here to seek guidance and procedure. I have been following this case of Dr Lukwago in the press and I have the following observations. First of all, Lukwago is the one who informed and stopped the cheque in Bank of Uganda – (interjections) – first wait. Secondly, he is the one who asked for investigations. Thirdly, after he asked for investigations, charges were preferred against him. 

When charges were brought against him, he protested and appealed to the Constitutional Court – (Interjections) – Please, let me talk. We are Members of Parliament and we need to understand issues so that we take decisions from an informed point of view. The Constitutional Court gave a ruling restraining Government and its agencies against acts of mob justice until this case is heard. 

In this House, we have people who have been charged with murder and they were heard and now they are in this House. There are people who were charged with several criminal offences but they were heard and let go –(Interjections)- I am talking about facts and I can substantiate them. 

The right to be heard is a constitutional one. I read the report of the Committee of Health; they did not invite Dr Lukwago. If you are asked to investigate and you see only one side and you do not see the other side and you make a recommendation, what is it based on? Madam Speaker, should we continue to debate and indulge ourselves in matters that are before the court?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the matter is in court, I think we shall prejudice it if we take decisions, which may be different from what the court might do. Let us leave the issue of Mr Lukwago in the court. We shall act when we get the judgement from the court.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I raised the issue of the three permanent secretaries, and the Front Bench is properly constituted in this House. I raised the issue of Permanent Secretary Pius Bigirimana and everyone is quiet like they have not heard what I have said. All the ministers are quiet. I also raised the issue of Permanent Secretary Dr Kagoda. 

Madam Speaker, can the ministers explain to us about these three permanent secretaries? We are representatives of the people and we need an explanation not only on Lukwago. Is it because he is a Lukwago?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. When the name of Pius Bigirimana was mentioned in the minority report, you clearly gave a ruling that whatever was done by that individual was not done by him as a person but as the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Is the honourable member in order to challenge the actions of the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development who is legally holding the office and against who no criminal charges have been raised? He is duly appointed and holding office lawfully. Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Minister of Finance was clear. He said he had dealt with the issue of Mr Lukwago against whom a charge sheet had been presented and he said he had not yet received charge sheets in respect of Dr Kagoda and Mr Bigirimana. So if anyone has a charge sheet, please lay them so that we can take action.

5.13
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will agree with me that this is not the first time that this House is bringing up the issue of the three permanent secretaries. Actually, the last time we were in this House on the issue of the three permanent secretaries, you made a ruling. We challenged the Executive to bring us an alternative name to replace the three permanent secretaries-

THE SPEAKER: No, replace the accounting officers.

MS ANITE: yes, the three accounting officers of Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Gender, and Ministry of Health. Madam Speaker, the Executive came back to us with a letter written by Keith Muhakanizi, the Secretary to the Treasury, and when they gave us this report, they brought back the same three names as accounting officers. The report was presented to the House by hon. Matia Kasaija. 

After giving that presentation, and the House was well constituted like it is now, you decided to make a ruling. It was a very wise ruling because you realised that we had exhausted all the options. The debate was very heated and the people in the Opposition and the ruling side expressed their feelings on the issue of the Executive Secretary very passionately. The wise ruling that you made as the Speaker of this House was that “you, the Executive, search your conscience; I leave this issue of the permanent secretaries in your hands.” That was what you said.

Now we are raising this issue again. You directed that the Executive should search their conscience. I strongly believe that the Executive is still searching their conscience. (Laughter) If there is an issue on that ruling in relation to the three permanent secretaries, what would I expect of the Executive?

Madam Speaker, I do not want to challenge you because you are very senior and a mentor to me, but I just want to say this and remind you of your ruling. Would you kindly ask the Executive if they have finished searching your conscience? What is the report? That is the point we are supposed to start from today, not to start debating the whole issue again, because our Hansard and the report is full of the issue of the permanent secretaries. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to the budget.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. We took oath to defend this Constitution when we were being sworn in. Article 164 is categorical on accountability: “The Permanent Secretary or the accounting officer in charge of a Ministry or department shall be accountable to Parliament for the funds in that Ministry or that department.” It says, “shall be accountable to Parliament.” 

It goes on to say, “(2) Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office. 

(3) Parliament shall monitor all expenditure of public funds.” 

Madam Speaker, we are just performing our constitutional duty to cause the accounting officer and the permanent secretary to be accountable. When we take a decision here, it is binding because it is a constitutional obligation. Mr Tandekwire, who was our Clerk, had reached retirement age but because Parliament had not appointed an accounting officer, he remained here as a Clerk but he was not an accounting officer. So it is not do or die that a permanent secretary must be an accounting officer. May I ask the Executive to rise high and defend this Constitution? Madam Speaker, I am seeking for your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that is what I said last time. I said I am leaving the Executive to examine their conscience and explain to the people of Uganda why they have taken the actions they have taken. I do not know what more I can do.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point I would like to bring out is that we have received over five reports and these reports have been systematically presented to us. What I see, however, is that the Members, irrespective of the wise ruling you made some time ago, are insisting on focusing on individuals and yet we have big business that has brought us here to deal with (Interjections) – So, I really implore you, Madam Speaker; we are setting aside the, the budget, all the big business we are supposed to deal with, and just dealing with individuals. I see this as diversionary.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I seek the indulgence and guidance of your chair on two pertinent issues that have been presented to this House. One, I want to make reference to the letter read to us by the Minister of State for Finance, General Duties, and as has been expounded on by the Minister of State for Animal Industries, hon. Bright Rwamirama. 

Whereas I agree with the contents of the letter written by the Secretary to the Treasury, I want to seek clarification as to whether the Uganda Government Standing Orders have changed. The civil service that I know, which still operates today, is to the effect that once you are indicted for offences related to the office that you hold, you automatically go on interdiction and you receive half a salary like Dr Sylvester Onzivua was interdicted when he was indicted. (Interruption) 

DR BITEKYEREZO: I thank you so much, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I need your guidance. The information I want to give to hon. Kassiano Wadri is that there is a problem of the right to a fair hearing. I was looking at Article 28 of the Constitution, which says that every person who is charged with a criminal offence shall be presumed to be innocent until proved guilty or until that person has pleaded guilty.

The information I want to give is that I had the opportunity to come across the court order from the Court of Appeal and it is entitled: “In the Court of Appeal, Uganda, at Kampala, Civil Application No.35 of 2013 arising from Constitutional Petition Application No. 34 of 2013, that is, Dr Asuman Lukwago v. Attorney-General.” There is now an order.  

“This application coming for hearing this 28th day of June 2013...”- and now I want to read for you how the judge ordered - “It is hereby ordered as follows: That an interim order doth hereby issue that the applicant’s bond terms in the Anti-Corruption Division of Criminal Intelligence and Investigation Department (CIID) of the Uganda Police Force headquarters at Kibuli under file reference No. GEF15/2013b and are hereby valued to the extent that the applicant shall from the date hereof report to the registrar of this court once every month till the disposal of the main application now pending in court or the main Constitutional Petition No.29 of 2013, whichever comes earlier.

That an interim order doth be hereby issue restraining the respondent whereby themselves, their servants and all agents from continued acts of reprisal and victimisation of the applicant/petitioner if any and/or from unlawful interfering. This costs with the applicant’s liberty based on acts which are the subject of Constitutional Petition No.29 of 2013 till the determination of the main application No…”

Madam Speaker, if the court has already said that we should leave this, are we going to deliberate on something of the court or we shall follow the court? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matters of Dr Lukwago are sub judice; they are in the court. We should not take any further steps on them until we hear from the other branch which is responsible. If they throw him out, we shall comply also, and I said I leave the others to the conscience of the Government. So, on the issue of Dr Lukwago I do not want us to have a debate.

Honourable members, let us go back to what we were doing. We had a lengthy debate; we considered all the reports of all the sectors at length, so I do not expect such a lengthy debate on the corrigenda but we could make one or two comments on the report of the budget committee. I will only allow five contributions.  

5.25
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. This House has been informed through the report on the first corrigenda that a committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Education and Sports was put in place. This House should be interested in knowing on which date this committee was put in place and which date this committee begun carrying out its duties in regard to this. 

On the issue of the 20 per cent salary increment, a Government assurance was made on the Floor of this House last financial year. You cannot tell me that this committee has taken more than 365 days without producing a report to Cabinet. This is exactly what the report is saying on page 7. 

A close scrutiny of this matter will inform this House and indeed the whole nation as to whether the Government of the Republic of Uganda has the political will to enhance teachers’ salaries. If we leave this issue at large, it will be very bad for our teachers and Government will continue disregarding resolutions and Government assurances in this House. I beg to submit.

5.27
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ekanya, our shadow Minister of Finance, for providing the solution that the whole country is waiting for. You sent the committee to look around for money to increase the salaries of the teachers. The alternative Government has provided an alternative - that the money is there. I would like, therefore, to say that let us move by the suggestions provided in the minority report provided herein by hon. Ekanya. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the whole of Parliament is being tested right now. If we yield today, we cannot stand tomorrow- (Interjections) – Yes! We must stand by the directive that we should provide salary increment for the teachers. How can we promise and promise again and again? Even if it is a child of five years old, you cannot go to the market promising to bring sweets in the evening and you come with nothing and then you say “tomorrow”, and the child will wait and then you come back with nothing and again say “tomorrow”. This child will grow up. Madam Speaker, stand your ground, we are with you on this matter. 

Thirdly, I support the minority report given by the Female Youth MP, National. Why transfer money- (Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In this House we always have different opinions. We do not always agree and sometimes we agree but we always look at the Chairperson as impartial. Is it in order for hon. Fungaroo, who I sometimes call funguwa ro, to stand here and point at the Speaker and say that you should stand your ground as if you are a Speaker of one side?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have no side in these issues; I am just a facilitator. (Laughter) 

MR FUNGAROO: I respect the ruling but I am also proud of the Speaker. Madam Speaker, on behalf of the youth of Obongi, which is in Northern Uganda, I would like to say that there was an attempt to help Northern Uganda with PRDP, with a lot of questions – (Member timed out)

5.31
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I applaud four of the five reports that have been presented by the budget committee and the minority report. 

If we are to be genuine in appropriation, we should look at what happened last year when the donors cut their funds. All local governments were affected; funds for the fourth quarter were not released because there was no money. Right now, we are talking about cutting areas where vote-on-account has already been released and the money has been utilised in those areas. If we now suspend money where half of it or part of it has been used, then I do not think we are moving. We are going to waste more money in funds lost, because funds are committed and then we are cutting and suspending. 

Madam Speaker, in order not to have this circus every financial year, I support the idea of having a salary and emolument review board, which will look at the salary of all of us who are paid by Government so that we create equilibrium across the board. Those who are getting much more can come down so that we create equilibrium, so that we can solve this matter once and for all. Continuing to debate this shall not take us anywhere. I want to propose that we go by the report of the budget committee and then have a board put in place to review our salaries. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.33
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the committee on corrigenda No. 2. I wish to say that the Youth Livelihood Programme together with the Youth Venture Capital Fund and Youth Graduate Fund have got strategic interventions that are meant to address the youth question. However, I wish to say that when you look at all these programmes, the underlying issue is job creation, transformation and more importantly, to boost youth productivity. 

When you look at the leap given by the public sector and Government but also the complementary roles played by the private sector, inevitably one would say that we need an integral process when addressing the matters surrounding the young people. I am mindful of the fact that as young people we are constrained by the terms and conditions as far as the Youth Venture Capital Fund is concerned. However, I wish to put it on record that whereas we urge Government to invest in the Youth Livelihood Programme beginning this financial year, we should not lose the Youth Venture Capital Fund and we should be able to call upon Government to  - (Interruption)

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you very much, my colleague. Hon. Odonga Otto seems to have an issue with me but I think we can finish that issue outside here. (Laughter) The information I would like to give – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is hon. Annet Nyakecho in order to state on the microphone of this House that I have any issue to sort with her outside this House? Madam Speaker, you know I am a married man. (Laughter) Is she in order?

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, since he has withdrawn his intentions, I have no intention of proceeding any further. 

The information I want to give to my colleague is about the issue of the Youth Livelihood Programme. Actually, the whole of last year, we all lamented here about the difficulties the youth were facing in accessing this money. The youth were being requested to produce collateral in form of land titles. You also had to be an S.4 leaver and above in order to access this money. We all prayed before that Government would come up with a better project because of this. I am happy that today we have a project that has been designed for the very poor youth.  

As I summarise, I need to say that it is high time we change the mindset of the youth of this country. Even though they are graduates, they should think about going back and doing projects that will help them in their future. Madam Speaker, I thank you. 

MR NAKABALE: Thank you very much, my colleague, for the information. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I wish to state that we should ask ourselves one big question: Who are our planners? How can we forget that over 5,000 youth have not benefited from this programme and in any given case, there are constraints. The answer is: it is our organizational capacity that is failing to streamline the issues surrounding the Youth Venture Capital Fund. 

I would also like to say that as we go on to invest with the Youth Livelihood Programme, let Government provide a guarantee scheme to the other commercial banks such that the country does not lose out entirely with the Youth Graduate Fund. 

5.38
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report of the budget committee indicates that they looked at the budgets from all sectors, from all ministries, and they failed to raise money. I took the trouble to look at the entire budget and I considered training, travel abroad, travel inland, allowances, workshops, fuel, lubricants and welfare and I sampled just 23 votes, including the vote of Parliament. From staff training, that is from Government ministries, there is Shs 36 billion; from travel abroad, there is Shs 47 billion; from travel inland, there is Shs 92 billion; allowances, 38 billion; workshops, Shs 36 billion; fuel, Shs 42 billion and so on. I am not saying that these items are not necessary, but if we just got 30 per cent, we would get about Shs 130 billion.

Secondly, teachers’ welfare is not all about salaries. Given the nature of teachers’ work, they need to stay at school and hence they need houses, for example, in order to be effective. I am wondering whether the budget committee could not at least find something and we start on construction of teachers’ houses, so that instead of them spending money on transport, they are able to be housed at school.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first, I want to know who is in charge of establishing the salary review board -(Interjections)- who in Government? We want to identify the person responsible. Who is in charge of establishing the salary review board? Deputy Prime Minister, I would like to know who is in charge of establishing the salary review board which has been recommended in this report. 

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The salary review board is supposed to be set up by the Ministry of Finance because it encompasses very many organisations other than the public service ministry. Also, since it will be a very important financial institution, it was decided that the Ministry of Finance should co-ordinate with agencies. That is the position. 

5.42
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think in matters like this, it was unfair for somebody to stand up to the microphone without actually knowing what is supposed to be done.

First of all, I would like to clear an impression by hon. Ssimbwa when he said that once you establish that board, even those who are earning less will have their remuneration come down. That will be clearly unconstitutional; you cannot review anybody’s emoluments downwards. We do not need to be populist; what that board can do is to raise the salaries of those who have been getting low salaries to make them equal to the others.

Secondly, this affects rights that have been entrenched in the Constitution, and I will give you an example; the emoluments of Members of Parliament are only determined by Parliament according to the Constitution. So there is no way the Ministry of Public Service or Ministry of Finance can come up with a board that can affect the emoluments of Members of Parliament. That is impossible. You can only do it by amending the Constitution and creating a commission under the Constitution, which may, for example, amend the particular Article that gives Parliament power to determine the emoluments of its members. I expect the lawyers on the part of Government – these are elementary things which you are leaving to hon. Kajura. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, once you have Government failing in its duties, the government in waiting is always ready to come in. I, therefore, would like to inform this House that among the proposals the Opposition is coming up with is the amendment of the Constitution to create that board. It will not be created by the Ministry of Finance as suggested by the Deputy Prime Minister. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I hear from the Minister of Finance on the response to the shadow finance minister’s proposals?

5.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A number of attempts have been made to find some resources for the enhancement of salaries for teachers to the level of 20 per cent. We need up to Shs 139 billion, and that is for the teachers alone. If we are to include pensions and gratuity, it will go beyond this. Secondly, if we were to include others like the Police, Prisons, – (Interjections) - we would require a total of over Shs 300 billion.  

To come to the issues raised by the Shadow Minister of Finance – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the Minister to respond to the Shadow Minister of Finance.

MR OMACH: Number one is the issue of Shs 68 billion that the shadow minister is talking about. During the budget process, we looked at the various votes which he has mentioned and we were able to remove Shs 33 billion, which was spread across various ministries, departments and agencies, leaving the bare minimum to operationalize other activities. Take the case of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, for example, they have to move. The Ministry of Defence also have to move. So, all this was considered and this was the bare minimum to enable the government to take services to the people.

If you take what has been raised here under vote 003, the land which is moving from zero in 2012/2013 to Shs 8 billion, this is money for buying land for the Bududa victims and it is a one-off. We have to resettle these people. If you move this to salaries, salaries are not a one-off; salaries have got to be sustained. 

So, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that we support the position that has been brought by the budget committee and we proceed. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The shadow finance minister spoke for the Opposition side and the minister has responded. So, honourable members, I want to put the question that –(Interjections)– I put the question that this House adopts the report on Corrigenda No.1. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House adopts the report on Corrigenda No.2. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House adopts the report of the Committee on Budget. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(Report adopted)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2013

THE SPEAKER: Where are Members going? We are still sitting; where are people going? Honourable members, please resume your seats. We still have business to do.

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Finance Bill, 2013” be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded; continue, minister.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to provide for the alteration of certain taxes and duties, to amend certain enactments relating to taxes, to revise the non-tax revenue collected under various enactments and for related matters. This Bill has got five parts. I beg to move. 
 




5.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule SSEBUNYA): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Finance Bill, 2013. 

Introduction

The minister has already mentioned that this Bill was read for the first time on 24 July 2013 and referred to the committee, which deliberated on it.  I will not read the objectives, but go straight to the observations of the committee on page 3. 

Observations

Imposition of a Fish Levy 

The committee notes that clause 4 seeks to introduce a fish levy on all exports originating from or caught in the fishing waters of Uganda to be collected by Uganda Revenue Authority. The committee was informed that this measure is expected to raise Shs 3.5 billion. The committee recommends that Government should enhance its regulatory activities and support the fish subsector. 

Revision of Fees payable under the Mining Act 
The committee observes that the proposed rates and terminology used under Schedule 1, items 4-11 is inconsistent with the Mining Act, 2003. 

The committee will propose amendments to items 4-11 to reflect the terminology used under the Mining Act, 2003. I beg to move. 

5.56
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): I wish to thank the chairperson, the committee and the ministry for the proposal. 

I have one amendment regarding this matter, under the Mining Act. Under the Mining Act, most of these costs are recoverable when an investor is paying taxes as expenditure of investment. I requested the ministers of finance and of energy for a way forward. This amendment will not even raise revenue because the investor is supposed to recover all these costs. We are not protected anywhere. 

I have asked the ministers of finance and that of energy to amend this law as a matter of urgency to bring it into conformity with international standards so that certain costs like this one are not recoverable. I am surprised that this item has remained as it was. If the minister expects us to raise money, we are not going to because under the same law, these costs are recoverable. 

Secondly, Government carried out studies on some of the areas. We got a World Bank loan here and there were aerial surveys done throughout the country on mineral quantity. To have a general figure of Shs 2.5 or Shs 3 million for a mining lease or exploration, irrespective of the quantity of minerals, is also lack of seriousness by Government. Government of Uganda has a database on the quantity and quality of minerals in every part of this country. 

By the way, prospecting and exploration licences would not be needed under the current arrangement in this country because we have developed a system and a database. Government needs only to assess the financial capability of the investor and the technological ability and go straight to issue a mining lease and charge appropriate tax. 

Therefore, this proposed amendment under the Mining Act is null and void; it is inconsequential and will not help this country to raise money. 

Finally, Kenya and Tanzania introduced a fish levy some time back. We would like to know from the minister, now that we are introducing a fish levy at a time when the fish is almost exhausted, whether this is in conformity with the EAC Treaty.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.00
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. By the mere fact that I represent the people from the islands and therefore a fishing community, I stand up to raise my concerns on the issue of the fish levy.

The committee notes that clause 4 seeks to introduce a fish levy on all exports originating from or caught in the fishing waters of Uganda. They are saying “or caught”, but there is fish that is caught and not exported. So, by saying “fish originating or caught”, it means that Uganda Revenue Authority is going to go to all landing sites and measure every fish that lands at the sites and introduce a fish levy. 

I presume this would be robbery. These fishermen are the biggest consumers of petrol; on average, a single boat consumes 40 litres of fuel a day, so they are the biggest tax payers. You cannot introduce a levy on fish which is not going out of the country. 

Actually, Members of Parliament who are not from the fishing community, this is fish for you to eat. If this is true, then we are going in the wrong direction and I call upon all Members, especially those from the fishing community and other beneficiaries of this delicacy, to seriously oppose this.

6.02
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the committee for the report. However, I have a few issues to raise. 

At one time, I remember in the Eighth Parliament a loan request was passed, funded by the African Development Bank, to finance construction of modern landing sites. There is one in Bwonja, one in Gorofa in my constituency and I think there is one in Kagwara. All these were meant to improve on the quality of the fish, but most of these landing sites with the ice plants are white elephants.

Now that Parliament is passing a law that a fish levy be introduced, which is going to accumulate and bring in Shs 3.5 billion, the fishing community is at a loss. Whereas we produce a lot of money for this economy, the government is milking a cow without feeding it. A lot needs to be done for the fishing community. We accept that this tax is going to help boost the economy, but the government should think of bringing input, providing loans and bringing SACCOs to the fishing community to make them access modern fishing gear at a subsidised price. This will help our people by changing their lives. 

For now, these people will remain underprivileged and forced to pay taxes because these exporters are going to levy this money on the common fishermen and it is going to be a burden on our people. So I ask the government to come down and help our people sustain the fishing industry, as the committee has recommended. Many of them have loans and many others have lost their property because of the loans they have accrued. Meanwhile, the government is emphasising on checking illegal fishing without providing an alternative -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okeyoh, can you explain why you are saying that the landing sites are white elephants? What is the problem? I went to Bwonda and I found a new facility. Why is it a white elephant?

MR OKEYOH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. These ice plants were supposed to produce ice. When these people have brought the fish, they are supposed to clean it and keep it fresh for export or en route to factories. 

Madam Speaker, part of this component was supposed to supply the community around with piped water but to-date, most of them are not commissioned, they are incomplete and the contractors never installed some of the components. Many of them lack electricity and the necessary components. So, you find that in some instances, even the fish we take to the factory is considered unhygienic yet these factories with the ice plants were supposed to improve on the quality and handling of the fish.

MR SSEBUNYA: Before the honourable member speaks about the subject, I would like to inform Members that this Bill is generally a sector based Bill. That is why we have mining, fishing - we have passed laws in this Parliament that empower those ministries to collect those levies; so, we are just formalising them. They are already passed in those respective Bills.

THE SPEAKER: You mean it is already a law?

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes, it is already a law.

THE SPEAKER: So we are wasting time?

MR SSEBUNYA: We are just formalising them here.

MS JANEPHER EGUNYU: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to find out what comes first; is it a Bill or a law? They are informing us here that the law is already in place and we are just formalising this. What does that mean? 

MR SSEBUNYA: Honourable members, as I said, we have a law called the Mining Act and it stipulates that money shall be collected in the Ministry of Energy and other relevant ministries. Those fees are already there and we passed them as law in those Bills. The Fishing Act was already passed in the last Parliament and now we are just formalising it in the Finance Bill so that we create a body to collect the fees. Uganda Revenue Authority is being empowered to collect this money but this money shall go to the ministries that are concerned and it is ring fenced to be spent as NTR. They are levies and fees in that industry.

THE SPEAKER: So this is a mere formality. There is nothing we are going to change.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I told the chairman and the committee that under the Mining Act, the minister has the power to vary these figures by statutory instrument. Therefore, while we may wish to make amendments, we need to remove that power from the minister. This amendment does not take away that power, so the minister will still remain with the power. 

That is why to me, this amendment is inconsequential, null and void. The committee needs to go back, look at the Mining Act with the ministers of finance and energy and come up with what they really want.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, is the Mining Act not working? Is that why you are bringing this matter to the Finance Bill? Is the Fishing Act also not working? Why do you need to bring it here?

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, if you look at the Bill itself, it has revision of motor vehicle and motorcycle registration fees, it has amendment of tariffs under the Road Safety Act, which tariffs are already being implemented by the Ministry of Transport. These tariffs were announced by the Police and that money is already going to the Police. 

We also have the imposition of the fish levy, and the Act was already passed by Parliament. We have the revision of fees payable under specific enactments. So these fees have been revised by the ministries themselves. As finance, we have no business in varying them but only allowing Uganda Revenue Authority to collect them.

THE SPEAKER: So, what you are saying is that the minister has revised the rates and you are just bringing them to our notice. The minister has exercised his powers under the Fishing Act and also the Mining Act-

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes; including the Companies Act where fees payable to the registrar have been also revised.

THE SPEAKER: So, this is just for information?

MR SSEBUNYA: I thank you - (Interjections) - For approval.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The principle was passed in various laws but the Finance Bill normally will revise those upwards and downwards and then we bring it to Parliament for approval. That is what is happening. Therefore, the chairperson should be clear that we are seeking approval of Parliament.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, there are Members of Parliament who are private investors with fish ponds in their homes or in their gardens. Under the East African Community, Kenya and Tanzania have been charging a fish levy on Lake Victoria. So this amendment needs to be categorically clear. Hon. Omach has a fish pond; you want to charge him even for his private fish pond? You are really distorting this. That clarity needs to come out. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I do not think there are landing sites on people’s ponds. 

THE SPEAKER: We need to resolve what exactly we are doing. Are we just noting, approving or what? If it is already on-going then -

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank this committee. We are realising that the Ministry of Finance is just bringing these figures for us to approve and it seems they want to raise revenue out of these sources. It is unfortunate that some of these Acts were approved when some of us were not in Parliament and we did not know the figures up to tomorrow. 

Wouldn’t it have been prudent for this committee to have told us that, for instance, industrial and building minerals was raised from this figure to this figure, so that we know the variation? In this one, we are seeing that there is the Companies Act but we do not know how much is being raised on the Companies Act. It is just left like that. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, the laws are in the public domain. You are expected to advise yourselves on them. Really, you are expected to advise yourselves on them.

6.13
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, my issue is related to the levy. If the levy is already being exercised under the statutory instrument, is this Bill therefore relevant? Are we supposed to get into it, because using the statutory instruments the different ministers are already exercising the levies of the dues? Is this Bill therefore relevant to us? This is what I want to find out.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is important for the country to know because I do not know how many people have access to statutory instruments. However, when this Bill becomes an Act, it is available to everybody in the public.

6.14
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you Madam Speaker. I find it unfortunate that my colleagues are trying to raise money from a fish levy. First of all, this country is in a very serious problem; we have protein deficits and that means our children are getting stunted. Many of us are no longer eating fish in our homes because fish is very expensive. When you go to Nakawa Market, you buy one sizeable fish at Shs 25,000 and a family of seven cannot adequately eat that. We know the relevance of fish in our children’s diet. Therefore, to assume that we are going to raise Shs 3.5 billion out of a fish levy is very unfortunate -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Abia, if you read the Bill, it is talking about fish exports and not domestic consumption.

MS BAKO: It doesn’t - 

THE SPEAKER: No, the Bill is talking about fish exports. It is clear. Part 4, fish levy is on fish exports.

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, even if it is on exports, from 2006 up to 2007 fish exports were third in this country and we took pride in that as a country. As I speak, our waters are exhausted; it does not mean that this levy is actually going to promote any revenues here when we are having a deficit of protein in this country. It is not.

THE SPEAKER: So, we should not export fish?

MS BAKO: No. Right now, Madam Speaker, we are exporting fish yet our waters are exhausted. The domestic supply is inadequate. That is even why it is very difficult for us to eat fish here at home.

THE SPEAKER: So you are saying we should not export fish?

MS BAKO: What are we exporting when at home we do not have anything to eat? Our waters are not fallowing and we are here looking for money that way?

MR SSEBUNYA: Honourable member, please do not task the Speaker for nothing. We export fish and we are saying let us add five cents in dollars per kilogramme wherever you find a fish. So, you are tasking the Speaker for nothing. 

For those who are exporting cattle, for instance, the minister is saying if you want to get or renew a cattle trader’s licence, instead of Shs 50,000 you shall pay Shs 100,000 and if –(Interjections)- this is hon. Rwamirama saying. The issue of exporting licence may be from Shs 50,000 to Shs 100,000 wherever you get the cow to export. That is what we are saying. They have consulted the industry players and it is now acceptable to them. I think that is what we are saying. 

6.17
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that the chairperson is telling us that our contributions may not really do much, but let me make my contribution.

Madam Speaker, we are always looking for ways of getting money into the Treasury. We have also observed that people who invest in the mining industry, sometimes when things turn sour they ask for higher compensation. So, I do propose that since the minister has the powers to make adjustments on the figures, when you are preparing for a mining lease, it should be from Shs 3 million to Shs 5 million and the renewal should be also Shs 5 million. 

When we look at number 4 - getting a licence - mining is really a lucrative business. You cannot just say that a person who is going to sometimes make even Shs 100 million a year should only pay Shs 1.5 million for a licence. We ask the minister to revise these so that we increase the sources of money for the country. Thank you.

6.19
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to speak about this tax that is going to be imposed on fish. I also beg for some minutes since I represent a fishing community - the whole district of Buvuma. 

I wish to inform Government that there are so many taxes that are levied right away from when a fisherman goes to fish. When the carpenter is making a boat, there is tax that that man pays to Government of Uganda. In Buvuma, which I represent, to put a boat in the waters, you have to pay Shs 20,000 for every boat. My colleagues who are telling me that is local government should know that local governments are under the central government. So that is money for government. If we are looking for money to go to the Treasury, that is also money going to the Treasury.

Secondly, if we are saying we are going to levy this money from the fish exports, what does this imply? This implies that these factories that we have that process fish, and these are the very factories that buy fish from our people - We have been complaining about the low pay per kilogramme of Nile Perch and since Government is going to levy more money on them, as buyers they will lower the cost of Nile Perch so that they also pay the tax that Government wants.

Madam Speaker, I want to request Government to first of all investigate. A boat that carries passengers brings fish to the market pays Shs 700,000 per annum to Government. That is money that goes to Government. Every factory pays money to the government. What does Government want from the fishermen? I want to find out.  

The chairperson of the Committee on Finance said that this money is to help the government enhance its regulatory activities and support the fishing sector. We have Beach Management Units (BMUs) that were set up by government. I want the minister to come here in front of all these honourable members and convince me that they have ever supported those BMUs by giving them fuel to regulate the fishing activities. This money remains in the ministry. This money has never gone down to the BMUs. 

I asked my colleague here why we are in this Parliament of Uganda. Sincerely, if the chair for finance stands up and says they have revised the rates, and we have representatives of people here from the islands and we were not involved and things are coming here for us to approve, then what is that that we want to approve –(Member timed out.)  

6.23
MR STEPHEN EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue of registration of vehicles and motorcycles. There is transformation in this country; people who used to use bicycles in Bukedea have moved to using motorcycles. If you went to Kamuli, you will also find motorcycles operating in Kamuli.

I want to support Government in its attempt to collect revenue while lifting registration fees. However, I have interfaced with the Committee on Finance and I presented to them that we have 12,000 motorcycles being registered monthly in this country, but there is an illegal fee that we keep collecting of Shs 18,000 per motorcycle. 

Last year, URA started the e-tax and provision of hard copies of registration forms was scrapped, but the Ministry of Finance has continued to collect Shs 18,000 for each form in order to register a motorcycle. Take an average of 10,000 motorcycles every month and that means that government collects Shs 1.8 billion illegally every month. Taxpayers are asking why they should continue to pay this tax and yet we have the e-tax. The government does not provide forms.

I have interfaced with the minister who also suggested that when amending the Traffic and Road Safety Act, this fee should be removed. However, I see here that they only intend to amend the requirement to deliver registration books and registration plates. What about this fee? This one is transferred directly to our local people who are buying these motorcycles, who are trying to move away from bicycles to motorcycles. 

Another issue I want to raise still on registration is that people have been paying Shs 35,000 for a number plate for a motorcycle. Last month, the Minister of Works doubled it to Shs 84,000. We have the plate providers who are private individuals. What is government’s interest in determining the price of a number plate for a vehicle or a number plate for a motorcycle? What is Government’s take on this? This must be explained. 

6.23
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I have the following observations: 

The first observation is that in his submission, the shadow Minister of Finance said that there is enough data as far as the mineral potential in this country is concerned, so he sees no need of collecting this money to be able to carry out this exercise. He said that there has been an aerial exploration covering the whole country, which is not true. The aerial exploration that has been done has covered the south, central and western parts of this country. The northern part has not been covered. So, it is not true that there is enough data in as far as the mineral potential in this country is concerned. 

Secondly, on the issue of tax rates that have been revised, still in the submission of the shadow minister, he said that these are recoverable costs. These are not recovery costs; these are expenses. If you pay for an exploration licence, for example, they give you a licence to go and try and establish whether there is potential of a mineral in a certain area or not; whether or not you find that mineral, you do not go back to recover this money. So, this is not a recoverable cost but an expense on the part of the investor. 

Thirdly, these rates are already being collected by the Ministry of Energy, being undertaken by the Uganda Revenue Authority. So, should there be any change of any effect, it will have a far bearing effect on the people who are already paying these rates. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

6.27
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have problems reconciling myself with opposing this proposal to impose a levy on our fisheries resource. However, when I listened this afternoon to the debate that took place concerning the teachers’ plight, I had to think twice. As patriots and as Ugandans who care for the welfare of others, we really need to find the money which will finance the civil servants including the teachers. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the finance committee and the Minister of Finance. In adjusting this proposal, they are saying “the fish levy on all exports originating from or caught”. So, is it to be imposed on only exports and not the fish caught in our lakes? The fish caught in our lakes will primarily cater for our nutrition needs, which we badly require as a country. So, if it is exports, then that is very fine. 

I want to add that they should find some money from even other sources so that we are able to finance the critical sectors of this country that need development.

Finally, my prayer is that as we look for this money, may we also find ways of improving the sustainability of this sector. We are already aware that the fish stocks are increasingly getting depleted; now, as the fish gets depleted, if we go ahead to enforce this levy, how are we providing for multiplication of fish species? Recently, also –(Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. In talking about this levy on export of fish, we need to take cognisance of what we want to achieve. Regulations have always been put in place and these regulations are harvesting a lot of money. 

You know very well that there are levies got from people who are catching young fish; you are not telling us how much has accrued to the coffers of the Government of Uganda from those levies. Now you want to impose a levy on exports so that you reduce even further the selling price of the fish to these factories to the detriment of our fisher folk.

MR BALYEJJUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable colleague for that useful information. However, I think what you wanted to refer to are the penalties and not levies because the two are different.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to appeal to colleagues to fully support –(Member timed out.)

6.32
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the finance committee and I support the issue of taxation.

We, Ugandans, love to receive things but we do not want to give. When it comes to taxation, people run and complain and yet we need services like health and so on. (Laughter) The fish is God-given in the lake and what the fisherman does is simply to get his net and collect. If he is selling it for export, why not get taxes from them? We need to tax them. Even some of us who dig and produce crops we pay taxes when we are selling our produce. So we must not run away from taxes. 

Secondly, on boda boda licences, I support the amount but the problem is that the agents add their own money and they make the process very long so that in the end, you spend a lot of money moving around. You can move from Koboko to Arua to have your motorcycle licensed, for example, two to three times or even more. I would now agree that the centres for licensing motorcycles be given to all the districts so that we do not spend money moving when we are licensing the boda bodas. Thank you.

6.33
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to add briefly to what one of the Members has already said because that was also the issue I wanted to raise – the mining leases. 

In mining, when they charge these preparation licences, it is not fair because you find that there are a lot of expenses when somebody is trying to prepare and see if there are substantial amounts of minerals. I would propose that instead, this Shs 3 million should be added to this renewal to make it Shs 6 million because when someone is renewing, it is a sure deal that they have found something and so they still have interest in that land. So it should be picked from preparation and be added to renewal. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see that in principle, there is no objection. I think the real debate will be at the committee stage; Members with specific amendments will speak during committee stage. So I put the question that the Finance Bill, 2013 be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FINANCE BILL, 2013

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Chair, I would like to think that for the purposes of the future, before we pass clause 5 that seeks to provide the schedule which seeks to revise the non-tax revenue collected under the various laws, I would like to request the Minister of Finance to look at other laws that can generate non-tax revenue next financial year, even as we pass this Bill. 

Madam Chair, I will give an example of an agency of government that falls under the policy supervision of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs called Uganda Registration Services Bureau. The Minister of Finance is here and he knows that in the last financial year, using the various laws that fall under its docket, the ministry set for this agency a target to collect non-tax revenue to a tune of Shs 7 billion. However, at the end of the last financial year, this agency tripled and instead collected Shs 21 billion as non-tax revenue. 

So I want to request the minister to use a number of laws, some of which can even be amended and brought on board. There is one on registration of births and deaths. There is also the Electoral Commission Act. We have paid Shs 200,000 for nomination for a very long time and this is part of non-tax revenue. Why should we continue paying Shs 200,000 when the rate of inflation is increasing? Why should we continue paying Shs 200,000 when others within the region are going up? We are not stopping people from contesting but if you cannot help yourself, how can you claim that you can help others? These are areas where we must generate non-tax revenue in order to handle the challenges that are lying before us. Thank you.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, as we said in the report, the nomenclature used in the Bill is not consistent with what is in the Act. Under Schedule 1, when you go to number 8 - Mineral Dealers’ Licence – under (a) we have industrial buildings, which is Shs 1.5 million; that one stays the same. We then have base metals at Shs 2 million; that also stays. When we get to precious metals, the ministry decided to use the terms “precious metals” and also “precious stones” to differentiate as it is in the Mining Act. So they are just differentiating them; precious metals, Shs 3 million and precious stones, Shs 3 million. That is the amendment. 

When it comes to number 10: which is mining lease for surface rent, they are separated. They state, mining lease – preparation is Shs 3 million and renewal is Shs 3 million. The figure remains the same but they are categorised differently. 

When it comes to goldsmith licence; annual fees are Shs 1.5 million. The justification is for consistence with the Mining Act. 

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I concur with the position of the committee. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, first, I agree with my brother, hon. Obua, that either we remove collection of non-tax revenue or increase it. If we are going to increase it, we cannot say, “Mining licence renewal is Shs 1 million”. Is that fair? This is peanuts. If only nomination is Shs 200,000, what about the licence for somebody who is going to make money out of our minerals?

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, the exploration licence we are talking about is not for making money; they give you a licence to go and explore and establish whether you will be able to get minerals or not. So this is not a licence to allow one to go and mine. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we should also avoid locking out certain classes of our society. How many of the youth or women can raise beyond Shs 1 million? Let us make it possible for them also to enter the market. If you put it too high, you would be locking out some people. 

Honourable members, I want to remind you that we raised the threshold for the banks here in this House and financial institutions to Shs 4 billion. Up to now, no woman has ever been able to open up a bank. It is foreigners who can do that; even our local people cannot do it. We should be careful. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I agree with you that sometimes it is not good to lock out our people. But we must look at many things. If you look at the same page, rule 5 on mineral dealers licence. This means that a person is dealing in industrial minerals and he has to pay only Shs 1.5. 

We must categorise licences; local and foreign. We must also look at the areas of coverage. I can get a licence to mine minerals in the entire Karamoja region and yet if it is localised to a specific area then we are better off. 

You are right, but on page 8, at an appropriate time, I would like to make some amendments. In bullet 5, on page 8, it says: “Registration of returns” - even if you have a dormant company and you take your returns after five years, they would require you to pay Shs 50,000 for every return. Again, we should categorise miners as Ugandans and non-Ugandans. Even the income tax law talks of residents and non-residents. 

So, I propose that the exploration licence for locals be Shs 2 million and for foreigners Shs 10 million. The justification is to promote the participation of the locals in mining. We are talking about local content but this is the best time to do it. 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, colleague, for allowing me to give information. I want to inform the Leader of the Opposition that if you put it at Shs 2 million, most of our people, especially the youth, may not manage to raise the amount. So I propose that for the locals, we leave it at Shs 1 million. 


MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I want to ask the minister of finance; what is the current fee payable now that you are introducing this fee of Shs 1 million? I am worried with what we are doing here; what is the status quo? 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I want to support the proposal by my colleague. He said Shs 1 million was peanuts. I want to add that Shs 1 million is not peanuts; it is actually a groundnut. Peanuts at least grow up on the trees, but groundnuts grow on zero ground.

I come from a fairly mining area; we want to encourage as many people as possible. We have to attach some value to this process. We have to be realistic; Shs 1 million is pocket change. If you think that Shs 1 million is too much for you, then do not try this industry. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you said you come from a mining area. How many of the young people in your constituency can afford to pay that Shs 1 million. I am not talking about our class; I am talking about the young people in your village: the senior three and primary seven dropouts in your village who want to engage in this business. 

MR ODOI: Madam Chairperson, our argument is that mining by its very nature is a capital intensive venture – I do not intend to be rude but it is not a venture for puppets; they are excluded. You cannot allege that you want to mine unless you have the money. Those of us from Tororo are weary of these small fees because –(Interjections)– let me tell you our own experience. You know we have Phosphates deposits in Tororo – (Interruption)

LT COL RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, we have been debating and we went into committee stage. But I can see people taking this chance to debate. Here, at committee stage, we should be moving amendments and justifications. I want to say that I also support the proposal of including the scope of coverage. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think they were speaking to the amendment of the Leader of the Opposition who said we should have two categories: the locals and the foreigners. 

MR NASASIRA: Madam Chairperson, I have been following the arguments of the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. Of course, when he is making them, they sound plausible but what was at the back of my mind is that these minerals have been here for centuries and up to now, they are still underground. I do not think these fees have been any higher. What has the problem been? 
Unfortunately, we do not have experts from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to tell us how they came to these low figures because I would like to do things in an objective way. How come they came to these figures? How come these figures have been so low and people have not even mined? We need to really understand why. 

I definitely support the idea of local and non-local but how will we determine what figure to put here so that people can start mining since these minerals have been here for all these years?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Minister, how did we discover minerals? We passed a loan here of $34 million and we told people to go and survey the whole country. They surveyed and discovered that we have all these minerals. I am putting it to you that when the Northern by-pass was being constructed, people in the Ministry of Works knew where it was going to pass. They went and bought land around there and they are the ones who sold for compensation –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, with due respect to my colleague, hon. Nandala, he stated that when Ministry of Works personnel knew that they were going to construct the Northern By-pass, they went and bought land and speculated on that land. Unless – [Hon. Odonga Otto: “Ask Fox Odoi”] - Fox Odoi is not from Ministry of Works and Transport. 

Unless the hon. Member substantiates and mentions the people in Ministry of Works who bought land around the Northern By-pass and sold it back to the government, I am compelled to move a point of order. Is he in order to insinuate and allege that we in the Ministry of Works and Transport bought the said land and sold it back to the government? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, who are those who speculated in the land around the Northern By-pass?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I want to do this as an exception and bring the details. I am sure and I have discovered that hon. Byagamabi might be one of them because the way he jumped - I said staff and there are many staff. That means he knows all the staff of the Ministry of Works; he walks with them, he knows where they sleep and that is why he came here and defended them. So, tomorrow, we are going to get the whole list of people compensated from Works and we shall tell you who these people are and we shall see where they lie.

In addition to that, I want to agree with hon. John Nasasira that the moment you see people quoting such low money –(Interjection)– I am going to get the report for you and you will see. You are one of them. The moment you see –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, I have my two ears and I was listening to the gentleman. Is the hon. Member in order to insinuate that I am one of them when he has no facts to show that I am one of them?

Madam Chairperson, I urge you that since he has stated it and it is on the Hansard that he is bringing it tomorrow, he should bring it tomorrow and let him check whether I am on that list.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are required to produce that list tomorrow so that you can tell us the people who speculated. But let us move on. I want to put the question.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I was telling the minister that all of us agree that the mineral licence is low. Two, we must put in an area. Three, we are looking at promoting Ugandans and if we are promoting Ugandans, then they should not be disadvantaged by foreigners. So, hon. Nasasira, I would propose that you agree with us that we increase this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, why don’t we finish the main clauses then we can deal with the schedule? Those changes are in the schedule. You have a proposal? Yes, hon. Nasasira.

MR NASASIRA: My proposal was that these points raised are good but as I make my proposal, you know when the Northern by-pass was done, I was the minister responsible. I just hope that hon. Nandala-Mafabi was not imputing that I bought land because I did not. I hope he was not imputing that and I hope he will clarify it.

For us to move forward on these points raised and in the same spirit like that of hon. Obua, I think we need more time to look at this so that we prepare better for this financial year rather than putting illogical and unprepared taxes. We take the points, we will go and prepare ourselves and we will come with a better deal next financial year. This is so that we can move forward. I just want to make that suggestion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 5 do stand part of the Bill. This is Clause 5, we have not yet gone to the schedule.

MR OMACH: The schedule is part of Clause 5, Madam Chairperson. Under what the Leader of the Opposition has raised, last year the exploration license was at Shs 800,000. We are proposing to move it to Shs 1 million. We agree that we want to increase but we had a lot of consultation with stakeholders and under the East African Community Common Market, all nationals of the East African Community Common Market must be treated equally. 

We have also signed treaties and investment promotion and protection agreements, which prohibit us from discriminating against foreigners. So if we are going to increase, let it be increased for all and not discriminating against foreigners.

There are two laws that I have talked about: the East African Common Market - (Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Uganda is for Ugandans; it is for us. We are still very poor. You may be rich but the people we represent are poor. Madam Chairperson, we have seen these foreigners come and even start preparing pancakes to sell on the streets when Ugandans are here. 

Furthermore, you are saying that we leave the money at that like Members were suggesting. Is it in order for us to rush and make this law favour those who have and we who think maybe in future - Uganda has not developed today. If you look at 20 years back, things were not the way they are today. If you keep on allowing these people because they have the money to come and take the big share and we are just here - I want to know whether this is in order.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, yes, we are Ugandans but we are part of the East African Community, we are part of COMESA, we are part of IGAD and all these are commitments we have entered into. I want to buy the suggestion of hon. Nasasira that maybe in the next financial year, starting in October, the Ministry of Finance could actually consult the Members of Parliament on the proposals to the Finance Bill so that you can get their views early enough.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. In line with the submission of senior Minister Nasasira, I want to first of all give information to the effect that in the Seventh and Eighth parliaments, Government invested $80 million for a sustainable mineral project. So, when we are talking of licensing, it is less grey; we now know much more what mineral wealth is in which place.

Secondly, the proposition I am bringing is that we are being held at ransom by people who are handling licences for areas without capacity to invest. (Applause) So, it is important that when we are discussing this matter, we are aware that Government has already invested some money and we need to invest even in areas of Karamoja, which we have not flown and which have a lot of mineral potential so that we do not only look at the licence figures but we look at the capacity of the company to be able - for example, we now need iron ore but those with the licences do not have the capacity.

So, I thought we should have this bigger picture other than just looking at the licences.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, can we task our Committee on Finance, this October, because it is about to come, let us start the dialogue on this issue so that by the time we get to the Finance Bill, 2014, Members are at home.  

Hon. Members –(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

MR SSEBUNYA: Let me first respond to the chairperson. Madam Chairperson, I agree with your position. We have rates including the ones cited by hon. Obua in the Electoral Commission. Let us, by next year, review all, now that we have information and now that we have made commitment to pay everybody increased salaries, then we shall know how much we shall need and then correspond it with the rates in the different sectors. I thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But, Madam Chair, some of the rates which are here are just trying to be prohibitive and dangerous and we need to take a decision. First, on the other one, I want to agree with hon. Nasasira that for the good of moving on, we leave this for now and review it next year. But, Madam Chair, if we passed this clause as it is, I tell you there are big problems. I will give you a simple example on page 8 of the Bill –(Interjections)– those are the ones who want firearms. Madam Chair, that the fee for the registration of a company - registration fee, nominal fee of share capital more than Shs 5 million is one percent. If you want to register a company of Shs 1 billion, that means you will pay Shs 10 million. What people do is that they go and register a company of Shs 10 million when they should register it for Shs 1 billion. And what they do is to put others as equity of shareholders as if loans and whatever; and this is very dangerous. 

We should encourage companies to put the right nominal value so that we are able to follow up what the directors have brought in as loans or the borrowing from out. This is one of the discouraging factors of the registration. So, you will get someone saying, “My company is Shs 10 million,” because he wants to pay Shs 100,000 yet it is Shs 1 billion. There are some of these which would encourage more people to – now if we put it at a lower price, say 0.5 percent, you will discover that he will declare because he knows he is going to pay less money than when it is high, which discourages. And that applies to the returns.

So, I want to propose, Madam Chair, that we go to this schedule like where the figures are in schedule 1, we go page by page. Say this figure on page 5, we can leave it because we have agreed. On page 6, whoever has a comment makes it. Page 7, we deal with it because these are figures we want to deal with so that we can - 

I want to move my proposal that on page 8, nominal fee, the percentage on registration of companies should be 0.5 percent. The justification is that this will increase people to declare the right - at least nearly the right - share capital and we shall collect more money. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Wouldn’t that be in conflict with the Stamps Act?

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, for instance, we have the petroleum on page 10 - petroleum exploration, development and production. How can we vary these figures without the proper information? I think it is not professional for us to adjust these figures. And these are the Bills we have just passed. We do not even remember how they came to Mpuuta; I am seeing Kaiso Tonya here and they came to $500. So we do not know.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think we should be careful. If you remember the other day when we were dealing with the law on the LCI elections, we made an amendment which has become exorbitantly expensive that we cannot even implement it: the one of gazetting and advertising and this and that. When they worked out the cost, it was impossible. So, I think we should not just move amendments orally. We should study and move for proper amendments based on information.

So, as we have said, hon. Members, that we are going to create an opportunity to discuss the proposals for the new Finance Bill of 2014, we should take opportunity to do the research, go to the meetings and then we can have this. Otherwise, we are likely to make a mistake because I do not know whether these amendments you are proposing do not conflict with the Stamps Act.  

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This time, we want to help Cabinet because you have said, according to the Chair, he wants us to make these adjustments or contributions when we are really well versed and that is next year. But we are in a dilemma because we still need more money in form of taxes. But at a certain time, we observed that the committee wanted to reduce the tax on cigarettes -

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is a different one. It is not here. We will deal with the cigarettes when we get there.

MS KABAALE: Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 5 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  

7.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Finance Bill, 2013” and has passed it with some amendments to the First Schedule. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2013

7.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance Bill, 2013” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed.

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE FINANCE ACT, 2013”

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EAST AFRICAN EXCISE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

7.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2013 be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Hon. Chair, you are not the one to second it. (Laughter)

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to amend the East African Excise Management Act, Chapter 28 of the laws of the East African Community, revised edition, to provide for definitions of supply, telecommunication services and value added service and to provide for related matters. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you. I will let my vice-chairperson read this Bill. We had agreed before. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is good delegation and training. 

7.10
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr David Ochwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2013.  The East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2013 was read for the first time on 24 July 2013 and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for scrutiny. The committee has in accordance with Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament scrutinised the Bill and now presents its findings to the House. 

The committee held consultative discussions with the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Uganda Revenue Authority. Their submissions informed the content of this report. The objective of this Bill is to amend the East African Excise Management Act, Cap.28, to provide for definition of supply, telecommunications services and value added services and value added tax. 

Observations 

Review of the East African Excise Management Act, Cap. 28: While the title of the Act indicates that this is an East African Community legislation, this is not the case. Uganda has two laws governing excise duty: the East African Excise Management Act, Cap. 28, for the management of excise duty and the Excise Tariff, Cap.338 for the rates of excise duty. The East African Excise Management Act lacks comprehensive provision on how excise duty is collected. The definitions in the Act are not comprehensive enough and do not reflect technological advancement in provision of services, for example, in the telecommunications sector. This has caused a grey area in the dissemination of applicable tax rates. 

The committee observed that these amendments should have been a total over-fall of the entire Act and a consolidation of the two Acts to comprehensively provide for the management and rates of excise duty. This will help taxpayers understand their obligation and rights with clarity. 

The committee recommends that Government should make a commitment as to when a consolidated Bill on excise duty will be tabled before Parliament. Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Chairperson. Hon. Members, I think this is a very simple Bill. All it does is to define four items in the Excise Management Act. Do we really need to debate it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, there is no need but when are they bringing the comprehensive Bill? If we don’t get a commitment here, they will bring it in bits. Let them come and comment on when they will bring the comprehensive Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, when is the real Bill coming instead of these little doses? It is a very small dose. (Laughter) 

7.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, within two months. 

THE SPEAKER: Are we really going to debate this? 

MR SABILA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is just to seek to understand whether the amendment is in line with the current arrangement of harmonisation of laws across the East African Community. I don’t know whether it is in line so that tomorrow we are not seen again to be moving backwards. 

THE SPEAKER: And who is going to respond to that one? Are the laws being harmonised within the region? He is asking whether these definitions are also the same in the region.  

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, this is a local law and not East African. The principle was approved by Cabinet and we have to harmonise it with the other states –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Then why call it “the East African?”

MR OMACH: It is the name. So, if we need to change the title, we shall do that but as of now, the Cabinet has passed the principle and we are now at printing level. So, when we bring it here, then we will discuss it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2013 be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

EAST AFRICAN EXCISE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2013” and passed it without any amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE  COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE EAST AFRICAN EXCISE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The East African Excise Management (Amendment) Bill, 2013 be read the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE EAST AFRICAN EXCISE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2013

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

7.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013 be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it is.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to amend the Income Tax Act, Cap. 340 to make miscellaneous changes in the law in income tax. 

The Bill contains nine clauses:
    • Clause 1 provides for the commencement;
    • Clause 2 seeks to extend the definition of dividends to include bonus shares to shareholders;
    •  Clause 3 seeks to include intelligence service organisations among the security forces personnel whose official employment income is exempt from income tax;
    • Clause 4 seeks to insert a new section to allow the Uganda Revenue Authority determine the chargeable income per person using the input and output ratios. 
    • Clause 5 seeks to amend Section 89(b) to include any other proceeds and credits derived by a contractor other than the contractor’s production share earned by the contractor from petroleum operations in order to do away with the ambiguity in Section 118 (A), which is caused by the lack of the definition of professional - it goes up to Clause 9. I beg to move.

7.21
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Ssebunya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013. I won’t elaborate on the object of the Bill because the minister has already done so. So, let me go to the observations of the committee.

The committee would like to make the following observations:
Exemption of the employment income of the intelligence services; clause 3 seeks to exempt the employment income of the intelligence services established in accordance with Article 218 of the Constitution from income tax. The committee notes that there is no definition of intelligence services, even under the Security Organisations Act, Section 305 as envisaged under Article 218. Therefore, the use of the word “Intelligence services” as well as the reference to Article 218 is clearly ambiguous.

Secondly, there may be a problem in differentiating between the officers in the civil capacity and those who are not in the civil capacity as envisaged under Section 21(1)(q) of the Income Tax Act, which provides as follows: “The following amounts are exempt from tax … the official employment income of a person employed in the UPDF, Uganda Police Force or Uganda Prisons other than a person employed in the civil capacity.” That is the definition in the Income Tax Act.

The committee is not convinced that the Security Organisations Act bars a civilian from employment as a staff of the organisation neither does it state that persons employed in the organisation shall be of a category other than civilians. 

The committee recommends that there is need for further study to this proposal to eliminate the ambiguities raised above in order for us to define a civilian who works with the intelligence services.

Determining chargeable incomes

Clause 4 seeks to insert a new section 56(a) to allow the Commissioner General of URA determine the chargeable income of a person using the input and output ratios and other methods of allocating revenue. The committee notes that this will provide alternative methods for deriving income for tax purposes especially in the hard-to-reach informal sector where there are no records or any form of statistical analysis to allocate costs and revenue. Input and output ratios are accurate scientific facts that can be used to derive production outputs. 

However, the committee notes that provision of tax legislations needs to clearly spell out the rights and obligations of a person. Therefore, the use of other methods is very ambiguous and may lead to arbitrariness. We, therefore, propose that the other methods be clearly spelt out. A taxpayer should clearly understand how their income will be determined. On the basis of the above, input and output is when the URA will consider the raw material against output or products before determining the revenue.

Power of the minister to waive taxes

The committee notes that tax incentives affect domestic revenue, create unfair competition between companies and shift the tax burden to only a few people. Tax exemptions are managed with no clear and consistent legal framework across on how they are managed. The bottom line is that the minister responsible for finance has discretionary powers to grant tax incentives and exemptions with a residual oversight role by Parliament. But Article 152 of the Constitution does not oblige the minister to seek approval by Parliament on tax waivers but rather to just notify Parliament over the decision. 

The committee accordingly recommends as follows:
    1. That in order to guide proper policy formulation and review tax incentives and regime, Government should design a transparent process and procedure for managing and granting tax exemptions. This should contain a requirement by the minister to explain his decision to Parliament.

    2. There should equally be a clear oversight role granted to Parliament to proactively supervise the implementation of tax exemptions in the country.
    3. The reporting structure on tax revenues foregone should be more detailed and comprehensive. A mere report on the amount of tax revenue foregone, after the minister’s decision to grant tax waivers does not add much value to the process.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members for their report. However, it seems to me that there are just definitions. So - yes, hon. Semugaba, but for only two minutes.

MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for the work done. My concern is about the councillors’ allowances at the district level. Those councillors earn only Shs 100,000 per month but they tax them Shs 30,000, which is almost 30 percent. So, I don’t know whether that is income tax or not? What type of tax is that? They are earning little; they have no –(Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, thank you and I also thank the colleague for giving way. The Third Schedule of the Income Tax Act, Cap 340, clearly prescribes income tax rates for individuals. The income he is talking about, I believe, falls out of this schedule because here we are looking at income not exceeding Shs 2,000,820 per year. This means Shs 235,000 per month. Therefore, the allowances for councillors of Shs 100,000 fall out of this schedule.

However, there is the Local Service Tax, which is embedded in the Local Government Act. I believe if these councillors are being charged some levy, maybe we need to refer to the Local Government Act, where the local service tax falls and see whether that is the tax they are charging.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us not confuse these things; we are dealing with the Income Tax Act. Let us deal with income tax.

MR SSEMUGABA: Madam Speaker, let the minister explain and if it is income tax, let these councillors be exempted. For only Shs 100,000, they cannot be able to monitor services and they cannot move in their sub counties.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what is that 30 percent that you take away from the Shs 100,000 of the councillors?

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What my colleague hon. Ssemugaba talked about is the Pay As You Earn of the 30 percent on the Shs 100,000 earned. Before I came here, I was a speaker in Nakawa and it is assumed that what you earn as a councillor, since you are part time, is over and above other earnings as salaries. However, we actually took it up to URA and we were informed that “should you prove that you actually do not have other earnings elsewhere then you will not pay the 30 percent.” It is Pay As You Earn.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, you cannot be charged Pay As You Earn when you are outside the threshold. The threshold is Shs 235,000. All those people in gainful employment that earn below Shs 235,000 are outside the bracket; they cannot be charged Pay As You Earn.

THE SPEAKER: Can the minister clarify?
MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, if you read section 19 of the Income Tax Act, not all allowances are taxable. In section 2(d); “Notwithstanding sub section (1) of the Employment Act, income of an employee does not include any allowance given for and which does not exceed the cost or likely to be incurred or reimbursed or discharged of expenditure incurred by an employee in the course of performing her duty is not chargeable.” So, if that allowance is under this, it is not supposed to be taxed. If it is taxed, then it is taxed wrongly.

MR OLANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was working with the local government before I joined Parliament. In local government, we have hon. Councillors and among them, we have the district executives appointed from the hon. Councillors.

The district executive earns a monthly salary of Shs 500, 0000. Therefore, the 500,000 is taxed of 30 per cent but other ordinary councillors who are not executives, are given an allowance of Shs 100,000 and that money is not taxable. They do not pay tax, unless they changed it of recent. 

THE SPEAKER: Can’t the minister just tell us what the law is instead of us debating? What is the law on that Shs 100,000?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, the Pay As You Earn threshold stayed for a very long time at Shs 130,000 until about two years when we increased it to Shs 235,000. If you have an income which is below that Shs 235,000, you do not pay the tax.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, so, if they are being charged, it is illegal? 

MR OMACH: That would be irregular.

MR SSEBUNYA: What hon. Kyooma said is that councillors are regarded as part-time workers, so, Revenue Authority thinks that these people have other gainful employment elsewhere; unless you prove as an individual that that is your salary and you do not have any other gainful employment, then they should be able to exempt this salary.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Finance write to Revenue Authority and guide them on that issue? Can you direct URA to stop taxing the Shs 100,000? If it is illegal, then it is illegal.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, we shall consult and then revert back to you.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I come with a background in taxation at a professional level. What hon. Ssemugaba brought is a true story. Whatever money councillors get, it is taxed at 30 per cent and what hon. Kakooza is reading is wrong because what they cannot tax is your per diem as you go out of this country or medical allowance.

If Parliament is your place of operation and you going to Ministry of Finance, that allowance given is not taxed but the one from home to here is taxable.

What Members are bringing is that that is the thinking of URA. If we look at our councillors, they are villagers. When you give them Shs 100,000, that is the only income they have got.
 
THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, what is the issue? If the tax is illegal, why doesn’t the minister write and stop it? We do not have to argue.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The tax is not illegal. It says that you must file your income tax returns at the end of the year. Every Ugandan must file his income tax returns at end of the year. I hope hon. Nasasira, you do so.

On this, you are supposed to declare all sources of income you have and the taxes you have paid at source. Now, for these village councillors, that is their only income and they do not know how to fill the income tax returns. So, we must pass something here that those people - (Interjections) – hon. Kakooza, I am trying to help you so that you can move.

The onus is now on Parliament to say that the councillors should have their allowances treated as income because there are those who earn more than Shs 300,000 per month then you apply the tax rate on those ones.

Now, you ask them that at end of the year, they must file their income tax returns to confirm that is the only income they have earned. That is the only way to proceed but the moment you say that it is illegal, it is not.

THE SPEAKER: No. If it is below the Shs 235,000 definitely, it is illegal. Yes, there is no two ways about it. It has nothing to do with filing returns. If it is Shs 100,000, it is below the threshold. It is below the legal limit. 

Hon. Minister, help us solve the issue of the councillors, please? What are you going to do for the councillors?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I do accept your guidance but on issues of taxation, it is important for us to look at the law and then act accordingly. So, we are going to look into this and see that Uganda Revenue Authority issues guidelines on how to treat allowances, which are below the threshold of Shs 235,000.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Okupa and then hon. Mbahimba.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Minister, as you go to do this consultation - but of course, as you stated here, they are far below the Shs 235,000. In a case like this one, where taxes have been charged or someone has taxed erroneously, he is entitled to a tax refund. Can you assure this House that being the case, what amount is refunded to the councillors?  

MR MBAHIMBA: Madam Speaker, thank you. That is exactly what I wanted to bring out.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. minister, if the money was taken unlawfully and you now know that it was not taken lawfully – irregularly - 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, we will direct the Uganda Revenue Authority to issue this ruling and where any tax has been paid irregularly, they will handle it within the law.  

THE SPEAKER: We need a time line. The councillors need the refund.  

MR OMACH: We will write to the Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority immediately and then we expect them to respond within one week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, I put the question that -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Madam Speaker. I have four issues, which I want to raise:

    1. Intelligence.  Intelligence people are not supposed to be known. The moment you exempt them from tax, the public will know that those are intelligence officers. Intelligence officers are supposed to be under cover and this is very dangerous for us to - that is why we call it classified.  

THE SPEAKER: Information from the minister for intelligence. (Laughter)

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Actually, the practice now is that yes, intelligence people are known. I am sure you know Col. Ronnie Balya who is the Director-General of the Internal Security Organisation. He is known and we know our RISOs, we know our DISOs and GISO’s. We even know the Minister for Security, Muruli Mukasa who is the head of intelligence and has been in the intelligence for quite a long time.  So, they are quite known. 

Really, for them to be cut out from this exemption is not fair and equitable.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay. If you say intelligence is supposed to be known, then they stop being intelligent because they are supposed to do their work underground apart from the top – (Interjections)- yes, if we know the covert ones, then that is dangerous.

    2. I think if those ones are exempted, then maybe also some workers like teachers should also be exempted. At an appropriate time, I will move that amendment. 

Madam Speaker, Clause 56 (a) the input-output method assumes that everybody has the same equipment they are applying. If you are making soap and if it is modern, you all have modern equipment. So, the input-output model in Uganda now cannot be applicable. I can tell you that. So, this one will bring a lot of problems that now URA will sit there and say, “Has hon. Nasasira’s machine produced 10 cartons of soap from this content of input, yours must be the same” yet hon. Nasasira has modern equipment and mine is using rudimentary method.

Therefore, the input-output method here cannot work and this is going to bring estimation and you are going to kill the people of Uganda with taxes for nothing. This is another method to close small enterprises –(Interjections)- yes, this is another one. 
 
Capital Gains Tax means you invested X amount of money then you have got capital gains – your profit. You cannot apply the rate on growth including the cost of the investment. What would be here applicable would be on the difference between the amounts you have got less the cost of investment. So, why do you say we can apply on growth? This is also quite erroneous.
 
In conclusion, on this issue of exemptions - exemption is very dangerous and I think we have a law on exemption. If you allow that the minister should have a leeway, it looks like the committee is trying to bring a leeway and this is quite dangerous.  

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to seek clarification from hon. Nandala-Mafabi from the mountain. I want to move an amendment on Section 21 CAP 1 about income gained, for example, so that those who earn some income from sports activities like Kiprotich and others, their income is exempted. So, is there any contradiction with this kind of proposal that I want to bring?  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Capital Gains Tax means that you invested an X amount of money in a capital asset and after some time, it has appreciated but that is not your normal business you deal in and it has appreciated and you are now selling it – the difference. Sport is your activity and that is your income because you have been born a runner and they must find a way to tax you – (Interjections) - If you want to exempt a talent, then exempt me in a talent in doing professional work in taxation because that is also a talent. So, we must find a way.

There is business, there is gaining and whatever but here what I am trying to look at is Capital Gains tax on property and even intellectual property.

Lastly, on revenue tax rates on goods and services on page 4; these rates applicable - the six percent of imported goods - I think this should be only applicable for people who are one off but if you are registered business person you import goods, for example, Shs 100 million, you pay six percent when the profit on those goods is Shs 1 million. So, it means you are financing Government in advance, you are running down on your capital and at the end of the day, you might run out of business.  

So, what we would do on imported goods for people who have permanent address - that is normal business and there is no reason for us to tax them. Let them sell their goods because you know where to get them because six percent is income tax, which is an advance payment, why should you pay an advance when the income you are going to get is less? This is clearly erroneous. Any person who is making profit of six percent on gross must be dealing in smuggling. Otherwise, normal business is now between two to three percent profit. Why should you pay six percent when you have made a profit of two to three percent? (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thought the withholding tax of six percent is part of income tax, that at the end of the year, when you file your returns, that six percent is refunded.

Secondly, this six percent is imposed on people who are not tax-compliant like you – who are likely to evade the tax or to file a wrong report at the end of the year. But for those who are tax-compliant like me, they are exempted from that six percent. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, there are only very few of us who can file income tax returns and I have the record. I am one of those who are always on time. And I know the reason – because of the law. Now, for you, Eng. Byabagambi, I want you to bring your tax returns here tomorrow if you have really filed income tax returns and I also bring mine. These are the people who are evading taxes in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, having said that, I want to tell hon. Byabagambi that he is right; six percent is advance payment, which a person gets at the end of the year. But I think you never understood what I was saying because I said that the return of an investment is between two and three percent and yet they have retained six percent. Moreover, you may have borrowed money, which is earning interest. To get an exemption for withholding tax, you must apply but for you, who are not tax-compliant, you will never get because you have never been tax-compliant.

I want to conclude by saying that the rate of six percent on imported goods on importers is too high and it will discourage investment.

7.52
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get a clarification from the minister, especially when they talk of intelligence service. Are we sure that if we exempt people under the intelligence service, we are not hiding some Ugandans who would be actually paying tax and yet, we are talking of widening the tax base? This is because Uganda Revenue Authority finds it difficult to tax Ugandans who are working in certain embassies because they cannot reach there. So, if we are talking of intelligence services, who are those? Aren’t we risking civilians working under that to evade taxes?

7.53
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of exempting intelligence staff from paying tax, I also, like the committee, do not support it.

I will now move to the power to waive taxes. In Uganda, we have always had disasters and the first group to respond is Uganda Red Cross. And when I used to work there, whenever we would want to respond – since Government has no capacity to respond - we would pay tax for everything. Why can’t we exempt this organisation from tax because as much as it is doing a lot of work, it is also paying a lot of tax? By the way, Red Cross is among the highest tax-payers in the country. 

And I would request the committee chairperson to think about exempting Uganda Red Cross from paying tax because they are always the first responders to every calamity that befalls us - (Member timed out_)

7.55
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Clause 2, where the committee is talking about extending bonus, the challenge we have is that we need to know the measures that URA will use because people have been declaring part of the dividends as equity. What they would do - many Ugandans and especially foreigners who live here - is to falsify the accounts; they will instead declare losses. And yet, URA has been getting money from those taxes. So, we want to know the mechanism they use to enforce this. Otherwise, they will be declaring losses in order to avoid paying tax.

Secondly, on the issue of withholding tax, like what hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, tax credit advance. But at the end of the day, when you have made a loss, you do not recover that money – (Member timed out_)

7.56
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is only on Clause 4, which seeks to allow the URA to charge tax using the input/output ratios. If I were to understand it properly, this means that the revenue authority would be able to determine what you should pay simply based on the products that you have perhaps in your warehouse or store and are ready for sale. Now, the question is: Suppose you do not sell those products, where will you get the money to pay the tax? My suggestion is that the best way to get tax from the informal sector is to devise some other means like asking them to issue receipts provided by URA –(Member timed out_)

7.57
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Clause 4 “seeks to insert new sections to allow the commissioner to return the chargeable income of a person using input/output ratios as a method of allocating revenue.” The committee’s suggestion that “as a method” is ambiguous and to me, it is very accommodative and it is better drafting because all the time, there will be emerging technologies and methods of allocating revenue. 

This means that if you delete that word, every time there are changes – there are new methods coming on board, you will come here to seek for amendments. So, when we retain “other methods” it is more accommodative -

THE SPEAKER: Let us have information from hon. Okupa before the minister comes in.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this will even be my submission. I will not again get up to speak. The information I would like to give, coupled with my presentation is that it is better to be specific. If you looked at the Value Added Tax law, the methods for calculating the chargeable income are specified: the cash basis, cash accounting and input/output ratios. So, you can use any of the three. I think the best thing here is for the Bill to name all those such that for comparison purposes, you pick one of them. If we limit it to only one method and then say “and other”, it will not work. Let us make it uniform like it is with the Value Added Tax, which has named them all.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Komuhangi, please, conclude, then we shall have hon. Nasasira.

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, the words “other methods” will be more accommodative in order to take into account every other method that comes on board due to emerging technologies. This is because you are not going to use one method of allocating revenue all the time.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Madam Speaker. I want to give her information; she is right and so is hon. Okupa with regard to VAT and sales tax. We are trying to compare what was charged on export with the value expected to be added to it. But that is different; this is income tax; income tax is about income at the end. That is why input and output cannot apply income tax; it only applies in sales tax and VAT. In income tax, you must use what you bought vis-à-vis what you have produced, unless you can confirm that someone has cheated. We cannot use the income and output model income tax. 

8.01
THE MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS, INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The reasons given by the committee in trying to reject inclusion of security services who are employed under the Security Organisations Act – we know they include UPDF, Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prisons and intelligence; these are established organisations. Just having the phase, “intelligence services”, is not enough justification for throwing them out. 

They could have said that Clause no.3 is using a wrong terminology. Clause no.3 in the Act used the heading of Article 218, which talks of intelligence services: “(1) Parliament may by law establish intelligence services and may prescribe their composition, functions and procedures. (2) No intelligence service shall be established by Government except by or under the Act of Parliament.”

Parliament passed the Security Organisations Act, and whether it is the Director of Internal Security or External Security, are employed according to this Act passed by Parliament. So, we should not lose the purpose for which that amendment was required. They are part of our security people and we should waive income tax or Pay As You Earn from them. 

If the “intelligence service” was vague in the clause, I suggest that we amend the clause and mention the names of the officers working under those intelligence services established by law in accordance with Article 218 – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, hon. Nasasira knows that the President and the Minister of Security have created more intelligence organisations than ISO and ESO. That is why there is Popular Intelligence Network (PIN) –(Interjections)– do you want me to tell you more?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, PIN is not a security organisation; the security organisations under the law are the Internal Security Organisation and External Security Organisation. This is just a title under the security organisations. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the concern is whether we should tax all of them or exempt them. If you put only ISO and ESO, you would be leaving those groups out. How can we bring all of them on board? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I can also become an intelligence service. I agree with hon. Nasasira that we either name ISO and ESO, otherwise, even hon. Rugunda might claim he is an intelligence service and claim tax exemption. 

MR SSEBUNYA: The worry of the Members in the committee was whether it is somebody on the payroll of Intelligence service, an informer – they must file it in a way that is not easily abused. 

MR NASASIRA: I think we should not mix operations and staff. Article 218 is clear; it says, “No intelligence service shall be established by Government except under the Act of Parliament.” So, if we waive the tax on intelligence services established under the Security Organisations Act, I do not see any problem with that. We should name those intelligence organisations. 

8.06
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (MR Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request you to exempt the staff of Internal Security Organisation and the External Security Organisation –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, even those we have exempted in some of these organisations, there is a rank where we begin from. We should not make it open. 

MR NASASIRA: I want to tell hon. Mafabi, who was a tax expert –(Interjections)– there is a threshold. When those people go down there and there is a threshold, there is no problem. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, in all fairness, these people get similar basic training; in addition to the intelligence training. They are on the payroll; there is an Act of Parliament creating them; there are the terms and conditions of service for these people; there is an audit committee established by the Auditor-General, which vets all these people. 

So, there should be no worry that there will be abuse; that people who are not qualified might come in and make a flood of people being exempted. I beg to request that these people get similar treatment like the Army, the Police and Prisons because they belong to the same sector of defence and security. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013 be read for a second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2

MR EKANYA: I have an amendment regarding income got from sport activities, in section 21.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are still on clause 2; 21 is in clause 3.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I have an issue here. We are saying that issuing of bonus shares to shareholders will be subject to tax. Sometimes, when you want to capitalise a company, the best way to do this is to issue bonus shares and some of these could be revenue or capital. Maybe, you have got devaluation and this can only be taxable at the time of paying. If we do it like this, many companies may not issue shares to capitalise their companies.

I would also want to agree that the most important thing they would do is to create more expenditure to make losses. So, I do not think it is right to say that bonus shares should be subject to tax.

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the input by URA was that when we issue bonus shares to the shareholders, they should be paid and not retained and when they are retained, they should pay a tax. They were saying that many companies do issue bonus shares. After issuing those bonus shares, they dupe their shareholders and say, “let us recapitalise this company” but with the intention of avoiding paying tax. So, they are saying that they are finding problems with these companies. 

I am a shareholder in a certain company but usually, they say I have been issued shares but due to the reason that they want to capitalise and bring in more machinery, they take back those dividends that would have come to me. This is being done by URA to encourage companies to pay their shareholders once they have declared profits. They should go ahead and give out the profits and not retain them. That was the reasoning.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we can deal with that by what we call forward taxation whereby you have issued the shares but you have not paid the tax so that they defer the tax and it is part of the assets of the company. It only solidifies when somebody pulls out the shares probably when he has now gained from them.

In this case, you are taxing somebody when he has not got any income. These are shares with paper where they have moved this money from here to there. So, I think the best way to handle this is to use the deferred taxation method. If you have issued shares of Shs 1 million to me and I am supposed to pay 10 per cent, I am not going to pay because it is in shares. Therefore, it becomes deferred taxation in the accounts. This applies to VAT also. You may import machinery and they may say, you will not pay taxes and you defer the tax. It has happened to machinery. Then you dispose of it is when you pay, otherwise, this can bring a lot of strain to individuals.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I am a member of the committee. We had the same problem because some of us argued that it is a policy of Government to allow people who have got bonus shares to reinvest and to encourage investors in the invested capital. It is a matter of paper work that if I sell these shares as bonus shares, you wait for me. The dilemma we had was that with the proposal that was made as a tax measure, they are expecting Shs 2 billion from these bonus shares.

We asked the Minister of Finance to provide us with the feasibility study because the policy of Government is to allow people to reinvest. We agreed as a committee that within five to six months, the Ministry of Finance can bring a feasibility study but in the meantime, we allow for generation of the revenue which is – This is because we had the same arguments and we took a vote in the committee and we lost. 

The dilemma was the money is generated, we have appropriated one third of that money, which is expected as a tax measure and we had no alternative. The only thing Parliament can do is propose that within six months, the feasibility study should be done. However, to be realistic, in business, there is no way you can tax bonus shares.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think we are flogging a dead horse. The commencement says, “The Act shall be deemed to have come into force on 1st July 2013.” So, it is already in application. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with you; it is within the Constitution. The Minister of Finance has a Collection Act for a given period but the question the Minister of Finance needs to answer is - I am with you in a company, Madam Chairperson, and I may be issued with a bonus share. If I do not dispose of it, what income will Government get? The point the Leader of the Opposition is making is, when the bonus share is disposed of, the income that derives from it is what URA should tax but this is a situation where you get a bonus share and URA submits a bill to you. This means it is forcing you to dispose and yet even if the shares are low, you are being compelled to sell. It is very dangerous.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I was just wondering what incentive remains for investors in this country. If, really, we want to build the capital base of this country, we have to allow people to reinvest their profits. When they build this capital base, that is when they will be able to generate more profits so that we can impose corporate tax on them. 

It is, therefore, very important that we build a capital base for this country through reinvestment and we should allow them to issue these bonus shares. After all, this money is not going out. Rather, it remains in the company to build that company and to expand their investment. I do not think it is the right time for us to tax bonus shares especially when we are a poor country that is going out to attract new investment in this country. I really would not like to support this policy.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, what is your position? Let us finish with the bonus first.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, there are companies that issue their dividends in cash and we have issues of withholding tax but where companies are paying these shares in bonuses, there is the element of evasion of tax. That is why we are putting this here so that we collect the tax and we are already collecting it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Minister, let me tell you what will happen. What you are trying to tell the public is that instead of issuing shares, go and borrow money. What they will do is most companies will not capitalise. They will say, “Because they are going to charge us withholding tax on this, let us borrow money because interest on borrowed money is an allowed expenditure.”

Madam Chairperson, we are talking from a professional point of view. What we can do is to make issuance of bonus shares liable to tax at the time of disposal. We will have saved you so that what happens is if they give me a bonus issue, it means they will compute a deferred tax on my bonus issue. The moment I dispose them off, you collect your tax because that is the best way and we will have protected you 150 per cent. Failure to do that, people are going to borrow money. That is the best way-

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you proposing?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to propose that the issue of bonus shares to shareholders be taxed at the time of disposal or when you sell them off.

MR MUSASIZI: My senior colleague in the profession, when you sell shares, there is a possibility of selling shares at a loss. So, when someone is losing, you cannot put a condition that a tax must be paid. A tax arises when you sell at a gain and you charge the capital gains tax. (Interjections) Yes, the gain- there can be the difference between your value and what you get. That one can be. So, I am not saying that we go ahead with the proposal of taxing bonus shares but also putting a condition that if someone sells shares, you impose tax, is also dangerous. I would rather -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, can you propose what you think we should do instead of debating? 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, when we say, “...will be taxable at disposal,” because at disposal you can either make a loss or a gain - So, it will be determined. If you have made a loss, then they do not tax you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you propose the formulation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I want to tell the minister that if you have given me a bonus share, it means I have put no cent. So, if I sell at Shs 100,000 yet you gave it to me at Shs 200,000 the tax will be applicable to Shs 100,000. You will never lose. It is me who sold the shares who will make a loss.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what is the formulation?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The formulation is that the issue of bonus shares will be “taxable at a time of disposal”. And that is it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: And also bonus shares will be taxable upon disposal.

MR OMACH: This former consultant on taxation - I concede. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, on Clause 3, we had refused to go ahead with the amendment on the matter of “intelligence service.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. You had said you wanted to delete the entire clause.

MR SSEBUNYA: The proposed amendment was that we delete the entire clause. The justification was that there is no definition of “intelligence service” even under the Security Organisations Act as envisaged under Article 218. There may be a problem in differentiating between officers in the civil service capacity and the others who are not in the civil service capacity as envisaged in section 21(1)(q),which  provides as follows: “The following be exempt of tax: the official employment income of a person employed in UPDF, Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prisons Services other than a person employed in the civil capacity.”

The committee is not convinced that the Security Organisation Act bars a civilian from employment as a staff of the organisation neither does it state that persons employed in the organisations shall be of another category other than civilians. That was our amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are saying you do not want that clause anyway. You do not want it there. 

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, the intelligence service personnel are also on the payroll of Government and they pay Pay As You Earn. So, we are proposing that they be exempted from paying Pay as You Earn. These are institutions that are instituted by the Constitution under Article 218 so, we can only maybe bring an amendment qualifying that those, which are designated by the Constitution, that is the ISO and ESO. Full stop.

MR SABILA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Mine is also to concur with the Minister for Finance that the clause be retained as it is to include persons employed in intelligence services under the exemption bracket. (Interjections) Do not say, “No.” I know what I am talking about. Reason being that if we are talking about intelligence services we are talking about security. The UPDF, the Police and the rest provide security. So, if these intelligence services also provide security, then it is also honest for this House to exempt them as well because the work they do is the same. They are also involved in intelligence; that is where these people are working. So, I believe it should be maintained the way it is. Thank you, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, there should not be a deletion?

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Chair, I needed more clarity from the Minister of Security especially when we are talking about civilians who are under intelligence. We have seen a lot of classified expenditure in the budget and usually, they talk about the clandestine or covert operations that may not be disclosed. I am trying to find out: we have what they call informers; they also say they are under internal security. We need to know that. 

But, Madam Chair, I remember some time back - this might be an asset but it is very important - I presented a petition here of the staff who were discharged of their duties from the Internal Security Organisation and they were left in limbo. Up to now, they have never been given their arrears and compensations. I do not know why - I am seeing the Minister for Security passionately defending but he is forgetting those who are discharged from duty. I have just smuggled that in as a proactive Ugandan.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Chair, I would like to inform the hon. Member that those former employees – indeed, progress has been made. There are now discussions going on to make sure that finally, that small problem is settled. There was a committee put in place recently consisting of officials from the ministries of Justice and Finance and indeed, representatives of those former employees and the Internal and External Security Organisation. They are working out modalities of how this problem is going to be settled finally. So, there is some work going on. They have not been left in limbo, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Minister, when are they going to be paid? When do you see an end to this problem because it has been many years since they left service? 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Indeed, I agree, Madam Chair, but as soon as – these are intricate discussions going on and the figures involved are fairly huge. So, discussions are centring around – (Interjections)- yes, how much can be cleared and so on, but the principle has been taken that they are going to be paid - (Interjections)– I cannot say when exactly because the money is not just there to pick but –(Interruption)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. You find that when you are laid off, it means you are denied the income which has been sustaining you and your family. I seek clarification from the minister: how are these people surviving? Don’t you think that these are the people who turn into rebels or robbers because they have nothing to sustain themselves? Even if the amount of money is huge, are you giving them something to survive on as we wait for that huge amount of money? 

Thank you. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Chair, it may not be possible to dish out something so that they can keep going. One good thing is that all these people are not among the robbers and they are not even among the rebels. They are there, it is proved. Discussions are going on. As soon as these discussions are cleared and there is also assurance from the Ministry of Finance that actually, the payment is there, then they will be paid but I can assure you, Madam Chairperson, that in earnest, these discussions are going on and the people concerned themselves are also part of these discussions. [Hon. Members: “Time frame?”] You will excuse me, I cannot give you a time frame but all I know is that discussions are going on and Finance has to come in so that we agree. We are also discussing even –(Interruption)

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. This is a very serious matter. The people we are talking about have ever held a gun. In my constituency, I have had a number of murders with people being shot and killed and it is widespread here in Kampala. So, this is a very serious matter. We know these people and they have been laid off and are not employed. They have become a security risk and for us to say that these people who have been in intelligence are not rebels and are not robbers, is just glossing over the matter.

MR NASASIRA: Madam Chairperson, I do not think we can handle this matter at committee stage. It is very complex. I want to propose that we revert back to Clause 3 and handle it and when we get back to the whole House, we can maybe discuss this. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, should we delete Clause 3 or not?
 
MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, these are people who are on the payroll and are in the service like those in the Army and those in the Police and they pay Pay As You Earn. We are saying that we should exempt those who are in the Constitution such as ESO and ISO from Pay As You Earn. So, I pray that we leave this at this and if there is any amendment, it can be moved. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think let us move to hon. Nasasira’s amendment and I think that amendment was accommodative. We should move to ask hon. Nasasira to improve the amendment as he had proposed and then we move on. 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, I am a bit disturbed. People go for training; some are posted in different forces services and they have the same service numbers. Some are transferred from the Army to intelligence. So, why should they lose their right when they are transferred? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have spent a lot of time on this matter. Please, is that a proposal? 

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, I wish to propose an amendment on Clause 3 that we delete “an intelligence service established in accordance…” and replace it with “ISO and ESO”, which are the organisations that we have established with the law.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Further amendment. Madam Chairperson, the state attorneys came and complained. I want us to also include the officers of the Judiciary because there is also a category in the Judiciary who are exempt. The justification is that –(Interruption – no, I am moving in good spirit. First, let us deal with the judicial officers because others have been exempted. I want to move that judicial officers must also be included in this clause. 

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Chairperson, I presented a petition on behalf of the DPP and they had their genuine issues and from their justification, the Police cannot do without them but when they are treated differently, they feel really cheated because they have a lot of work and yet, they are given low pay. So, can’t we include the DPP under these – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think we are getting on a really slippery ground. What would be the impact for placing an exemption suddenly to the projections of the resource allocation, the resource envelope and so on? I think we need to be careful on how much we can exempt and how much we shall raise. Let us not do what we did with gazetting. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, what is interesting is that we are dealing with Article 218. So, once you bring in the Judiciary, then you have varied and you have gone away from this Article because this Article is specific on the UPDF, the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Prisons Service and then the security people. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Nasasira, please, say your amendment so that we vote on it quickly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But, Madam Chairperson, he brought an amendment and I also brought my amendment on his. So, I want you to deal with both. I have said that judicial officers and teachers should be included. That is my proposal and it is now up to you and we must vote on it. 

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, even when we moved the threshold from Shs 130,000 to Shs 235,000, we actually forewent over Shs 80 billion to make that adjustment. So, these are not things that you can just propose and expect that we will approve. So, we pray that we only remain under Article 218. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, is the Minister of Finance in order to say that they forewent Shs 80 billion when he knows that the Shs 80 billion was got and brought back in production to produce more income in form of VAT and income tax? Is he in order to say that we lost Shs 80 billion, yet more money comes in?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think let us be focused. We have been saying we want more money for the teachers, we want more money for this, and we want more money for that. Now, if we are taking away the source of revenue suddenly and without any planning, I think we shall be making a mistake. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, on the issue of saying we include the teachers, the teachers earn Shs 200,000 and the Pay As You Earn is Shs 235,000. So, they are already covered. 

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to appeal to the renewed tax consultant; we have been moving very well together and let us remain on this track. So, I want to propose that we amend Clause 3(a) by deleting the words “an intelligence service established in accordance with Article 218 of the Constitution” and replace them with “ESO and ISO” -  

MR EKANYA: Further amendment. Madam Speaker, I would like to amend Section 21 (c) and state that “…exempting received as an award by sports on athletes from winning or participating in the sports competitions”. This is very good in regard to people like Mr Kipsiro and Mr Kiprotich who have invested a lot of money. 

The justification is that sports are very vital activities for this country. The few individuals who have enabled us to raise the Ugandan flag have helped us to earn a lot of money from tourists more than even the income they have earned. There are tourists who are coming to Uganda from all over the world because of the success of these two sportsmen. So, it is very unfair that these two sports get taxed from the awards, which actually come from Government. I would like to ask hon. Omach to support this amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, this income from sports people is not a regular income. It is just a windfall. Maybe, it will not come in 10 years. There are three or four. Is there a problem really? What I am saying is that I am okay with your amendment because it is just a windfall. Who knew that Mr Kipsiro would bring money or that Mr Kiprotich would bring money to Uganda? We had budgeted without his money.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, the shadow finance minister is bringing this because Mr Kiprotich is from Eastern Uganda and so, we concede. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, thank you. Hon. Members. I put the question that Clause 3 be amended, first, as proposed by hon. John Nasasira.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 3 (a) be amended do stand part of the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, how about the amendment moved by hon. Ekanya?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am coming to that. So, that Clause 3 (a), as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a new sub clause (c) be introduced as proposed by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as emended, agreed to.

Clause 4 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I move that Clause 4 be deleted - (Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, let the committee first present its position before you come in. Madam Chair, the committee suggests that we delete the phrase “and other methods of allocating costs and revenue.” The justification is that provision of tax negotiation needs to clearly spell out the rights and obligations of a person. Therefore, the use of “other methods” is very ambiguous and may lead to arbitrary –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Wait on, maybe the minister is going to concede.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, Madam Chair.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, I do not concede - where we have put the phrase “other methods of collecting costs and revenue”, this comes about when we use the input/output ratio, where the normal methods have failed.

Madam Chairperson, in this country, the revenue to GDP – we are stuck at 13 percent and this is mainly due to tax evasions. So, we are saying the use of input/output ratio another methods of allocating costs and revenue may be applied. We are using the word “may” so that where somebody is okay with the normal methods of determining chargeable income we do not have to use these. But where we can vividly see there is tax evasion, we then use this input/output ratio. So, I pray that we allow this to remain.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, first, the moment we use the word “may”, it means that is not applicable to the taxpayer. It is those responsible for collecting taxes who can decide to use or not. So, it is not up to the taxpayer. It also means that URA could use it for convenience.

Why I am praying that this clause be deleted is – first and foremost, income is what you earn as result of all your trading activities and the profits you have made. This method can only be good for the estimation of VAT. 

In this case, we do not have similar methods used for production. Each person has their own methods of production. There are those who use old machinery, modern and there are those who use just their hands to produce and somebody comes to say that because you produced 10 kilogrammes, you are going to produce 10 grams of “Malwa”, yet, that is not true. So, as far as income tax is concerned, we already have what we call the accounting method or the financial methods and they could use the other methods where they can be able to call value for money. So, when you allow this to remain, URA is going to apply this to people. They will start to compare ordinary people with companies that might be doing well. Unless they are saying they are going to procure equipment for production for everybody, but which is not possible because people invest according to their capital.

Madam Chair, in the current state of Uganda, with all this backwardness that we are living in, this can only be applicable may be in –(Interruption)

MR MPONGO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to believe in what the Leader of the Opposition is saying. But also, I want to give in information. When we use the input/output method, we establish a production ratio, which will be different from producer to producer. The production ratio is for that particular establishment. So, it cannot be that what is happening to this company will be applicable to another company. URA establishes a particular production ratio for that particular company. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I will tell you this because I now know what I am talking about. We have seen production where people use different methods. They will use a basis to say, for example, that when you put in 10, we expect you to get 70 percent of that 10 and URA will come to anticipate that you should have produced 70 percent. So, the best you can do here, because for income tax, we already have basics because people have to keep records, you can only go away from this when somebody has not kept their records of production. 

The production will say, “unit X, this is the cost I have put in and this is the output.” That is why you will realise that for most companies that do manufacturing, URA always places there what we call “bonds officers.” But are you saying you are going to place there an income tax officer to be in charge of this? That is why I was saying this one can only be applicable to sales taxes and value for added tax, but for income tax, this is not applicable and it should be deleted.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, if the books of accounts are up to date, we do not need to apply this input/output. But where the books of accounts are not correct, you can see that – that is the only time we can use the input/output because we will be able to see what you have produced. But when what you are stating in your books is not correct –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to inform you that the moment you do not keep update books, you are allowing the Commissioner General of URA to estimate you because the law allows him/her to estimate you. There is no justification and when he estimates, you are finished.
 
So, when the record exists, there is no reason why you want to go and use input/output method. You estimate me if I lack a record but the moment the record is there, you cannot do that. That is why even the income allows –(Interruption) 

MR SSEBUNYA: They said if somebody had built a house and is now selling off the house and he has not kept records but he is selling - they were saying how do they look at the value of the house without records?
Some people say, “I put in so much” and it is debatable, so they were looking at how to get to the value. 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: It depends on who is constructing. Some people use one bag of cement and put six wheelbarrows of sand. Some use two wheelbarrows per bag. There is a difference in all this. That is why we are saying that there are many different methods of production.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, the Leader of the Opposition seems to be having a point but some of us have seen companies evading tax here but they have continued to exist for the last 10 years; they do not pay income tax. Every year, nil, they are making loses. How can we get income from them?
I can tell you that these sugar corporations have not been paying taxes, so how do we get them to pay? Like Tororo Cement, they get income but which 80 per cent comes from cement and they do not pay income taxes. So, how do we get income tax from them?

MR OKUPA: I want to support the Minister of Finance. Maybe, he used a wrong word of saying where there are no “records” and it can be a case of incomplete records. I think Ministry of Finance and URA are bringing this because under-declaration of income. Where they suspect under-declaration of income at the end of the financial year, I think that is why they are using the word “may”, that is where this formula should be applied. Let us support the minister on this.

MR KYOOMA: I want to inform you that it is even more dangerous when we have a situation of incomplete records because for you to determine the input/output ratios, you must be having data, therefore, you must be having records. So, where you do not have records, it is very difficult to apply this method and in any case where you have records, other methods will apply and there is a provision for the URA commissioner to estimate where you have concealed the records, where you have not kept the records, financial statements. She will come and estimate.

MR OKUPA: Then, you estimate based on the input/output ratio because this ratio will not give you an exact thing. It is estimation that we are applying.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members why are you curtailing the capacity of Revenue Authority to raise funds?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, what we are raising here, input/out ratio is for VAT. He brought a very good example; you are using six wheelbarrows to one bag, this one is using two wheelbarrows to one bag and there is a difference. That means different methods of production and you are all producing a house. The cost of the one who is using two wheelbarrows will be higher than the one who is using six.

Now, you cannot come and say, “Because you used six, the cost should be Shs 100 million” when I had put Shs 200 million. These are the things we are trying to say.

Madam Chairperson, this is why we are saying it can only be applicable where URA is authorised to estimate. Hon. Ekanya brought the issue of Tororo Cement. URA is the one, which is aiding Tororo Cement to evade taxes because they bring –(Interruption) 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Nandala, for giving way. Madam Chair, you were rightly guiding. A tax collector whose hand is tied, that is a tax collector who cannot make a difference. I believe the reason of estimation is that there would be a standard.

I am here to support the minister that we should widen. We should give the tax collector wider powers to use other options available. Why should we make it very impossible for this tax collector and we all know that nobody wants to pay tax? So, people will be trying to avoid and we know that avoidance is not a crime but this is why we need to give wider powers to spread the long arm of the law to catch up with the would-be like neighbour here.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is not even saying “shall”, it is saying “may.”

MR NANDALA MAFABI: It is very dangerous. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: If you are still on hard positions, may be, we stand over it and go to next one.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, I would go with the amendment that was proposed by hon. Okupa. If we took that, then there will no need to stand over this.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chair. Tax liability must be an exact arithmetic calculation. The parameters must be known; the law must be specific and the mathematics must add up. If we introduce guess work, you introduce injustice and it hurts people’s rights. That is our misgiving.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we are already under estimates. When the commissioner general estimates my income, it is the same thing; there is no difference because we have already given that power to the commissioner general to estimate our income.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chair, you are right.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, I think this is about business. There has never been any business where the formula is uniform or exact. You can go to Roofings and Uganda Baati, what hon. Mafabi is saying is true because Roofings is using another method of production different from that of Uganda Baati and the quality is different. So, you cannot come and say “because you are using a different method, I am going to charge you under the law.”

The only way out and where the law cannot be discriminative is commissioner general to come and find out, “do you have records” and then calculates. The way of calculating costs in business is in three ways: the straight line method of depreciation and the amount of money you have put in. If they find that your costing is under-declared, URA is free to get you. You cannot make a law, which is very discriminatory.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The reason VAT is allowed is because it is an expense. But for tax, it is after knocking off all the expenses and costs and then tax the income. If you want to tax me, as hon. Kakooza has brought it, if I am in Uganda Baati using a different method and I have made Shs 1 million and Roofings as a producer of iron sheets has made Shs 10 million, you now come and say I should also be charged because I made a profit of Shs 10 million, that is very dangerous! The reason it is allowed in VAT is because that expenditure will be allowed as expense for purposes of tax. This is the only direct tax –(Interruption) 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. If that particular company thinks that this method is not going to favour them, then why not do the needful and use the conventional methods of determining their chargeable income.  If you think the input/output method is not going to be favourable to you, why do you leave that option to be applied to you by URA? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Members –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair –

MR OMACH: Another information -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think on this information, I am now well versed, Mr Minister. I know what the minister’s position is.  The reason you are bringing this is that this is the only direct tax by the way. The others are indirect taxes because they are even passed over to the final consumer. But the moment it is a direct tax, it hinges on a person with income.

Madam Chair, given that we do not have similar methods of production, this method cannot be applicable as input/output in income tax but in sales tax and VAT, it can be applied.
   
MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, I did say and hope that the minister will be taking note that we used the word “may” and it can only be applicable in situations where there is suspicion of under-declaration of income. That is where it applies - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But if your accounts are up to-date, why should anybody estimate and go out – no, really? Minister, please, conclude.

MR OMACH: In support of what hon. Okupa has said, the tax payer will have the right to object and prove his cost and income and so, there is room. There are very few of this type that count. So, I would like that we take the amendment as given by hon. Okupa.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, you can object but the law says your objection will be listened to when you have paid 30 percent and you people are saying it is okay but you are not in business and you are talking here and you are not there – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition has alluded that my presentation is based on an uninformed position in areas of business. I want to inform my Leader of the Opposition and I would also want to invite him to visit my business empire – (Laughter) - in the hotel industry and in the citrus fruit growing in Teso. Is he in order to continue proceeding to allude just like that that this Member is very ignorant and is not a person with business knowledge. Is he in order? (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think he has not been to Kasilo lately and maybe we need to take him there.

So, hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 4 do stand part of the Bill - 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, I propose to move an amendment just before we reach Clause 6 to amend Section 117 (2) of the Income Tax Act with regard to interest paid by listed institutions and we do this by inserting under sub-section (2) (e), the words “interest paid by listed institutions” and amend Section 120 of the Income Tax Principal Act by inserting sub-section (4) the words, “for where payment is made by a listed institution.” I am proposing a new amendment.

MR NANADALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, anything even half a fraction in taxation is very dangerous. You cannot bring such amendments on the Floor, which involves numbers. 

Madam Chair, this can be dangerous to society. Can we have copies for maybe the next year?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, I think that you are not being fair to us because I have not understood what you are doing. This is your Bill - maybe you present us with your proposal, we stand over it because I think we need to study it. For me, I have not understood the impact of that proposal.

MR OMACH: I apologise for that, Madam Chair. The justification is that we have multi-lateral agreements that we have signed with various bodies, which bar us from asking them to charge interest or to pay and I have the number of the – so, maybe, we can stand over it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we stand over it and you distribute so that tomorrow, we can look at it.

MR OMACH: Yes. If we ask them, for instance, to collect Withholding Tax, the World Bank, IMF and African Development Bank, we would not be in agreement with what we have signed with them and so, we stand over this. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us stand over that proposal and go to Clause 6.

Clause 6 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, on Clause 6, I want the committee to educate me. Why are they saying substitute for “resident professional” the words “resident person”? I want you to explain because we know that - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where are you getting it from? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I see Clause 6 here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But that is from the minister and I do not think that the Chair - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want the minister to explain why he is substituting the words “resident professional” with the words “resident person”. The reason I am asking this is because we know that there are some professions that we charge different from other trading business and so, I want you to justify for me this.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, on Clause 6, you want to substitute “resident professional” for “resident person”. Why are you taking away “professional”?  No, that was a new one and he was going to insert a new clause. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, I think the explanation we got in the committee was that when you say “resident person”, this includes also professionals and companies and so, it is much wider than using professionals –

And in addition, Madam Chair, the term “resident person” is the one which is internationally used and not “resident professional.”

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, even from the legal point of view, “professional” sounds very limiting but we can have companies existing as legal persons and so, for purposes of taxation, I think this is proper and it is wide enough and it sounds good.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, this is more encompassing?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Madam Chair. The reason I am bringing this - I want you to understand Section 118, which is the one for applying withholding tax. So, what happens is that there are some professions that can say 10 percent, 15 percent and may be final tax or advance. So, that is the reason I am asking. Are they trying to categorise and that is the reason as to why I am bringing this Clause 118. What does it mean? What are you trying to cure here?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, minister, what was the rationale for your proposals?  

MR OMACH: The rationale, Madam Chair, was the professional can be an individual while a professional person can be a company or a firm. As the Learned hon. Oboth – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, it was limited to professionals? 

MR OMACH: Yes. Now it is wider.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 6 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6 agreed to.
Clause 7

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, in this one, they are saying: “A resident who purchases a commercial from a non-resident shall withhold tax on gross.” And they call it “Withholding tax on capital gains tax.” “Capital gains” means that you have gained on the initial investments. So, I think this should be withholding tax on gross less the cost of investment. In fact, the withholding tax should be on the capital gains on that property. Otherwise, if you say “gross amount” it means that even the initial investment is being charged.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are your proposals?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am proposing that “A resident who purchases a commercial from a non-resident shall withhold tax on the net capital gains after due consideration of interest and other applicable allowances.” And in fact, capital gains tax takes into consideration inflation when you are computing and some allowances. So, you have to be careful again here. For example, hon. Nasasira, I know the house you have, you bought it cheaply. Now, if you want to sell it, it will be – (Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: I wanted to propose - you know, this issue of capital gains tax on property needs to be studied more. I propose that, if the minister allows, we stand over this clause you are seeking to amend, since you have stood over some clauses and we put our thoughts together. Although you know my house, I might be having more than one house. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I agree with hon. Nasasira. In fact, all commercial buildings attract VAT and I think the best thing is – I know why hon. Nasasira would be more interested because he has some assets, which have attained capital gains and if we do not deal with it, it will affect him badly. (Laughter)

MR NASASIRA: I just want to inform hon. Mafabi that I pay my taxes in time; whenever it is due, I am ready and I pay. You can even check it with Uganda Revenue Authority. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, there are taxes, which we call routine taxes but capital gains tax is – So, the best thing for us is to delete it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, just deleting? Why don’t we sleep over it, if we are in doubt because we do not know the effect of deleting it?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, as we think of sleeping over it, the Minister of Finance and URA have been collecting income tax on property. So, they need to come with detailed explanation as to under what framework they have been collecting those taxes and the difference this amendment is going to create.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Members, let us sleep over it; so we defer Clause 7 until tomorrow when we have had time to reflect on it. Let us move to Clause 8.

Clause 8

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 8 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8 agreed to.

Clause 9 agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, for Clause 9, at an appropriate time, I am going to re-commit it because of the issue of the six percent withholding tax. I had thought that we were going to schedule parts (i), (iv) and (v). But since we did it in an omnibus style, we could not and yet, part (viii) has a very big implication on business – that is withholding tax on imported goods at six percent.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we have noted your concern. Hon. Minister, please, go ahead and move the motion.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

9.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

9.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill 2013” and passed most of the clauses but stood over two. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

9.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking for your indulgence that we may adjourn at this point so that we can prepare and be fresh for tomorrow’s business. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, it seems you are thinking a lot about the taxes. So, I think we shall accept the request for adjournment. House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. to continue with the business. But I thank you for the work done this evening.

(House rose at 9.20 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 September 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)

