

Tuesday, 20 September 2016

Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Ms Catherine Lamwaka

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lamwaka, I welcome you to this Parliament and I congratulate your people for choosing you to come and represent them in this House at this time. That means, I also congratulate the people of Omoro District. This is where you will be doing their business. 

There are two books I intend to give to you now. One of them is the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The laws that you will be debating in this House and participating in making, must fall within the four corners of that Constitution. They must not exceed it; if they do, it will be a violation. I, therefore, expect you to observe what is provided for in that Constitution.

The second book is our Rules of Procedure. All the procedures required for you to follow in bringing anything you would like to this House are contained in that book. Use them for the benefit of your people. Congratulations and welcome to Parliament. (Applause)

2. Ms Noeline Kisembo Basemera 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Kisembo. I thank the people of Kibale for choosing you at this time to come and represent them in this House. 

I will give you two sets of books. One is the Constitution. The laws you will debate and pass here must fall within the four corners of this book. If they happen to be outside, that will not be proper. So, internalise and use it properly. 

The second book is our Rules of Procedure. The procedures for anything you may wish to bring to the Floor of Parliament, whether it is from the district or anywhere else, are all in this book. Please, take it. Welcome to Parliament and congratulations again. (Applause)

3. Ms Jennipher Kyomuhendo Mbabazi 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mbabazi, I welcome you to this Parliament. I thank the people of Kagadi for having confidence in you and choosing to bring you to this Parliament at this material time. They have put their trust in you, so you should deliver for them the reason they brought you here. 

I will give you two books. One is the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which you have just sworn to uphold, defend and protect. That is what you have just sworn by. I give you a copy to look at because all the laws you will pass must conform to the principles contained in that book.

The second one is our Rules of Procedure, which you will use to bring business to the House - matters of your district, the country; everything about how you access and bring them here to the House is within this book. Congratulations and welcome again. (Applause)

4. Ms Akampurira Prossy Mbabazi

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations and welcome, hon. Akampurira. I thank the people of Rubanda for choosing you to come and represent them in this House. They have sent you here for a purpose, and for you to fulfil that purpose you are going to use these two books. One of them is the one you have just sworn to protect and defend - the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.  I give you a copy. 

The other one is a copy of our Rules of Procedure. What you have come to do here can only be processed through this book. All you need to know about how to do business in this House is contained in this book. I welcome you again and congratulations. (Applause)

Honourable members, it is now apparent that in the public gallery we have people who have come to observe the proceedings, particularly this first part of our proceedings. We welcome the people from Omoro District, if they are here. (Applause) We welcome the people from Kibale District, if they are here. (Applause) We welcome the people from Kagadi District and the people from Rubanda District. (Applause) You are all welcome and congratulations for bringing these four people to the House of Parliament to do business on your behalf.

In the VIP gallery, I have also noticed Mr Roy Lugone, who has come to observe the proceedings; Brig. Gen. Charles Otema-Awany; hon. Sam Engola – (Applause) – my vice chairman for northern Uganda; and also hon. Richard Twodong, who only last year was sitting down here but now he is up there. (Laughter) He is the Deputy Secretary-General of the National Resistance Movement Party. I also see hon. Suzan Nakawuki, EALA representative. You are all welcome. (Applause) Thank you. 

On behalf of the Leader of the Opposition, member for Kasilo proceed.

2.27
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Winifred Kiiza, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Kisembo Basemera of Kibale District; hon. Lamwaka Catherine of Omoro District; hon. Kyomuhendo Mbabazi of Kagadi; and hon. Prossy Mbabazi Akampurira of Rubanda District for having been sworn in. Congratulations! (Applause)

We would like to also thank the people from those districts for supporting them. Please, continue supporting them because without your support, they will not be able to do their work. Mr Speaker, I saw you were all smiles; congratulations, Omoro District –(Laughter)– because an addition to the family is not a bad thing. 

On behalf of the people of Kasilo, we would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the new Members and the people of those new districts for having elected their new leaders. As you have been properly guided by the Speaker, when we get in this House, we are one House as we perform our duties. You are going to be assigned to different committees, different Parliamentary fora and groups where we are expected to work together as Members of the Tenth Parliament.

Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Opposition, we are willing to cooperate and work together for the benefit of this country. May God bless you. (Applause)

2.29
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing here, first of all, to thank the Leader of the Opposition, who has been represented by hon. Elijah Okupa, for having congratulated the Members of Parliament who have been sworn in and who belong to the NRM party. (Applause) I must thank hon. Elijah Okupa because he concluded his submission without any castigation of any organisation like the Electoral Commission and the like, which is unprecedented. That is why I am sincerely thanking him.

Secondly, I too would like to congratulate my colleagues who have joined us and also thank the people who have entrusted them. I thank the managers of their campaigns. I would like to pledge to you, as the Government Chief Whip, that I am here for you, to guide and whip you as well.

You have come to a House, which belongs to people of different political affiliations, but as hon. Okupa said, when it comes to transacting business that touches the development of the people, we move together. We are here to welcome you and I pledge total commitment and guidance. 

I once again congratulate you, Mr Speaker, for the Omoro Woman Representative’s seat because you are a leader there. For me as a person who belongs to NRM, it would have been bad if you delivered otherwise. So, congratulations, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is completely out of order to draw the Speaker into this. (Laughter) Let us leave it there; the leaders have spoken for all the Members. Thank you, Members.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you know, by our Rules of Procedure, oaths take precedence even before communication from the Speaker. 

As you know, honourable members, we have business, but we continue to remind Government and ourselves that the procedures required to activate business that was saved by Parliament, to be handled should be completed. I am saying this because right now we are not doing very well with the business. That is why we have a growing number of urgent matters and other things; it is because we are trying to get things to do.

We urge Government to help Parliament to activate all those Bills that are pending. I was informed that a ruling was made to this effect. Honourable members, when these matters start, those of you who are in the committees already, please let us handle and finish them within the framework that is provided for in our Rules of Procedure. In 45 days, we should be able to report, so that we can finish them before we start getting new business from Government.

We have five years, and those are 60 months only. How many have gone so far? Four months have gone already, so we have 56 months to deliver on the promises we made on behalf of our parties and our own undertakings with the constituencies. We have 56 months to do that. If you take off the last months to go back to them to campaign, then you will find that the productive months we are left with are no more than 50.

Therefore, we need to double our efforts and deliver, so that our work speaks for us rather than what we will say to the people, so that our elections can be assured. We do not want what happened last time to follow us this time. We would like to see all of us back in the 11th Parliament, so that we can continue serving the people of this country. I expect us to work hard and deliver for the people of Uganda. Thank you very much.

I do not see any Member rising on urgent matters and yet a few had come to my office. (Laughter)

2.35
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. There has been a calamity in Agago County for the last few days, although the worst occurred yesterday when a rainstorm destroyed a number of properties in the subcounties of Omot, Arum, Lira-Palwo and other parts of Agago.

Mr Speaker, my intention here is to bring this to the attention of the House and the Minister of Disaster Preparedness. My appeal is that as we try to establish the extent to which the people of Agago have been affected by this disaster, the relevant ministry –(Interjection)- With your permission, Mr Speaker - (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am being bullied by hon. Joshua Anywarach; he just said that this is information from the “true Agago?” I believe that hon. Makmot is the full representative of the people of Agago. I would like to thank him so much for the matter of national importance he is raising on the Floor.

Mr Speaker, I would like to give information in regard to this calamity that has befallen the people of Agago. It has, as he mentioned, badly affected the four subcounties of Lira-Palwo, Omot, Arum and part of Patongo. Houses have been brought down. As I speak, a good number of households were blown off and people are sleeping outside. The issue is very grave.  

We are trying to work hand in hand with the people on the ground to establish the amount of damage. However, Mr Speaker, we would like to request the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to send a team -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you still giving information?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: That is the information I wanted to pass on to you. (Laughter) Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR EDWARD OTTO: Thank you, my Woman MP. A lot of information has been added to what I intended to say and I appreciate that. We will be updating the House on the short and long term effects of this disaster when we get more information. Otherwise, that is essentially what we wanted to present. We do not have all the facts right now, but we wanted the House and the relevant ministry to be aware.

Mr Speaker, to conclude, I would like to also congratulate our new Members who have been sworn in today. I thought it is very important to -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that an urgent matter? (Laughter)

2.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have taken note of it and I will make sure that the minister in charge handles it immediately.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, follow up with the Government Chief Whip. We will also be following up this matter.

2.39
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning education in Bulambuli and north-eastern Uganda, in particular.

Mr Speaker, I have been analysing the results of PLE from 2001 to date and I have realised that the districts of Bulambuli, Kween, Lamwo, Namayingo, Bududa and Abim have always been the last in performance. I am very worried because come 2035, who will be the member of Parliament, because we are supposed to speak English while here? I do not know luganda -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the urgent matter?

MR BURUNDO: The urgent matter is that I would like to request Government, particularly the Ministry of Education and Sports, to take affirmative action for the districts which are always the last in PLE, especially Bulambuli and Amudat, which get one pupil passing in the whole district. Sincerely, if you look at that and compare it with the performance of the pupils in the central, who are always in the lead, don’t you think that some time to come we have to import a Member of Parliament from here to represent the people of Bulambuli? (Laughter) That is my concern, Mr Speaker.

Otherwise, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you. The other day I was here on the Floor of Parliament crying that they had taken 100 animals from my constituency. It is good news now; all the animals were recovered and are back from the warriors of Nakapiripirit. I am very grateful. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations!

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague from Bulambuli. Our policy is clear, that we want education to be enjoyed by all Ugandans from all corners of the country. I have noted the concern and immediately, I will sit with the technical people and we shall find out the cause, and institute relevant measures that can be quickly taken. I thank you.

2.42
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the new Members who have just joined us. 

Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of national importance. I have not used a lot of time in the House to deliberate on a number of issues and so, I request that you give me some few minutes to explain my point here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is under urgent matters. So, you raise an urgent matter, which is not a speech. Just raise the urgent matter that you have. 

MR ELOTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in relation to the continued underfunding of local governments, particularly at the subcounty level. Despite the low funding that these local administrative units keep receiving, even that little does not reach them in time. A case in point is Dakabela, particularly Tubur Subcounty, which up to now has not received a coin of the first quarter release. We are all aware that the first quarter in this budget cycle is coming to an end; I wonder when these people will be able to implement the few projects they are planning to do during this financial year.

Mr Speaker, I particularly would like to urge this House to take this issue as a matter of national importance. Unless we put our feet down to ensure local governments get adequate funding - They are the right people on the ground and they are the right people to address particular issues that keep arising or coming up in this House, like roads, lack of classrooms, broken bridges, etcetera.

I, therefore, request that the appropriate ministry or department comes to this House not only to make a statement but to also assure us with appropriate means or steps that they are going to take to address this particular issue. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.45
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. May I also join the rest that have congratulated the new Members of Parliament; you are most welcome. 

About money issues, I would like to say that we send money on request. In this particular case, I do not know whether the accounting officer did submit their work plans and money requests; I will go back to the ministry and check. 

However, I would like to convey this message to all of us here; whenever you have difficulties about money not coming to your districts, go to the accounting officer and find out -(Interjection)– I mean all local governments - municipalities, town councils. If you ever have a problem like that, ask the accounting officer whether they have made a requisition because we do not release money unless we have got a request.

Mr Speaker, I will go and check for this particular case and I will deal with the Member of Parliament directly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you taking points of clarification? You have to process them for me; you do not just -

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, you are the one who leads us, and so it is you to choose who should -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they are seeking clarification from you. You have the prerogative, at least for a few seconds, so use it.

MR KASAIJA: Can I ask hon. Anywar to seek the clarification and I will give it?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for allowing me to seek clarification. It was comforting to hear the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development saying that, if there are problems in the district or local governments with financing, he is available with his team. 

I would like to find out from the honourable minister, does this include the newly created municipalities? I ask this because as we speak, all the newly created municipalities have problems of funding their activities. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, the minister may not be aware of this, because he has been very busy as a minister of finance, but the workers in Kagadi Hospital went on strike. When I contacted the accounting officer of Kagadi District, he said that he made a requisition but the problem is with the Ministry of Finance. I wonder whether he has details of exactly what is happening in his ministry because much of what is lagging behind is within his ministry and not with our respective accounting officers.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I would like to seek clarification following your explanation. You are suggesting that there is a new requirement, if I understood you well, that will require the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) to requisition for monies that are supposed to be released. 

I would like you to clarify here whether this also applies to conditional grants, which Government is supposed to release after every quarter. Are you trying to suggest that there is a new circular that requires them to request, because I know that after releasing that money, it is only until the local government fails to utilize it that they send it back to the Consolidated Fund? I would like to seek that clarification.

MR ILUKOR: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. Honourable minister, you have told the House that money is paid on requisition. Yes, the accounting officers, the CAOs, do requisition the money, but are you aware that that money, once released to the accounting officers, also delays to reach the district?

Some time back in 2003, you introduced an IFMS system, which is functioning throughout the country, and you promised to roll out the programme within three years. Further, you said at that time that within three years, the IFMS system would have been rolled out up to the subcounties and that would reduce the problems of money being released to the accounting officers in the district and it delays to reach the subcounties. What is happening with the rollout today because you have not rolled out the IFMS?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, as for the new administrative units – the new municipalities and districts - there has been a problem which I must admit. Because we operate using a computer system, my ministry has taken time to create the linkage between the centre and local governments and that is why the funds have not reached there. Otherwise, money is available and this is being worked on.

As for Kagadi Hospital, we should have released money for it because I received information from there about two weeks ago. I informed my people and I have not heard anybody comment about it, so, I thought that we had handled Kagadi, but I will check. I would like to assure this House that for any district or administrative unit, whether new or old, that has not received money, we shall take quick and corrective action.

Concerning conditional grants, I would like to say that one has to make requisitions because conditional grants are sent in accordance with the work plan of the spending entity. We do not just send the money; one has to inform us that, for example, in such and such quarter this is what we want. One has to indicate this from their budget before we release the money. Once one fails to indicate in their requisition that they need such and such money, we keep the money at the centre until they do the necessary. Thank you.

2.53
MR TONNY MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I come from a constituency that has a river called Bukangara. This river supplies water for domestic consumption as well as for animals, but also serves wildlife in Queen Elizabeth National Park. 

About three years ago, a group of people camped at the banks of River Bukangara with machinery, including excavators, together with men from the UPDF. They later began excavating the river banks, even within the water. This means that it is only the dirty and polluted water that was left for the households as well as animals. To worsen the matter, they broke the hard rocks using acid, which has also contaminated and polluted the water that is consumed by the same people. 

This group has not identified itself to the local government authorities, and I would like to make the following prayers:

1. 	That the Government makes it clear to the local authorities who this group is and what they are doing.

2. 	That the excavation be stopped until an alternative source of water is provided, because the people in the area are suffering; you know that water is life.

3. 	That this House is made to know, if this activity is income generating, how much is collected from it and probably, the proceeds for the community to benefit. I thank you.

2.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Muhindo for raising this matter. The Minister of Defence is not in the House but we have the Chief of Defence Forces in the House as an MP. I would like to call upon him - if he has any information regarding the matter - to feel free to lay it before this House. 

However, if he does not have information, then I am instructing the Minister of Defence to go to the site and see what is happening as soon as possible, before I say yes to the three prayers that the honourable member has risen. This is because I am not privy to what is happening on the ground.

2.56
GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not aware of that situation but I would like to confirm to the honourable member that we will find out what exactly is happening. In the UPDF, we do not even have a backhoe, so I do not know what excavation equipment he is talking about. However, we will investigate and report back to the House through the minister. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.56
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter I am raising is in reference to the directive, which was issued by the former Minister of Information, hon. Rose Namayanja, on 18 March 2014. She issued a directive to the media houses to identify an hour every week, during prime time, for Government programmes to be relayed to the public. I know some radio stations have complied, although I have not seen this on television. 

Mr Speaker, I know that our tourism sector has been grappling with publicity. Today, we are at the peak season of tourism and I am wondering why the Ministry of Tourism and its agency, Uganda Tourism Board (UTB), have not utilised this opportunity to promote our tourism locally. We are spending a lot of money marketing ourselves overseas and to other countries and yet our own citizens do not even know the tourism potential that we have in the country. Why doesn’t the ministry utilise this free opportunity that was given through a directive by the minister? Thank you.

2.59
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to confirm that it is true that media houses offer free airtime to Government programmes. However, I would also like to state in this House that not many of us have utilised this opportunity, probably including the Ministry of Tourism, which hon. Centenary has talked about. Therefore, I need to do more whipping to ensure that we utilise this airtime. I promise to talk to the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry so that they use this free airtime, which has been offered. 

Further, I would also like to encourage honourable Members of Parliament on the Committee of Trade and Tourism to also utilise this airtime. This is because as Government, we are beneficiaries. This airtime should not only be used by ministers or Members of the Uganda Tourism Board; Members of Parliament should also use this airtime to promote our country. Thank you.

3.00
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in reference to an open letter that featured in the Daily Monitor, dated Friday, 16 September 2016. There was a write-up by representatives of ten civil societies operating in Uganda addressed to the President of the World Bank. For ease of reference, it is on page 7.

Mr Speaker, it is a standard model for the contents and letter to be written through the relevant institutions of Government. The way the world operates today is not like in the past. No aid givers would do so without interacting or sharing information in the college of donors. I would like to draw this to the attention of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that this has dire consequences, if as a country we do not deal with it. 

First of all, I totally agree with the content of the open letter but my only problem is the channel. You do not address a letter that, more or less, talks about the institutional imperfections of a country with the donors, because it can bring a spill over effect that we, as a country, cannot contain. Ask how Zimbabwe got to where it is; it was because of such letters. 

My prayer, Mr Speaker, is that probably the Minister of Finance creates time and seeks audience with the authors of the letter. He should also try, by all means, to fast-track the progress because the loans mentioned in this letter were passed by this Parliament. Unfortunately or fortunately, they even made reference to a parliamentary committee. So, I wonder why the same authors did not seek audience with Parliament or the relevant organs of this Government. Mr Speaker, I want to thank you.  

3.04
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you, hon. Katusabe, for raising this important matter, which touches on the regulation of civil society organisations. This is matter of regulations that guide the operations of civil society organisations and it falls within the docket of the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

It is a concern of everybody. Unfortunately, I did not read that letter but the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can supplement with some information. Otherwise, my concern is the way the civil society organisations, as I picked from the honourable member, decided to use that method to address their concern and yet we have Parliament, the ministers and the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business. We shall, therefore, address that together with the Minister of Internal Affairs. I do not know whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has something to add on.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I wish to congratulate and thank hon. Katusabe for bringing this matter to the Floor of this House. I have seen the letter because I received a copy and I have read it. 

Mr Speaker, at times we behave as if this is not our country. Yes, in some instances the authors wrote the truth, which was known. As you know, and Mr Speaker, maybe I can use this opportunity to officially tell this House that the World Bank has suspended lending money to this country. I will come back here to give you a full statement on this so that I give you the facts.

However, instead of those good Ugandans - I presume these NGOs are Ugandans - coming to seek for the right information, they went ahead and issued that letter. My worry is that it coincided with the letter from the World Bank informing me that they had suspended lending of money to Uganda. Therefore, it leaves me wondering whether there is some hidden hand somewhere or people are interested in their own issues. 

I have often told journalists that if they get a hold of certain information, no matter whether it is true or not, when such information is likely to damage the name of the country, hold onto it. They do not have to report everything that they get. It is, therefore, a big concern as well as a national matter. The NGOs are supposed to operate within this country but they must make sure they also protect the name of the country because when Uganda is in trouble, they can also not operate. I thank you very much for that issue. I am going to –(Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to comfort the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the clarification I am seeking is in good faith; he should not be worried. 

We have this reality with us that the World Bank has opted out of funding some of the projects that they intended to fund or are funding. Remember Parliament had just discussed the fate of redundant loans – performing and non-performing, redundant and sleeping. Would you tell Parliament the extent of the impact of this policy reversal by the World Bank on our budget and plans, both in the short term and long term? Have you sought a remedy with them that we can be positive about it in time to come? This is because at the end of the day, we are going to come back here to do a post-mortem on projects not undertaken and/or projects that have stalled. Would you like to clarify to Parliament what this means?

MR KASAIJA: I think, Mr Speaker, my colleague was not listening carefully to what I said. I said I will come to this House –(Interjection) – next week, before I go to Washington, with a full statement and inform you of what has happened between ourselves and World Bank, where the problem is arising and what corrective measures we are putting in place. 

Yesterday I was in Kamwenge using one of the causes of this misunderstanding - the Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road. We will be coming with a full report, Mr Speaker. I want to make sure that this House fully understands the genesis of the problem and how Government is addressing it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Clerk, extract those minutes and forward them to the Minister of Finance. We expect a statement on this matter next week as he has promised. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have parents of Nyero Subcounty, represented by hon. Silas Aogon and hon. Amoding Monicah, Kumi District. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome.

In the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA). (Applause) They are led by the President of FUFA, Engineer Moses Magogo; the vice-presidents, Mr Justus Mugisha and Mr Mugoye; the head coach, Mr Milutin Sredojevic; -(Applause) - players, Hassan Wasswa, acting captain and Brian Umony, goal scorer; and staff members, Mr Kiiza Decklous, Mr Matovu Muhammad and Charles Kawasi. (Applause) They are here to observe the proceedings of the House.

Honourable members, as you are aware, there is a motion coming up; I think that they are interested in that. In order that we do not keep them here too long, we may have to find a way of adjusting the Order Paper so that we can accommodate their item before they go. If the House agrees, we will deal with them immediately and then they can leave. Let me finish with the matters that are already here.

3.12
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance relating to the problem of striking workers at Isimba Power Project. To make matters worse, it is the Chinese workers that are now on strike. This project has about 600 Chinese workers and about 200 of these have gone on a sit-down strike. The reason is that they are not being paid their wages by the contractor.

I met the contractor and the consultant and this is what they had to say: The Government has not been paying them according to the interim certificates that they have completed and because of that, they are cash strapped and they do not have money to pay workers. In fact, they are struggling to pay the local workers and to pay for the materials they are using for the project. The last payment they received, according to them, was in March and since then, they have not received any money. 

This matter becomes a matter of national importance because the Government has borrowed heavily from the Exim Bank to execute this project and the Exim Bank has not failed to pay. However, according to the consultant and the contractor, their concern is about the bureaucracy in processing their payment and as a result, the project is suffering.

To remedy the situation, the contractor has resorted to private borrowing and when he borrows this money, it incurs interest and according to the contract, he is going to transfer this interest burden to the Government. So, the cost of this project is going to go up as a result of the bureaucracy involved in this project. 

I think it is very important for the agencies concerned, for example the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Energy and Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited, to take immediate action to remedy this situation before it completely runs out of hand. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.15
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Lugoloobi for raising this issue. It is a very serious matter. It is a pity that we do not have a colleague from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development here; as for me, my job is to pay in accordance with the certificates that have been sent to the Ministry of Finance.

I am not aware of any certificate that has been forwarded and we have not paid, but the money is available. We borrowed this money from China and it is available; so, it must be a procedural issue. I, therefore, promise this House that I will take it up with my colleague, the minister in charge of energy, who is outside the country, when he returns. We will then come back to this House to give the exact position. Thank you.

3.16
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Sunday, I happened to be in Kasilo County for constituency work. However, as fate would have it, I also attended the burial of a friend’s mother, who is a staff in Soroti Municipality. I was accosted by the Mayor of Soroti Municipality and the Speaker of Serere, with information that while in a meeting in Kampala, where they met with the ministers and the President – I think when the Cabinet had a meeting in Munyonyo - they raised the issue of hepatitis B and the vaccines. Unfortunately, they were told by the minister that the people of Serere and Soroti should wait.

Mr Speaker, we passed Shs 11 billion in this House specifically to address this issue as a matter of urgency in the Teso, Lango and Acholi regions. I am surprised that up to date, no vaccine or tests have taken place in the above mentioned regions. Now, we are being told by the minster responsible that the people of Serere should wait, as the disease takes their lives.

I would like to know from the minister and the Government of Uganda what happened to the Shs 11 billion that we passed in the last financial year? Also, in this budget of this year, I think we passed some money to address that matter. We were even given a list of districts by hon. Baryomunsi, who was the minister then – (Interruptions)

MS ADOA: Mr Speaker, just to add onto what my colleague is saying, the other day I personally sent a team of medical workers to test people in one of the villages that was highly infected. Out of 110 people that were tested, 25 people were found positive and out of the 25 people who were positive, there was a whole family of five which was infected - the mother and the children – and yet the father had not even come for the test!

Yesterday, the testing was in Odapakol. Out of the 645 people that were tested, 32 were positive. Almost every day, they bury people in Serere due to hepatitis B. So, what my colleague is saying is true –(Interruption) 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give you on top of your submission is that, even in the few districts where the Government started giving the vaccine, the vaccine is supposed to be taken in three doses, but most of them were given only the first dose or the second and they stopped. Even where they started making an attempt to immunise, the situation has literally gone back to zero.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, now you have seen the attention this matter is attracting. It is a very grave matter and we do not know what is happening with the money that we passed to address it. We have just left it to a few Christian organisations that charge people for the tests and vaccines in our region. Those are the only people who are trying to help our people down there. 

We would like to know from the Minister of Finance - You gave the Ministry of Health money, where have they put that money? We would like to know from the Ministry of Health where they put the money that was given to them by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and when they are going to start the tests and vaccination in those districts.

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think about two or three weeks ago, I did make a statement on the Floor of this House regarding this very subject matter - hepatitis B. I was very clear that we would have wished to roll out the testing and vaccination to those found positive in this country, but we are constrained by resources. I did indicate very clearly that although Parliament passed Shs 11 billion, we were given only Shs 3 billion. 

Mr Speaker, in the final conclusion, you referred this matter, with agreement of Members here, to the Committee on Health to interface with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Health and find a way forward, so that we can provide vaccines to all Ugandans. Hon. Adoa is a member of the health committee; I would like the health committee to invite all of us so that we can find an amicable solution. Otherwise, this is a challenge that we must address but we cannot do it without the resources. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, this is a very dangerous disease; we acknowledge that. However, when we send money, we demand accountability. In this particular case, I thank the Members of Parliament for having passed that supplementary. We released Shs 3 billion, as my colleague has said, and we asked them to account to us how that money was used. However, we have never got that accountability up to now.

We are ready to give you the money –(Interjection)– Please, I would like you to listen to me very carefully. Can I be protected, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MR KASAIJA: We got unauthentic information that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it is unauthentic, do not put it on the record of Parliament.

MR KASAIJA: Ok. We have information that if all the Shs 11 billion is released at once, the capacity to absorb it in terms of -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, on that Sunday, my mother happened to be admitted in Apapai Health Centre IV, so I visited the health centre. I found two other people who had been diagnosed by those Christian organisations and my sister is one of the victims. At the burial I attended, there was another lady who came to me in tears after being diagnosed with the same disease and she could not even get any preventive medication. 

It is surprising that today hon. Kasaija is giving us the same response he gave us immediately we came from elections, when we put this question to the Executive. People are suffering and dying; how can someone come and say there is no capacity for absorption? We have health workers everywhere in this country, at least to the capacity of 60 per cent in health centres?

In this era of kisanja hakuna mchezo, I do not know whether that is what it means. When that phrase was coined, I knew that what the President meant was very serious. However, from the statement that the minister is making here I do not see that being implemented. Is the minister in order to come and say, when people are suffering, that the Ministry of Health and the Government of Uganda do not have the capacity to absorb the money in order to save the lives of Ugandans? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister started by saying he had unauthentic information. When I warned him, he immediately made it authentic. Honourable minister, you are completely out of order to proceed with information, which you said was unauthentic, and now you have brought it to the House and you have to speak to it. Is it true that the Ministry of Health does not have the capacity to absorb Shs 8 billion with the scale of the problems that we have?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, from the way I was brought up, I speak the truth as I see it. You can rule me out of order, but the truth must be said; I think the best thing to do -(Ms Joy Atim rose)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have asked him to speak.

MR KASIAJA: Mr Speaker, I will never tell a lie. I will not tell a lie. We either leave this matter to rest or you can take it to the committee and go sort it out there, but I will not tell a lie. What I have said is the truth and nothing else but the truth.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, is it authentic?

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. We are members of Parliament and we represent our people. We are being blamed for not doing anything for this country. We appropriate funds and it is the responsibility of the ministries to implement.

Mr Speaker, the other day we asked the Minister for Disaster Preparedness on the Floor here, he was blaming the Ministry of Finance. Now we are asking the Minister of Health and she is blaming the Ministry of Finance. Now the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is coming out to speak the truth that the ministries do not have the capacity to absorb the finances. Even Shs 11 billion cannot be absorbed by the ministries and yet, we have technical officers in these ministries.

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for these people to come and iron out their issues here when we have a Leader of Government Business and the Vice-President? He has to acknowledge that the ministers and the technocrats are incapable. Is it procedurally right for them to come and argue on the Floor?

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What we are talking about is a matter of life and death. To hear two ministers of Government on the Floor trading counter accusations, we may have to think twice if this Parliament is to offer a solution to the dying people.

In my constituency and my subcounty, I know of one Ochwo Moses and his brother from one family suffering from the same disease. Government cannot plan and say there was no capacity. What is planning? Before they came to Parliament to ask for Shs 11 billion, they must have planned.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development might have to change their name at one point. They are behaving as a typical SACCO treasurer and not a modern Government arm that is a facilitator. Since the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is honest, I would like to join him by being more honest. Everything rises and falls with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. All other Government departments point at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Are we proceeding well in this House to get two Government ministers trading blame – “We have not been given enough money”; “you have not accounted for it”; and then “no capacity”? This is a game and yet someone else somewhere is dying. 

Mr Speaker, I come from the east; I am tempted to take this debate a little higher and ask, if it was somewhere else - if it was in Kagadi or Masindi? Why are we fooling ourselves in this place?  -(Interruption)- I am speaking the truth, even if he rules me out of order.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, some of us have spent the bulk of our lives trying to serve this country as honestly and diligently as possible. Some of us do not believe in tribes; we do not believe in segregation on religious differences.

Secondly, this disease is not only confined to one part of the country; this disease is everywhere. The other day when we were debating the supplementary, I told you that even in other parts of the country, this is the problem. When I stood up here, I said that this is a serious case. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to stand here and insinuate that I am not serious because the problem is not in Kagadi, where I happen to come from, and yet actually we are here to serve each and every Ugandan? Some of our people have died; people have suffered for the sake of this country -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is against the rules of this House to impute improper motives on another. However, from the statement arising from the honourable member, I am not able to discern whether it had that meaning, but if it did, then he is out of order.

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the wise ruling. As I conclude, I am constrained to challenge ourselves to prove our worth to the people of Uganda as a Parliament of the people of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the budget that was presented to this House for this intervention was Shs 36 billion, if I remember correctly. The money that was eventually agreed upon with the Ministry of Finance was Shs 11 billion. That means that by the planning of the Ministry of Health, they had capacity to utilise Shs 36 billion. (Applause) Now, they have failed to use Shs 3 billion and they have even failed to get Shs 8 billion on grounds that they have no capacity; that is what we are being told. 

Honourable members, who was misleading this House that this problem required Shs 36 billion when there is no capacity to even absorb Shs 3 billion? Honourable ministers, are we really serving this House properly?

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me just finish because when this matter came and the statement was made – This is not the first time we are discussing Hepatitis B. Even in this Parliament, I have sat in this chair and we have talked about Hepatitis B four times; this is the fifth time. When the Minister of Health said I send it back to the committee for them to look at a few things and come back - reconcile issues between finance and themselves and come back and advise the House - the matter was serious and it is still serious. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure. The issue we are debating is a serious one. As we speak, we are losing a soul. I know the situation from the statistics in eastern and northern Uganda and the urgency of the matter. 

Mr Speaker, we request that you allow us to reconcile our positions and then come back to the House so that we do not look in the face of Ugandans as if we do not care about them when actually we care. I beg, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the chair of health here? The matter was referred to the Committee of Health for this reconciliation that is being now proposed by the minister.

DR BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, we have scheduled to meet them on Tuesday, 29th - (Interjection) - In the interest of Ugandans, we can have the meeting on Thursday. We have to readjust the other appointments which we have –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what is the preliminary thing you have been able to see so far since we referred the matter to you?

DR BUKENYA: We had just talked earlier with the minister and we had also sent an investigative team on the ground in some of the districts where they distributed the vaccines. We would like to meet them when we have quality data such that we can come up with something conclusive. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable ministers, please, let us resolve this matter. Whether there was accountability or no accountability, that is a matter that should have been resolved by now. You cannot wait for a Member to raise the matter and then you say there are issues of accountability. This debate has been here for months; it should have been resolved already. 

Please, do something and by the time we get back here on Thursday afternoon, we should have some clear picture of what is happening with the intervention on hepatitis B.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, this is a matter of life and death. Let me go back to the ministry, look for the money and give it to the Ministry of Health. However, they must be ready to account for the money. I will release the money, but I need accountability. Otherwise, you will be the same people accusing me-

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, give me a minute.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, on what matter do you rise? 

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, people are dying. We have had issues of accountability even in the beginning. This is about life and death. We have had issues raised by the Auditor-General on accountability, but it has not stopped the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development from remitting the money. We need to save life. We shall deal with those who fail to account or have eaten the money when the Auditor-General does his work. What we need right now is to save the lives of the people who are dying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I need to know on what point you are rising. You cannot rise and start speaking into the microphone before the Speaker has even understood why you have risen. (Laughter)

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Faith Homes Primary School represented by hon. Sam Cheptoris and hon. Rukia Chekamondo. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them.

We expect a clear brief on the issue of these interventions on hepatitis B on Thursday afternoon. Both ministries should reconcile and come back here and we hear what they have to say. Thank you.

MR KASAIJA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the matter which was raised by the member for Ntenjeru, the same Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed this House that the Ministry of Energy and Minerals has never supplied them with the certificate of completion of the work at Isimba and we left it at that. Meanwhile, the contractors are saying Government is not paying for the certificates which have been submitted. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on the other hand, is saying the Ministry of Energy and Minerals has never submitted those certificates to them.

Mr Speaker, would it be appropriate that on Thursday, when the minister is coming to clarify on the issue of the Ministry of Health, he explains a bit more on the progress of Isimba and why it has stalled? If it is alright, Mr Speaker, we could get a statement from the Ministry of Energy and Minerals, so that we know what is going on. Otherwise, it is the same thing that is happening - Ministry of Health cannot absorb; Ministry of Energy and Minerals does not supply the certificate. What is going on?

Mr Speaker, isn’t it procedurally right that we demand a statement from the Minister of Energy and Minerals to clarify on the position, because this is a lot of money which is committed on this project. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House, as it is constituted, cannot deal with all those matters. I am sure the chairpersons of those committees are picking these discussions and they are getting interested in following them up. If the Minister of Finance says the money is there but he has not received a certificate of what he should pay, he cannot pay even if the money is there.

Therefore, somebody should pick up this information and follow it up instead of being asked to come back the next day. We will just flood the House with business that cannot move. We have committees that should go into better detail of these matters and help us.

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, I chair the Committee on Natural Resources; the issue of Isimba and Karuma are already on our desk. They are technical in nature and you cannot simply rush them in a day or two. We are handling them and we will bring the report to this House.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Right now, the workers are on strike and the contractor is saying they have not been paid and that is why they cannot pay the workers. Ministry of Finance, which should pay them, says that they have not received a certificate of completion, which could move them to pay.

MR BYARUGABA: Those are some of the details that we are going to handle.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we now go to the Order Paper, honourable members? By going to the Order Paper, I had proposed an alteration and the Members agreed that we allow the motion on the Uganda Cranes to be brought forward. 

Allow me to further alter the Order Paper to include two ministerial statements from the Ministry of Health. One is a ministerial statement on operations of the Uganda Medical Board. This was requested for and the minister said she is ready to make this short statement as information to the House. The second statement from the Ministry of Health will also be on Yellow Fever vaccination. 

The Order Paper is accordingly altered and the motion on Uganda Cranes is brought forward. We will follow up from there.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT CONGRATULATING THE UGANDA CRANES FOR QUALIFYING FOR THE AFRICA CUP OF NATIONS, 2017

3.47
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I rise under rule 14 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament, congratulating the Uganda Cranes for qualifying for the Africa Cup of Nations (AFCON), 2017.

Mr Speaker, before I move the motion, allow me to lay on the Table, for the record of Parliament, the portrait of the dream team that is taking Uganda to the Africa Cup of Nations after 38 years. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know how the records will capture that. (Laughter)

MR OBUA: “WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, under the provision of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XVII mandates the State to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS Article 8A of the Constitution of Uganda provides for governance based on the principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy;

AWARE THAT on Sunday, 4 September 2016, in front of a multitude of fans, in a match played at Mandela National Stadium Namboole, the Uganda Cranes, Uganda’s national football team, defeated the Comoros national football team 1-0 and thereby, qualified for the prestigious Africa Cup of Nations finals in Gabon;

FURTHER AWARE that this triumphant victory and qualification match was presided over by the Minister of Education and Sports, the First Lady of the Republic of Uganda, hon. Janet K. Museveni;

COGNISANT of the fact that Uganda had last qualified and played in this continental tournament in 1978, losing to Ghana’s Black Stars 2-0 in the final game of the tournament played in Kumasi Ghana;

NOTING that this qualification presents a rich springboard for the Uganda Cranes to qualify for bigger and better tournaments;

FURTHER NOTING that the Government of Uganda needs to take  centre stage in enabling the realisation of the dreams of the Uganda Cranes in particular, and the sports up sector broadly, through adequate funding, preservation of playgrounds and entrenching of physical education in the school curriculum;

Now, therefore, be it resolved that:

1. 	Parliament of Uganda pays glowing tribute to the Uganda Cranes for qualifying for the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations in Gabon.

2. 	Government of Uganda continues increasing the annual budget allocation to the sports subsector to facilitate the development and sustainability of sports countrywide.

3. 	A law be tabled in Parliament within six months to facilitate a regulatory framework for facilitating sporting activities in Uganda generally.”

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Members of Moyo West, West Budama South, Member of Makindye West and Shadow Minister of Sports and Member for Kitgum Municipality and Mitoma District. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, to the football loving citizens of Uganda and the sports fraternity generally, Sunday 4 September 2016 remains the day during our lifetime and history when the aspirations, dreams and hope of Uganda to qualify as a country and participate in the Africa Cup of Nations since 1978 – a year I was not yet born - were realised. Therefore, this is a big achievement during my lifetime at a personal level and during our lifetime as a Parliament.

This qualification, in my humble and honest opinion, was a wakeup call. It was a litmus test and precursor to reaching greater heights, if only we as a country invest slightly more in the field of sports. As a country, we need to rejuvenate our strategy in nurturing, grooming, mentoring and sustaining sporting talent. 

I am happy that this qualification and historic match was played on a Sunday because many Ugandans across the religious divide prayed for our national football team. Therefore, one the fundamental spirits of this motion, Mr Speaker, is derived from the Bible. It is derived from Luke 17:11-18 where Jesus healed 10 men with a dreaded skin disease and the Bible says only one of the 10 came back to say “Thank you” to Jesus. Through this motion, Mr Speaker, this Parliament as an organ of Government is saying “thank you” to our national football team for bringing glory to this country, for taking us to the continental football tournament where we last played in 1978. 

We would like to say thank you to our gallant players of the Uganda Cranes, those who were within and without Uganda, - many of them play outside the country - for a job well done. We would also like to salute our national head coach and all the officials for delivering Uganda to the continental football. 

In the same spirit, we would like to salute the Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA) and the National Council of Sports for being resilient. We have always participated and failed to qualify. You remember twice, honourable members - One time Kenya came and held us to a goalless draw. It was just the pride of the East African Community and yet even if they had defeated Uganda 10-0, the Harambee Stars would have not qualified. You remember the time when Zambia came here and we lost during penalties. We would like to thank you, the Federation of Uganda Football Associations and the National Council of Sports for being resilient.

We equally salute the mother ministry, Ministry of Education and Sports. I would like to appeal to them that with this qualification, we need to tighten our socks and seatbelts to ensure that more resources are injected into these national teams through this Parliament. We would like to salute and say thank you to the Uganda Cranes’ sponsors. Airtel is the official sponsor, Nile Breweries are partners, National Insurance Corporation is for insurance and BIDCO Uganda limited. 

We equally salute this Parliament. Mr Speaker, you were part of the qualification when a team from FUFA came here and was seeking for parliamentary support in terms of mobilizing the citizens of Uganda. We must say thank you to Members of Parliament and the staff, especially those who turned up at Namboole to support our national football team.

I also would like to salute the chief guest, the Minister of Education and Sports. Honourable members, this was the first time the new Minister of Education and Sports attended a football match where the national football team was playing and all she brought was luck, nothing else but luck. I salute the minister of state who was equally present; you have a huge responsibility to ensure that we translate this lack into action.

I salute the Government of Uganda because without putting in place a conducive atmosphere, in terms of ensuring that there is law and order - The crowd that came to Namboole went beyond the capacity of 40,000. There are people who even stood outside to support our national football team.

Finally, I would like to say I am indebted and as a Parliament, we are indebted to the nationalist, patriotic people of Uganda of all walks of life who travelled far and wide irrespective of their political, cultural and religious identity to support our national football team. We would like to say thank you to you wherever you are. 

You are aware the Mufti of Uganda, the Katikiro of Buganda and the Kyabazinga of Busoga attended. That is where I saw nationalism and patriotism at work. Politicians of all walks of life from different political shades were at Namboole. We were all talking about nothing but Uganda. There was no NRM, FDC, UPC, and DP. Therefore, I would like to say that it is only sports that can promote the spirit of nationalism and patriotism, honourable Members of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, as I conclude in speaking for this motion, my submission would be meaningless if I do not highlight the critical challenges that football in particular, and the sports subsector, in Uganda are faced with at the moment. 

First is the issue of inadequate funding. I would like to talk about areas where even we, as a Parliament, have cardinal responsibility such that when we do appropriations, we are able to track from the budget of the Ministry of Education how much has been earmarked for the various sporting disciplines that we have in Uganda - not only football. 

Mr Speaker, allow me put this on record: Uganda is one of the few countries in the continent of Africa where activities of national sporting teams, be it football, athletics or boxing, are funded by the respective associations. In many African countries, most of these national teams like Uganda Cranes are supposed to be 100 per cent funded by Government. In situations where Government cannot fund the national teams 100 per cent, through PPPs Government can summon all the corporate organisations and tell them that they need to at least take up one sporting discipline and fund it. Airtel can be given the national football team under a PPP arrangement; MTN is given volleyball; and Nile Breweries is given another sporting discipline in situation where Government cannot provide funding.

However, in countries like Rwanda, Kenya, Nigeria, Burundi, Ethiopia, Guinea Bissau, Equatorial Guinea, Burkina Faso and even South Sudan, the youngest nation in the continent of Africa, Government takes charge 100 per cent for all the national sporting teams. The challenge is ours as a country, and that takes me to the second challenge, honourable members. All these are areas where you and I have an input in this Parliament.

The second challenge is the legal framework. This is the supreme law-making body of Uganda, but are we aware that all sporting activities in Uganda are still handled by an archaic, outdated and obsolete law of 1964 called “National Council of Sports Act”? That is why one of the prayers in this particular motion is calling upon Government to introduce a law to amend the old one within six months. 

We would like to put them on notice that within six months, if they fail to do so, we have had situations where good laws are equally championed by private Members. I, therefore, call upon Members; if within six months the ministry cannot bring a comprehensive law to take into account the millennium challenges and developments in terms of sports, we shall be left with no option but to bring it ourselves because the current law is extremely old.

In the Kenyan National Sports Act, it is an obligation under that law for the Government of Kenya to take charge of all activities; it is a command of the law. Issues of taking full responsibility would include paying the salaries to the national coach across the continent of Africa and without Africa. If you leave that to the association, this association does not receive a lot of money.

I know people who have served in the association; maybe in debating they will get an opportunity to tell you. People may think that that money which FUFA raised from the gate collections was enough; that is the same money that was used for transporting over 18 foreign-based players to Uganda. That is the same money the federation used to pay for the national sports facility called Namboole - it is hired. That is the same money the national football federation used to pay the police for keeping law and order. All the money was spent.

In this country, Government also takes charge of allowances and bonuses to players and staff. We are grappling with the $10,000 that was promised; why don’t we call upon Government? The Federation of Uganda Football Associations needed to do something for these players. Somebody travels all the way from Brazil, UK and South Africa - For those who have done research, try to google the countries that have qualified and those that have not qualified and the bonuses they have given to their national players including the staff. Equipment, camping costs, air travel - these are all costs that are met by Government in certain jurisdictions. 

I think this is a wakeup call to us because we may qualify but then we fail to support the team, honourable members. It is only four months left for this team to be assembled and taken to Gabon. They must be fully facilitated to go to Gabon. If that is not done, we may send a team of people who will act as tourists. We would like to send a team of people who will go and compete. In 1978, our team went up to finals and played against Ghana. (Applause)

The last challenge, Mr Speaker, is the issue of infrastructure. Honourable members, we are aware that we had a plan, which may be long-term. Namboole has a capacity of only 40,000 people, but when we have big games the number of people who are interested in watching them live is more than the capacity of the stadium.  Maybe we need to start thinking about putting up regional stadiums in Lira, Arua, Mbarara, Mbale and Gulu.

Finally, Mr Speaker, let me put this on record: Out of the 23 countries in east, central and southern Africa, it is only Uganda and Zimbabwe that have qualified for the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations. (Applause) You may think I am lying, but big countries like South Africa, Zambia and Nigeria are out of the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations. So it is only Uganda and Zimbabwe, and you can see the pride these young men have brought to our country.

I would like to state that in the entire east, central and southern Africa, some weeks from now our national football team will again be playing a World Cup qualifier. Again, in the entire east, central and southern Africa under the 2018 World Cup qualifier, it is only Uganda, Zambia and South Africa that are still participating at the group stages; you can image. (Applause)

The onus is on us to see what we can do. You have heard about issues of bonuses. We would like to plead as Parliament that Government takes up full responsibility and ensures that these heroes are motivated. World Cup qualifiers are around the corner and we have qualified for Africa Cup of Nations. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to salute you for giving us an opportunity as a Parliament to pay tribute to our national football team. Honourable members, I would like to salute you and appeal to you to support sports. If you want to see where there is no politics - When I met my sister, hon. Nambooze, at Mandela National Stadium we were all talking about Uganda although she is from DP and I am from NRM, but we were all shouting Uganda.

Honourable members, I would like to thank you. With these many words, I am optimistic that if our team is given the support it deserves, they will be able to perform at the continental level. They may even shock the nation and qualify for the World Cup. We need to motivate them. In the World Cup group they have Ghana, Egypt, Senegal and Congo. 

We have played against Congo, Ghana and Egypt before. Even if they are giants, we can surprise them since we have already surprised the entire African continent. We are also a giant in our own right. However, let us support them. Mr Speaker, I beg to move and once again salute you. For God and my country. (Applause) 

4.11
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion for that very passionate presentation. Indeed, we have all been moved by it and it has showed a lot of patriotism. 

Mr Speaker, I stand to second the motion. First of all, I would like to add my voice and thank the sponsors of the Uganda Cranes and all those promoters who participated in the Tulumbe Campaign such as Airtel, the official sponsor; Nile Breweries; and other corporate bodies. The organisers, Federation of Uganda Football Associations and the National Council of Sports under the Ministry of Education and Sports played a big role to see to it that Uganda achieved this.  

To paint a picture for those Members who were not in Namboole, Ugandans dressed up in our national colours - black, yellow, red and white as well; so everybody was there in the spirit of Uganda. I, therefore, would like to applaud all Ugandans who stood and moved from all walks of life to come and say, “Uganda Cranes oyee.”

In a special way, I would also like to thank the First Lady, who is the Minister of Education and Sports. She came clad in the Uganda Cranes colours to support them. I would also like to thank the coach of the team; may God bless him for all that he has done for Uganda because they have both left Ugandans full of smiles. (Applause) Much as a few other people put in some effort, all Ugandans were left proud and we cannot leave this unnoticed. We, therefore, have to thank all of them. 

Mr Speaker, we are aware that Uganda has qualified for the Africa Cup of Nations in Gabon but I am calling upon all stakeholders to begin planning now for the next match or tournament. As has been stated by hon. Hamson Obua, the major challenge faced by the sports docket is inadequate funding. I would like to throw some light on this. 

In the Financial Year 2016/2017, in their total budget there is only Shs 12.2 billion that is provided for to the physical education and sports docket. Shs 5.3 billion is recurrent and Shs 6.8 billion is for development. The Shs 6.8 billion for development is budgeted for the National High Altitude Training Centre in Kapchorwa and the other one billion shillings is budgeted towards the construction of the Akii-Bua Olympics Stadium. As you are aware, the old Akii-Bua Stadium was sold off by the council. However, only Shs 1 billion has been provided for its construction. I am, therefore, appealing to the concerned parties to provide more money towards the construction of the Akii-Bua Olympics Stadium so that we improve on the sports in this nation. 

There is Shs 5.3 billion meant to support the National Council of Sports and other associations, which are too many. They include football, netball, volleyball, athletics, golf, table tennis and many others. However, this money is not sufficient because the same money is also used to pay utilities and staff salaries. 

As a committee, we interacted with the National Council of Sports. According to them, if sports is to be upheld, they will need Shs 50.6 billion in their upcoming budget. This will support all the sports federations; it will organise tournaments, identify talents from the grassroots, establish sporting facilities and camps, train sports officials, to mention but a few. 

My request is that Members support the proposal for the sports budget to be increased. If it is increased in the coming 2017/2018 budget, we shall probably see improvement in sports and this will make Ugandans proud. 

When we were beginning this parliamentary session, the Prime Minister brought to the attention of the Speaker the business that Government intends to introduce to the House. One of them is the Physical Education and Sports Bill. As a committee, we have already seen a copy but it has not been officially brought to the House. It is, therefore, my humble request that the minister fast-tracks the process of introducing this Bill officially to the House so that we can strengthen the legal and institutional framework of governing sports in this country. Otherwise, without a legal framework, we shall be moving the way we are and there will be a big problem. 

As a sportswoman, I have noticed that many schools and universities are representing this country in sports and games without Government’s contribution, and yet when they win, Uganda applauds them. A case in point is at the beginning of this very month when a school called Mbale Progressive School represented Uganda in the East African Games and won in table tennis. They went singlehandedly as a school and when they won the East African Games, nobody applauded them; Government did not recognise them and yet they won medals for Uganda. 

I am appealing, therefore, to Government that as schools, universities and other institutions represent our country outside, let them be supported morally, physically or spiritually and Uganda will shine. 

I would, therefore, like to end by appealing to all Ugandans – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, can I just interrupt you a bit? I see some students moving out. In the Public Gallery, this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Rima and Guluge Primary Schools represented by hon. Jonathan Odur and hon. Joy Ongom, Woman Representative, Lira. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are very welcome.

MS NAKAYENZE: As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I am appealing to all Ugandans, most especially the first stakeholders that as we need to plan in advance for Gabon. I would also like to suggest that Parliament spearheads a fundraising, so that every member of Parliament makes a contribution towards the Uganda Cranes as we are going to Gabon. (Applause)


As a committee, we are willing to stand with the Uganda Cranes, with FUFA and with all the other organisers, to see that the Uganda Cranes go and shine in Gabon because together we can. I would like to thank you. For God and my country.

4.21
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand in secondment of this motion today to congratulate our gallant boys who, on the 4 September 2016, led Uganda into victory and made Uganda one of the best countries in football in Africa.

First of all, I would like to congratulate my line minister, hon. Charles Bakkabulindi, for achieving this feat. Your overstay in that office has led to some fruits at last. (Laughter) 

The weight of this qualification is shown in the number of those who have tried and failed. It has taken more than 2,000 players, more than 25 coaches, more than 10 ministers and more than eight Presidents of the Federation of Uganda Football Association, and of course, more than five Presidents of this nation, to qualify for the Africa Cup of Nations of which, a quarter of the times we have missed, we have been led by one Government under his Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. 

Uganda has tried to compete and this is not going to be the first time to compete in the Africa Cup of Nations. Uganda first competed in 1962, then in 1968 and 1974 but we last qualified in 1978. To our surprise, we were the runners-up in that tournament. It was unfortunate that in the next years, we did not qualify for this tournament yet we had played the finals.

A few challenges were encountered in this process and we congratulate the Uganda Cranes and the Federation of Uganda Football Association, in particular its President, Engineer Moses Magogo. Despite the hardships that they went through, they managed to manoeuvre and qualify for the Africa Cup of Nations.

Whereas we are proud of the heroic acts that happened in Namboole, this is the time that we should look at the challenges that the team faces that may not allow us to qualify again in the next Africa Cup of Nations in 2019. The Uganda we want and need as sportsmen and lovers of sports is the Uganda that is always counted to be qualifying at each and every international tournament, be it the World Cup, the Africa Cup and the Olympics and not only participating but achieving by winning medals and trophies. The manager of the Ugandan team is not only poorly paid but even the little that is promised to him is not forthcoming.

According to the information that I have, the national coach Micho Sredojevic, earns about $ 10,000 in a month and he is the least paid national coach in Africa, if not the whole world. Countries that we are going to play against, like Algeria, pay their national coaches close to $ 70,000 per week and they are paid in time.

This man is owed by Uganda close to seven months payment and FUFA is trying to look around to see if it can pay this gentleman. For your information, Uganda is threatened with disqualification from the Africa Cup of Nations. We can celebrate today but cry tomorrow when FIFA cracks the whip on Uganda because of failure to pay our heroic national coach, Micho Sredojevic. As such, Parliament and Government should think about this.

The allowances that were promised to our team; the heroic boys, is not forthcoming. According to the information that I have, the Government promised FUFA that they would give each player $ 10,000 if they defeat Comoros and qualify for the Africa Cup of Nations. However, to our surprise, the Minister of State for Sports, through his organs, only gave $ 1,000 to each player to go back and play professional football and others to stay home based in their clubs, which is a shame to the Government of Uganda. 

We need to seriously address the challenges of our national team. This is the only activity that brings together all Ugandans, as stated by fellow Members of Parliament who spoke before me. Everyone was joyous, we were in unison and up to now, we still celebrate the same feat in unison. It is the only team that makes me put on a yellow jersey in vain, which shows the degree to which football and the national team have tried to unite most Ugandans.

Many promises have been made to sportsmen who have performed greatly for our country but they are never fulfilled. For example, when Stephen Kiprotich won a gold medal for Uganda, the President promised that each sportsman who goes outside Uganda and wins at least a gold medal will automatically be put on a national payroll.

Some sportsmen have complained over the same issue; that they have taken years without seeing this promise fulfilled. I also pray that the same promise is given to the national team of Uganda; the heroic boys. This is because although they did not bring a medal to Uganda, qualifying alone to the Africa Cup of Nations needs to be considered the same as winning a medal at the Olympics since it has taken so many years of trial. Why then doesn’t Government of Uganda consider these boys, under a national salary scheme, like they have done for other people like soldiers?

I, therefore, support the motion calling upon our Government to fully fund the national activities of the Uganda Cranes and I also pray that facilitation is given to the Federation of Uganda Football Association in time for them to be able to prepare for the Africa Cup of Nations. Otherwise, we will get a national shame on international television when Uganda is hammered 22-0 goals if we do not prepare well.

We need money to the tune of Shs 5 billion to be given to FUFA to properly prepare this team so that our national team can get proper friendly matches, facilitation and to create a better environment for these boys to perform better at the Africa Cup of Nations.

Lastly, I would like to support the idea that has been brought forward by the Chairperson of education and sports committee, through a resolution of Parliament, that we, Members of Parliament, have used sports as a ladder to achieve what we have by showing our constituents that we support sports. We have all done that. 

We also ask you, through a resolution of Parliament, that since this has happened three months after swearing in, each Member should contribute Shs 500,000 to these players and to their coach as a token of appreciation. This would amount to Shs 215 million. The public would applaud Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I propose the question for your debate. The question is that Parliament congratulates the Uganda Cranes for qualifying for the Africa Cup of Nations 2017 and in particular:
 
    1. That Parliament pays glowing tribute to the Uganda Cranes for qualifying for the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations in Gabon;

    2. Government of Uganda continues increasing the annual budget allocation to the sports sub-sector to facilitate the development and sustainability of sports countrywide;

    3. A law be tabled in Parliament within six months to facilitate a regulatory framework for facilitating sports activities in Uganda.

Honourable members, that is the motion for your debate and debate starts now with each Member taking three minutes.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week we spent two hours debating this matter as was brought by hon. Ssewanyana. Unfortunately, no Minister of Sports was here. There were issues raised and I have seen ourselves repeating issues like the one of arrears to the coach, promises of the $10,000 etcetera. 

The ruling then was that when the motion comes - because we had given notice that this motion is coming - before we open up the debate, the minister must present a statement responding to those issues. Thereafter, the outstanding issues would be responded to.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to get the statement from the minister, who is present today in this House, so that we avoid cases of repeating ourselves, if he read the Hansard of the two-hour debate last week?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, have you received an extract of the minutes? Are you prepared to make a statement on the matter as requested?

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank my colleagues. It is unfortunate that, that day I was not around with reasons, which I communicated to your office.

Mr Speaker, it was a very important motion because Members were asking about Uganda’s performance in Rio but today, when I looked at the Order Paper, it was requiring me to give a statement on the closure of Nakivubo.

Nevertheless, at an appropriate time, and if I am given a slot, I will come with a written statement on our performance in Rio and sports generally. I heard that many issues were debated here and some need to be clarified. However, for today, I am only prepared for the Cranes and the closure of Nakivubo.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the absence of this statement from the minister, are you proposing that we wait for the statement?

MR OKUPA: Yes, Mr Speaker, so that we have a comprehensive statement. We have heard recently that David Emong won a medal in the Paralympics. Therefore, he could present a comprehensive statement so that we debate it once, rather than repeating the matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we would wish you to be ready in a short time so that when you come, you open with that statement and then we conclude with the debate. Is that okay?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I had requested, I wanted to contribute on this debate of the Uganda Cranes. The reason why I want to come in -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there is a request that there were some issues that were raised and proposals were made that you should respond to, to catalyse the debate that is going to come from this motion. Are you prepared to come with those issues tomorrow?

MR BAKKABULINDI: No, it should be Tuesday, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then the debate comes after that? Honourable members, I am trying to find a solution to the matter that the Member raised.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, if the Members feel that I should do it this week, I am partially ready and I can do it on Thursday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, can we have a statement from the minister, as guided by the ruling that was made by the presiding officer? Any debate that is coming would be premised on the response of the minister covering the subject, then we can have our debate. Let us deal with this in that way. Debate is deferred to Thursday.

Let me thank the mover and the two seconders of this motion. I think they have done a good job in highlighting the issues, and also building the national spirit and giving us pride we should have as a country. Thank you, honourable members.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DELIVERY OF SEEDS TO FARMERS IN ADJUMANI DISTRICT

4.39
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let me interrupt you a bit. In the Public Gallery this afternoon we have pupils, teachers and board members of various primary schools in Egaju sub-county, Buhweju County, represented by hon. Francis Mwijukye and hon. Olivia. They are here to observe proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a statement by the honourable Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on delivery of seeds to farmers in Adjumani District, which was prompted by the honourable Member of Parliament for Adjumani District.

At the commencement of the financial year 2014/2015, the mandate of NAADS was changed and refocused on the provision of agricultural inputs to farmers, with the procurement and distribution of the agricultural inputs handled centrally at the NAADS Secretariat.

Mr Speaker, it is important to note that, as is the case for all the other district local governments, the agricultural inputs, planting materials; seeds and seedlings, and stocking materials for livestock in particular, provided to Adjumani District Local Government, have usually been based on the priorities submitted to the NAADS Secretariat while also putting into consideration the national priority commodities based on the strategic direction for the agricultural sector, as provided by the Government from time to time.

Accordingly, since financial year 2014/2015 to date, the NAADS Secretariat has been supporting farmers in Adjumani District Local Government with a range of agricultural inputs under the NAADS/Operation Wealth Creation interventions, as summarised in Annex 1.

In the financial year 2015/2016, the NAADS Secretariat provided planting and stocking materials to farmers in Adjumani District for eight commodities namely: maize, cassava, pineapples, citrus and mangoes as well as heifers, artificial insemination kit (one), fish fingerlings and feeds, as shown in Annex 1.

For financial year 2016/2017, the NAADS Secretariat allocated planting materials for farmers in Adjumani District for six commodities namely: maize, beans, cassava, pineapples, citrus and mangoes, as shown at the back page. The distribution of seed for maize and beans has been concluded while the distribution of planting materials for other commodities has commenced and is on-going. 

Mr Speaker, allocation of stocking materials to do with livestock to the beneficiary local governments for this financial year is underway. 

Before I conclude, we have sent all the allocations to the districts through the Chief Administrative Officers and we have copied these distribution lists to Members of Parliament for other districts. I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, you will appreciate that these kinds of statements are not typical ministerial statements or policy statements. This one is a temporary improvement on our rules on Questions for Oral Answer and I think that has arisen because of the gaps we still have from the supply side on Government business. Matters come from constituencies and are directly referred to the ministers to come and make a response. That should have been covered under another procedure of our Rules of Procedure; Questions for Oral Answer. 

However, these kinds of responses do not normally attract a debate. They are specific to some questions and if they are answered satisfactorily, it ends there. If they are not, the Member who raised the matter can raise a supplementary question.

4.44
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed I raised this issue. Facts are reflective on the ground and, therefore, I am satisfied. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON INVESTMENT LICENSES FOR EXPORT OF SAND

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the minister ready with this particular matter? Next item.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. The matter of sand exportation, in part, enjoins a constituency neighbouring to mine and I was very keen in listening to the minister, especially on the rationale and the subsequent measures being undertaken by the minister to take care of the leftovers of this mining, because while sand is being exported, the neighbours are importing mosquitoes and other problems.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, could you guide us on what the minister needs to do to make sure that we guide the communities on how to behave themselves in view of the fact that this practice is on-going? Actually, the road in Lwera is being affected by sand mining; a newly constructed road is sinking in. I would like to listen to the minister as to what he is going to say regarding this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no statement. The person who should be making the statement is not here and I have no explanation. I cannot be answering those questions, which are supposed to be for the minister. Therefore, procedurally, the matter remains pending until the minister responds to it.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, it was the minister who said that he would be available today. Now that she is not around and yet she committed herself, what the Members are asking for is for you to direct the Leader of Government Business to ensure that the minister appears here tomorrow or Thursday, because the matter is very grave. From the way the matter was raised here – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is not rising now. If the minister walks in now she will make that statement. If by closure of the House this minister is not here to make this statement, those directives will be made. (Mr Byarugaba rose_) You are not the minister, honourable member. No, it is not necessary, there is no statement. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CLOSURE OF NAKIVUBO STADIUM

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, before I proceed with the statement, I would like to thank my colleague, the Shadow Minister of Education and Sports who is not around, who brought the motion that resulted into this statement. 

The spirit behind the motion was that we are all concerned about the fate of Nakivubo; we are all concerned about sports development; we are all team lovers and at the end of the day, we all contribute towards the positive achievement hence there will be no winner, no loser but giving advice to each other.

Mr Speaker, this is a statement on the closure of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium. On 19 July 2016, the Registered Body of Trustees of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium was served with a letter of distress by M/S Kamugasha Agencies Limited, the official agents for the Uganda Revenue Authority. The order was signed by the Commissioner General of the Uganda Revenue Authority seeking to recover outstanding Value Added Tax (VAT), Income Tax arrears and accrued interest respectively totalling, Shs 484,236,638. 

The agents sought to enforce the warrant of distress on Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium by locking up the stadium facilities pending the removal of items for sale unless the stadium paid the above mentioned tax arrears plus the agent’s fees and costs of the said distress.

Background to the Closure

Mr Speaker, this is the second occasion in which the Uganda Revenue Authority has been constrained to take action and be strained for arrears of taxes owned by the registered Board of Trustees of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium. 

On 14 March 2013, the facility had been closed over accumulated Value Added Tax and PAYE arrears and accrued interest for the period between 2004 to February 2009. These are arrears to the tune of Shs 865,936,279. The principle amount due was Shs 356,728,390 and the accrued interest was Shs 509,207,889.

Concerted efforts towards the reopening of the stadium then led to the signing of a binding Memorandum of Understanding between the trustees and the Uganda Revenue Authority in which the Board of Trustees made a down payment of respectively Shs 50 million towards the tax arrears and Shs 20 million towards the then bailiff’s fees that had been engaged by the Uganda Revenue Authority to recover the said arrears.

The Memorandum of Understanding provided for a three year repayment plan, by which time, tax arrears together with the accumulated interest thereon would total to the sum of Shs 865,936,279.

Mr Speaker, over the agreed three year period, the trustees have been able to pay to Uganda Revenue Authority, a total of Shs 430,405,488 leaving a balance of Shs 484,236,638, of which Shs 223,567,608 is the actual amount of the tax arrears and Shs 260,669,030 as balance on the accrued interest over the said three year period.

The Board of Trustees then was able to raise revenue towards clearing of the said tax arrears from the developing partners following the signing of a series of Public-Private Partnership arrangements with potential developers from whom the trustees were able to generate resources as commitment fees.

The Board of Trustees and other major resources of income at that material time when the Memorandum of Understanding was reached with the Uganda Revenue Authority as was above mentioned, had been revenue generated from the Park Yard Market, which unfortunately was gutted several times by fire thus denying a definite revenue source that had been earmarked for servicing of the said tax obligations.

The stadium management had committed to URA Shs 21,500,000 per month, which was being collected from Park Yard Market before it was gutted by fire but this is no longer forthcoming, which resulted into management failure to remit the funds to URA.

The Current Closure

Mr Speaker, on 19 July 2016, the Uganda Revenue Authority again moved to close the registered trustees of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium over the said tax arrears in the amount of Shs 484,236,638 and demanded for full payment of the same in addition to Shs 48 million owing as bailiff’s fees without which, the stadium facility would remain closed under lock and key.

The new Board of Trustees engaged the Debt Management Unit of the Uganda Revenue Authority to resolve the impasse with the best aim of having the stadium facilities reopened to the public. Tentatively, an understanding has been reached along the terms for having the said stadium facility reopened as follows:

    1. The Board of Trustees make a down payment of Shs 100 million towards clearing the overall tax arrears as above mentioned, which is still due and owing. So far, Shs 75 million out of the Shs 100 million has already been paid to URA.

    2. The Board of Trustees has negotiated with the bailiffs for the fees of levying for the distress or close of the stadium facility and so far, the sum of Shs 25 million has been agreed upon and cleared. The stadium facilities have been fully opened to sports and business activities as we talk now. 

    3. The Uganda Revenue Authority to provisionally take over the collections of rentals from the stadium facilities for a period of not more than three months to inter alia establish the actual current resource base for the Board of Trustees, during which time, the stadium facilities shall be open for business supervised by the Authority.

    4. The Board of Trustees and the Uganda Revenue Authority to jointly agree on the payment methodology for the outstanding tax arrears upon a down payment of Shs 100 million referred to the above whereby Shs 75 million has already been cleared.

    5. On the strength of the above stated arrangement, the stadium facility is now open to the public for commercial and sports activities but still under the management of URA and once the agreed fees (Shs 25 million now remaining) is cleared, URA will hand over the stadium to the management of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium Board of Trustees.

As we talk, various teams like Vipers have played their three league games at Nakivubo. The Eid Day celebrations also took place in Nakivubo; the Eid Day cup tournament: Villa Vs Lweza, also took place in Nakivubo.

The ministry has also instructed the Office of the IGG to carry out an investigation into this matter.

The challenges ahead

Mr Speaker, as already indicated, the revenue base for the registered Board of Trustees of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium is currently at the minimum for the basic reason that following the signing of the respective Public-Private Partnership agreement with the respective developers, the management of the stadium facilities gave notices to the then tenants to respectively vacate the property in anticipation of the commencement of the construction works. It is now going to be a challenge to clear the above tax arrears.

Secondly, the respective Public-Private Partnership agreements are a strategic decision of the Board of Trustees to mobilise resources and generate extra revenue. This positive process has, however, not taken off for two main reasons:

    1. Delays by the Kampala Capital City Authority to approve the respective redevelopment plans (architectural drawings) that the Board of Trustees and the development partners had jointly submitted for consideration and approval. It has been impossible, therefore, for the Board of Trustees to engage these development partners directly with a view of resolving the matter of the tax arrears with Uganda Revenue Authority.

    2. There was a parliamentary select committee, constituted in the Ninth Parliament, to investigate the arrangement between the trustees and the developers, which not only took more than four months of investigation and thus, valuable time was lost to seal the said arrangement, but that has also created uncertainty and threatened to erode investor confidence in the partnership.

There is also a simmering conflict between and amongst the development partners to the extent that one of the development partners has already taken the Board of Trustees to Court and has obtained an interim order, temporarily restraining the trustees from developing and creating parallel interest and additional interest in the stadium facility. This will, of course, take some time but I am meant to understand that before the end of this month, the court will have ruled.

Way forward

    1. Honourable members, the registered board of trustees of the Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium is appealing for a bail out from Government of Uganda to the extent that the Uganda Revenue Authority writes off or waives the current tax arrears, which aggregate comprises more than 50 per cent in interest portfolio.

    2. In the alternative and without prejudice to the above where the bailout appealed for is not possible, the Uganda Revenue Authority could consider waiving off the interest so that the trustees commit to payment of the decremental sum of the tax arrears. The Government of the Republic of Uganda should consider supporting the trustees by way of establishing a modest subversion, given the current meagre resources generated. 

Lastly, cause the relevant officials of the Kampala Capital City Authority to expeditiously consider and resolve the issue of approval of the architectural drawings for the redevelopment works necessary in the stadium facility to enable commencement of the works thereon as time is of essence here.

The trustees, on their part, undertake to quickly resolve any misunderstandings amongst and between the development partners with whom they have committed and signed an agreement. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to thank you and I request for your support. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this particular statement also falls within the category of the one I said earlier but we will have to see if we can have a small discussion on this although it falls in the category of a matter that should have come under questions for oral answer. However, it is here, so let us see how we can reflect a bit on it.

5.02
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the minister for his statement. However, I feel a bit challenged. The statement is as if it is from – actually, this would be hon. Ssewanyana’s statement; the shadow Minister of Sports, requesting certain things of Government. Just look at the way forward that the minister is giving; he wants Government to write off or waive tax arrears.

I thought the minister would be giving us the stand of Government because the Public Finance Management Act, section 35, gives the honourable minister a way out. You can either come to Parliament, if it is beyond Shs 10 million or the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can provide that waiver. 

Therefore, you are now telling Parliament that Government should do this. You sit every Wednesday with your colleagues; the Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Minister in charge of KCCA. I do not know what to take from here. He says “Cause KCCA to expeditiously approve” - What should Parliament say? Should we say no? Do you expect Parliament to say no?

Mr Speaker, the honourable minister is not being fair to Parliament. This is a statement of the minister on a matter raised by a Member of Parliament. What is the response of the minister? What is the way forward provided by the Government? Honourable minister, you still owe us that statement.

Look at the reaction on the intervention of Parliament when we set up the parliamentary select committee. Mr Speaker, I did not know that the intervention of Parliament erodes investor confidence and creates uncertainty. I thought that the minister would appreciate the intervention of Parliament and the fact that we were seen to come out to see that this was a point of national interest. Riding on the recommendations of that committee, we are now being bashed that when Parliament came in to intervene, things got worse.

Do you now want us to intervene and make things worse? I am not yet clear in terms of a Government position. Look at (c) where they want a modest subvention. Are you moving under the Public Finance Management Act to propose something to Parliament? 

Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, why didn’t you advise your colleague? Where are you leading us, as Parliament? What do you want us to decide on? I would not take these as resolutions of Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.06
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. As a nation, we are having a big problem, most especially with our ministers. Our ministers do not take work seriously. Remember the time when I raised the issue of hunger in Teso. Somebody took a long time to act. Hon. Ssewanyana –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am sorry I did not want to disrupt my friend but when he makes sweeping statements without substantiating, it leaves me uncomfortable because we have ministers who are very serious and those who are still learning. (Laughter) Yes, there are those who are new and are still catching up like the honourable members of Parliament who sit at the back bench.

Therefore, when he stands up and makes a statement saying that ministers are not serious, without substantiating, I get uncomfortable. Is he, therefore, in order to make that statement without substantiating?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to substantiate? What did you mean when you said that?

MR AOGON: I meant that most ministers do not act when we tell them what to do. One is the Minister of Health here. We have been talking about issues of Hepatitis B. The finance minister came openly to say that there is incapacity to handle work. Isn’t that part of a problem? (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Disaster Preparedness came here and told us that there is no money, according to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Isn’t that cross cutting trouble for the whole nation? I do not want to waste my time over something, which is very clear. 

Mr Speaker, the matter that I would like to put clearly here is that Nakivubo is a national interest facility. I remember that hon. Ssewanyana was the one who raised this matter here and it was stated that we should have attended to Nakivubo, in order to help us prepare for the qualification match. However, when this report comes to Parliament - if we are really serious - if you say that I cannot substantiate what I am talking about - We all have to thank God that we have been lucky to qualify without Nakivubo being a part of it.

Mr Speaker, somebody is talking about a bail out. I wonder what kind of bail out you are talking about. To bail you out or to bail out the stadium because there is a big problem? People are mismanaging national facilities then they run around and say, Parliament, please help us with a bail out. That is not going to be the order of the day –(Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, my colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that, the honourable minister is telling us that these people failed to pay VAT and PAYE. Pay As You Earn is money deducted at source and is supposed to be remitted to Uganda Revenue Authority. 

In a situation where you deduct such monies, - where did you put that money? Now you are requesting Parliament and Government to bail you out. Can we find this out? Thank you.

MR AOGON: Thank you for the information. Mr Speaker, it would be good for the minister to come up with a proper statement, not a written paper, to show us that he is serious about Nakivubo so that we can progress.

His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda said that, “This is kisanja hakuna mchezo.” We will not tolerate any nonsense this time. Let us do something for Uganda. People should not continue carrying piglets and putting them at the gate of Parliament to blame Parliament, and we are seated here not doing anything. It is time for us to act. This does not concern political parties but Uganda as a nation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.11
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Looking at the statement of the minister, how does VAT and income tax arise? Income tax is charged as a percentage of the profits. This means that Nakivubo Stadium made profits and, therefore, they attracted income tax.

VAT arises because of one’s output tax; what you sold, is more than the input tax on the purchases. Therefore, this arose because the sales were more than the purchases. Where the output tax is greater than the input tax, one is supposed to remit that on a monthly basis to Uganda Revenue Authority.

Therefore, where did Nakivubo management put this money? It means that they mismanaged this money. We are not going to accept your prayers for a bailout because you are supposed to have been remitting this money on a monthly basis. They were making profits and that is where the income tax accrued from.

We could possibly look at the issue of the total interest charged on the tax arrears, but on VAT, Pay As You Earn and Income Tax, the management there must pay. Looking at the accounts of Nakivubo in COSASE, there is a lot of mismanagement and misappropriation of funds. A lot of fraud is taking place and that is why we have reached this level.

I would like you to interest yourself in the Auditor-General’s report and you will see that the same applies to Namboole Stadium. It is being mismanaged; the money is being stolen and you come here to ask us to whitewash the dirt for a bailout? I think this cannot be tolerated and we will not allow it –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that, this document is self-contradictory. The person who is asking for a bailout is saying, in the last paragraph, that he wants plans to be approved so that he re-develops the stadium.

The last paragraph says that you would like KCCA to move swiftly so that you can redevelop the stadium. If you do not have money, what will you use to develop the stadium, when you are saying you need a bailout? That is the information I wanted to give.

MR OKUPA: Finally, I thought that hon. Betty Kamya, the Minister for Kampala, was still around. The honourable minister - my sister, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, meets with hon. Kamya on Wednesdays. If there are delays in the approval of their structural drawings, does she need to come here? 

Aren’t you on talking terms with your colleague, the minister? You need to call her because she is your colleague and tell her that, “KCCA is not helping us to move forward, what is the problem?” instead of bringing that here. I hear someone is saying steady progress. Please, do not waste our time. These are some of the things that you can sort out at the Cabinet level or even a call away. 

You need to put your House in order. We have had issues of developers like Riham Limited, and these are the people who have messed us up. You sold that park. Where is the rent that you collect from those people? This is because - even after that park got burnt, we are still seeing tenants there. Where do they take the money that they are paying? Honourable minister, sort your house. Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for the statement and colleagues who have submitted. In line with contributions from the Members of Parliament, I would like to suggest that we withdraw this statement. (Laughter) Since Cabinet will meet tomorrow, I direct my minister to present this statement to Cabinet and we formulate a position – (Interjections)- I need your protection from hon. Mbwatekamwa who is barking at me. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mbwatekamwa, please.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I was scared when he shouted, “order” but since his name is – I request that we reorganise our statement. I know that my colleague may have answers to some of the questions that we have raised, but procedurally, I think we need more information to add, and we should not waste the time of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, are you seeking leave of the House to withdraw this statement, so that we proceed? This is because in the debate we are having, we are querying the statement, but I think that the spirit of what the minister has presented was based on the question that was asked: why was it closed? What is being done to reopen it? There was a timeframe to it and time has elapsed. No, the issues have changed. Therefore, honourable minister, would you like to come back to this as proposed by the Government Chief Whip so that we move properly?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will not contradict my Chief Whip, but I would like this to be clearly understood. The essence of the question was; can you tell us why it was closed? I have told you why it was closed and how we are handling it.

The rest of the management issues are what we will continue working on with Uganda Revenue Authority and KCCA. That being the case, I have told you why it was closed and it is now opened. Parliament can tell us when to finish the other issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we still have three other statements. Since there is a request, can we accede to that and let it be for now until we get a proper statement? Can we have it on Thursday, honourable member? Okay, thank you.

MR MBWATEKAMA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am seated next to the honourable minister and he is saying that on Thursday, he will not bring any statement because it is finished. Is it procedurally right that the minister will not bring –(Interjections)– yes, he is here, let him deny. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been attentively following the discussion in this House, and I have not heard the minister say that. 

Honourable member, what is stated on the record is what we deal with, not the things you have heard from the corridor. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know hon. Charles Bakabulindi has been here for many years. When he came to Parliament, he was advocating for Nakivubo Stadium’s bail out. However, VAT is charged on a supply, which means Nakivubo Stadium made a supply, collected money and never remitted it to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). That is the first crime. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, you are aware that hon. Charles Bakabulindi was even in the Constituent Assembly (CA) as well as the National Resistance Council (NRC) and so he has been around for long -(Interruption) 

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, I have got respect for my colleague. It is true that I am an experienced person in this House. I became a minister in 2005 and the issues you are talking about are from 2004, when I was not a minister. 

In your wisdom, Mr Speaker, we agreed on what should be done and we said that we would be coming back to deal with this on Thursday. Is the honourable member now in order to start teaching us how the VAT and interest rates are calculated at this particular time? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is more of a procedural point than evaluation of order. But, honourable member, I thought we had agreed that we would deal with this issue on Thursday. If we agreed and then we are reopening debate on the issue, others will also feel unfairly treated if they do not speak now. Can we leave it for now and deal with it on Thursday? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, that is okay - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The same point you are making was made by the honourable member for Kasilo. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, it is just something to help hon. Charles Bakabulindi compile his report. Mr Speaker, URA has no authority to write off tax and that is the reason I wanted to help hon. Charles Bakabulindi, who has been around - (Interruption) [MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: “Order”] You cannot raise order on a procedural issue.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Is hon. Nandala- Mafabi, a senior legislator, in order to continue defying your ruling? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let us just move this way. That matter has been deferred to Thursday and we will conclude it then. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON INVESTMENT LICENSES FOR EXPORT OF SAND

5.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The House requested that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development makes a statement on this issue.

However, we discovered that the Committee on Natural Resources is considering the same matter. We would like to request here that we allow the Committee on Natural Resources to consider this issue so that we debate this matter once and for all. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does that mean that you have no statement? 

MR BAHATI: I have no statement now. 

5.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Alex Byarugaba): Mr Speaker, I would like to concur with my senior colleague. It is true this House received a petition to that effect, regarding the sand mining in Lwera and Lake Victoria and we received your instructions as well. 

On Thursday, the committee will be going out to those places to compile a report for decisions on the recommendations we will have made. I would, therefore, like to concur with him. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. But I think you should go on Friday not Thursday because you will deny the House quorum, if you go on Thursday. 

MR BYARUGABA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is on the Order Paper. It came earlier and it was referred to the committee. There was an issue with the Ministry of Environment or the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, there was that debate. 

However, the matter was referred to the committee. Let us have this matter next week. I am sure the committee will be ready to report and then we shall go to the details of the discussion. 

There are two other matters but let me just make this announcement. Honourable Members, you are aware that Parliament has procured iPads for all Members of Parliament. (Applause) This is to inform you that your iPads are available and ready for collection effective today, at the ICT offices in Room E301. You are required to go there in person, because there is some configuration that has to be done before you receive it. So, please, go there. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OPERATION OF THE UGANDA MEDICAL BOARD

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do we have copies of the statement?  

5.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The copies are available. This is a statement on the operations of the Uganda Medical Board, as requested by the Members. 

I would like to inform you that the appointment of members of the Uganda Medical Board is subject to circular standing instruction No.8 of 1993. The Minister of Health appoints the members of the medical board, who serve for a period of three years.

The functions of the Medical Board are;

    1. To handle all patients being referred for treatment outside Uganda; 
    2. To consider civil servants for retirement on medical grounds; 
    3. To accredit centres of excellence within Uganda to which patients can be referred; 
    4. To advise the Director General of Health Services on medico-legal aspects as they may arise and; 
    5. To handle any other duties assigned to the board by the Minister of Health or the Director General, Health Services.

We currently have 12 members of the board, who are all senior specialists in different medical disciplines and it comprises of;
 
    1. Dr Fualal Jane Odubu – Senior Consultant Surgeon/ Chairperson
    2. Dr Tito Beyaza – Senior Consultant Orthopaedic/Vice Chairperson
    3. Prof. Josephat Byamugisha – Prof. Obstetrician/ Gynaecologist 
    4. Dr Fred Nakwagala – Senior Consultant Physician
    5. Dr Rosemary Byanyima – Senior Consultant Radiologist
    6. Dr Jolly Nankunda – Senior Consultant Paediatrician
    7. Dr Francis Lakor – Consultant Dentist
    8. Dr Noeline Nakasujja – Consultant Psychiatry 
    9. Dr Moses Kasadhakawo – Consultant Ophthalmologist
    10. Dr Victoria Walusansa – Consultant Oncologist
    11. Dr Peter Lwabi – Consultant Cardiologist
    12. Dr Jackson Amone – Consultant Public Health/ Secretary

This board is new and they have just been appointed, Mr Speaker. 

Usually, the referring specialists are required to present documents in person to the Medical Board, which takes place on the second Thursday of each month at Mulago National Referral Hospital. The board discusses each case looking specifically at the investigations that have been done, the availability of the treatment locally in Uganda, the centre to which the patient is supposed to be referred and of course, with preference to easily accessible and affordable centres in Kenya, India and South Africa. The board also looks at the cost of treatment and prognosis or outcome of the treatment of the patient.

All this is done to ensure that the deserving patients are the ones referred abroad for treatment to avoid wastage of Government resources, especially for public servants. It should be noted that it is a specialist who is responsible for referring a patient for treatment abroad and not the employer. The specialist should exhaust all the locally available health services in-country before referring a patient for treatment outside the country.

We have self-referrals abroad and in case the patient chooses to go for treatment abroad, as self-referral, then they should meet the costs of the treatment. The board is mandated to refer all patients who require treatment abroad, irrespective of whether the Government is paying for it or not.

This is because the board is best placed to know which health facilities abroad offer the best desired services, however - I am on page 4 - self-referrals abroad –(Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, you have jumped some pages. From page 2, after the list of the members of the board, you did not read 1.2. You may need to check the arrangement of your papers; you went straight to self-referrals. That is why we all got mixed up.

MS OPENDI: My apologies, Mr Speaker.– 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it supposed to be read verbatim anyway?

MS OPENDI: I should not be reading word for word. Anyway, for the benefit of Members – I think I can proceed because 1.2 is really talking about the process of referring a patient, where you are required to go before a specialist, who will examine and carry out the necessary investigations. This is in order to make the diagnosis and then consultations are made with other specialists in relevant disciplines, to ensure that the treatment or the medical procedure of the patient is not available within the country.

Once this is confirmed, then the patient is presented to the Uganda Medical Board for referral for treatment abroad, with evidence of the following documents: a fully completed form for referral of the patient abroad; a summary of the medical report of the patient to be referred abroad; evidence that a professional team has discussed the patient and agreed that he/she deserves to be referred abroad and of course, a letter from the hospital, to which the patient is supposed to be referred accepting that they are willing to receive the patient and work on him/her.

Self-referrals abroad

In case the patient chooses to go for referrals abroad as a self-referral, then he/she should meet the costs of treatment and the board is mandated to refer all patients, who require treatment abroad irrespective of whether the Government is going to pay for them or not. The reason for this is that the board is best placed to know which health facilities abroad offer the best desired services. However, we have noted that some patients and their relatives choose to go for treatment abroad without the approval of the board. This has caused a challenge in the event of the patient dying from abroad. It is quite expensive to repatriate the body back home and of course, there are always calls on the Government to come in and assist. 

So, for the case of a Member of Parliament for Mukono Municipality, hon. Betty Nambooze, she presented Mukono Church of Uganda Hospital and later to Kampala International Medical Centre, who then referred her to a hospital in South Africa.

The board received the letter from the Clerk to Parliament, requesting for clearance but that was after the patient, hon. Betty Nambooze, had left the country. The board noted that the patient was not properly investigated. Besides, there was no input from any medical consultant to make a diagnosis.

The board, therefore, recommended that the patient should be evaluated by a consultant physician at Mulago National Referral Hospital on her return, before a decision can be made. The board is still waiting for the feedback from the Clerk from this matter to date.

Challenges with referrals abroad

We have noted there is inadequate consultation and investigation of patients before they are referred abroad. We have also noted that specialists in private health facilities, sometimes do not follow the criteria for referral abroad and just refer patients for reasons that we sometimes may not be able to understand.

The number of cases presented to the medical board cannot be justified for referrals for treatment abroad, especially where Government is supposed to be meeting the costs of the treatment and sometimes, we turn them off.

Many of the self-referrals of patients – there are many self- referrals of patients abroad. We have no problem with this as long as you are going to meet the costs of the treatments yourself and in case of eventualities - as I mentioned earlier, of death, we hope that the family and others can be able to repatriate the body back home. There is immense pressure from the public on these referrals and also a lot of political influence on the board for referrals without going through the necessary processes. 

As I conclude, referrals abroad cost Government approximately $400,000 annually to cover treatment, per diem and air ticket and most of these referrals are due to Cancer, Heart, Kidney neurological and orthopaedic conditions. 

Government is committed to reversing this trend and we would like to thank Parliament for passing the Uganda Heart Institute Bill that is supposed to make this institute autonomous. We hope that once it is up and running, they will be able to attract the senior specialists by giving them the remunerations commensurate with their skills.

We also would like to thank Parliament for passing the Uganda Cancer Institute Bill. We are waiting for His Excellency, the President to assent to this Bill. Once it is assented to, the Uganda Cancer Institute will also be an autonomous institution and it will be able to attract the necessary staffing that it desires and also have in place the necessary equipment.

I know questions will arise about the bunker but I would like to inform Members that currently the construction of this bunker is on-going and we hope that if all goes well, by June next year, we should be able to have it up and fully equipped with modern equipment.

In addition, the East African Development Bank is sponsoring the East African Oncology Institute, which is also supposed to be based at the Uganda Cancer Institute, to enable it provide the necessary services. It will include supply of advanced equipment and training of more human resources that are needed in this facility.

The Kidney Unit at Mulago is also undergoing re-modelling to meet the demand of the services for which the patients are being referred abroad for treatment. The human resources have already been trained in India and ready to handle most of these cases once the re-modelling is concluded.

Allow me also to indicate that we need to change the mind-set of our people and leaders who imagine that Government facilities cannot handle certain situations and prefer to go abroad for treatment, even for diseases that can be handled within the country. Uganda, by the way, has the best doctors but the challenge has always been their remuneration and once this can be sorted, then we shall be able to reduce on the referrals abroad. 

With those few remarks, Mr Speaker, I beg to request Members to understand that the Medical Board is there to refer patients, whether private or public, before travelling to wherever they want to go for treatment. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this statement also falls within the same category but let us have some intervention.

5.40
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing this statement. This matter arose when I made a personal statement here, after I returned from South Africa for treatment.

Mr Speaker, I did not raise this matter for my personal benefit. I wanted to know the procedure any Ugandan can go through while seeking to be treated abroad. 

On 8 January 2010, the New Vision carried a sad story of the death of a one Dr Francis who died at the age of 29. As a medical doctor in Mulago, he had thought that after failing to get treatment there, he was entitled to treatment abroad. 

He asked, through his ministry, and he was told that the budget had been exhausted. His relatives and some charity organisations raised money for him to travel, but the Medical Board denied him permission to travel and he eventually passed on.

It was not because of money but just a total denial of permission to travel. The Medical Board - when I read through their documents, one of their requirements is that you should prove as a patient that when you travel for treatment you will get well.

They cannot approve a treatment for somebody who appears to them that he or she is about to die. We recently faced that same problem when we had a young girl who was suffering with cancer. People raised money and the girl was denied permission to travel, because the doctors said that the chances that she would recover were very minimal.

However, that girl was taken out of the country and up to now, she is still in India and she is recovering. Mr Speaker, I have talked to my honourable colleague; the former MP for Makindye, hon. Kyanjo. This is what he told me; For over a year, he pleaded with the Medical Board to allow him to travel for treatment but the permission was not forthcoming. Eventually, he was allowed to travel, but it was late. We all know that hon. Kyanjo is now partially disabled. 

When they eventually allowed him to travel - and each time he would travel, the Medical Board would assign two doctors to travel with him, on Government pay, to escort him to hospital so that they observe as he was being treated. He told me that they would apply to go out for a month and they would stay there for just five days and leave him there after taking the money. This is the pain people go through when they are sick.

I was sick and went to Mulago. The machine that was supposed to be used for my tests, I was told, had broken down three years ago and the Medical Board was telling me that I had not exhausted all the local options. What more local options do exist in Uganda when you cannot be treated in Mulago?

Did you want me to go to Nakapiripirit, to Mama Fina, to witch doctors everywhere or Pastor Kakande? What are the local options that a person must exhaust before you travel for treatment?

Mr Speaker, when a Member of Parliament dies, I have been told that at death, I would be entitled to Shs 68 million for my burial. However, my Government could not even give me permission, even when I had not asked for money, but just permission for me to go and get a medical visa. It required the intervention of the Speaker at a personal level, she asked the South African Embassy to grant me a medical visa to travel when I had been denied that opportunity by the Medical Board.

Mr Speaker, this is very unfair. We have had people who have got sick in the night and by morning, they have been flown out of the country. That is fine. If we cannot treat any Ugandan, it is fine to take them out of the country.

Mr Speaker, this thing should not end with us; it should not be a preserve of people working in big offices in Government or MPs. We have heard people making appeals over radios with children who have diseases that we cannot attend to here in Uganda. 

Where are these peasants supposed to go? You hear that now we have charity runs, Cancer runs, washing cars, doing this and that. It is as if in Uganda when you are sick, you must mobilise for treatment.

We have Prof. Kiyimba in Makerere for whom they are fundraising. A professor. Nobody is coming up to assist. It is very sad that people die and the standard condolence offered by the President is Shs 10 million and yet, people are pleading for treatment.

If your country cannot treat you, at least let it assist you to be treated elsewhere, especially when that person can raise the money. 

Mr Speaker, I want to question the wisdom behind sending somebody with people from the ministry to escort him for a medical trip, and waste funds that we would have invested here in our medical system. I do not think that somebody fetches any pride in being treated abroad. It is not a good story anyway. It is not a privilege. People would like to be treated at home among friends and relatives. It is even out of pain that we sometimes seek to move out of Uganda to go for treatment. I find that what was done to me was not only unfair to me, but to other Ugandans as well.

As I conclude, I have looked at this list of the people that were appointed. Repeatedly, hon. Ssebagala, as the Imam of this Parliament has always raised this matter; why is it that whenever we are appointing boards, committees, we forget the Muslim community? In sickness, at times a person of your culture, gender and religion, better understands some things.

However, you see Jane Kityo, Josephat, Fred, Rosemary, Jolly, Francis, Noelina, Moses, Victoria, Peter, Jackson. That is not Uganda. Mr Speaker, let this statement by the minister be an eye opener that as a country, we need to invest in our medical system back home as a priority.

Last week, I was touring the health centres in Mukono and I discovered that all Government health centres no longer have medical documents to record sickness. Women who go for antenatal care in Mukono can no longer get that antenatal card. It is out of stock. There are no forms for patients, for example, for outpatients and those admitted. They no longer exist in hospitals. 

It is so sad that you travel to South Africa with an exercise book and it is where your medical officer has recorded the notes about your health.

Lastly, we should lead by example. When shall we ever see His Excellency, the President or one of his relatives in Mulago? At least Amin used to go there. When his Excellency was asked one time why he could not allow his daughter to deliver in our hospitals here, he said, he cannot trust Ugandan doctors. Even our doctors have been cited as people who are capable of assassinating their patients by the President –(Interruption) you would like to give me information?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Just small information that the late Amos Kaguta, the father of Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, was in one of the Ugandan hospitals and I visited him.

MS NAMBOOZE: I asked when we will ever see his Excellency or one of his relatives in Mulago and the minister said, “In one of the Ugandan hospitals?” I will leave that matter because our grandfather, the late Kaguta is dead. It will be very unfair to discuss him here –(Interjections)– excuse me, allow me to wind up. I am a sick woman.

Mr Speaker, when I was returning, I had medicine – the pain of seeking treatment out of your country; I was in South Africa at the same time with hon. Okupa. When I was returning, I had to take some medication while on the plane and I had some medicines in my handbag. However, the medicine was confiscated by the security officials in Johannesburg Airport. I tried to explain that those were my medicines and I even gave them the medical forms but no one listened to me. Even with the intervention of hon. Okupa, I lost most of the medications I was carrying in the handbag. This is the pain we go through.

All in all, I would like to say that this is not a partisan matter. We should strive to invest in our medical systems here. That is the most viable and appropriate way of doing things. In the event that we cannot treat someone here, let the permission and facilitation be available for all. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.53
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri East County, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Dr Sarah Opendi Achieng, the Minister of Health, for this statement. I would like to request her to take these guidelines even to my village in Busamaga so that anybody who falls sick and wants attention of Medical Board should know the procedure.

Mr Speaker, even in this Parliament – you know in Animal Farm some animals are more equal than others. I will not mince my words. The Member of Parliament for Bubulo East was sick and still is; they took him somewhere and cut off his leg. Recently, they went looking for permission to take the man to India but they refused.  Maj. (Rtd) Gen. Moses Ali just within one day was in India. Can you imagine; some animals are more equal than others!

Mr Speaker, I went to Busoga College Mwiri - you know that famous school. In our year, there were about eight people who went to study Bachelor of Medicine and all of them are in South African Hospitals and they are chiefs. When they take people there to be treated; in South Africa, you find Dr Ouma, Magero among others. They are the ones who are treating patients, and yet, they are from here. I know eight who were my classmates in March 1985 –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. You have mentioned Dr Ouma. He is the one who operated on hon. Oduman, former Member of Parliament for Bukedea. He is based in the University of Witwatersrand, in South Africa. It is a medical centre. This year, on 1st August 2016, a staff of Parliament who had two operations in Mulago - there was a challenge in getting the medical report for two years - was operated again by Dr Ouma. They found out that it was mishandled in Mulago. Dr Opolot from Milpark Hospital is a Ugandan from Teso. He was Nelson Mandela’s physician. He died in his hands. That is the quality of Ugandans we have in South Africa.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. I was giving examples and thank you for more additions. In short, I do not need to go to court to prove my qualifications. I studied with intelligent people. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I would want the minister to bring us a list. We want a list for those who have been taken out to be treated and the recommendations. The reason we are asking for this list - you will find consistently specific names appearing, yet others are not there. You read the newspapers. You will see someone advertising “I am looking for money to go to India” yet we have those who go without even advertising. You cannot help the one who is advertising; he has got a recommendation; he needs money to go for heart treatment among others.

Mr Speaker, I would like Parliament to ask the minister to give us the list of those who have been treated abroad on our public money for the last five years and then, we determine if Uganda belongs to all of us. (Applause) 

Two, health insurance is overdue. We need health insurance for everybody. We are complaining about coffins and whatever, we should have death insurance and I think everybody will accept that. However, health insurance is very important. I will give you an example. One time, one of my sons travelled. He got a dental problem and they wanted £7,000. Luckily enough, he was on health insurance. Otherwise, I would have sold Bugisu to pay the bills. That shows that if we want Government to cut on costs, we need to have health insurance in place.

Last Friday, I buried a gentleman I grew up with in my village.  He was knocked by a motorcycle and his knee ball was shattered. When they took him to Mbale Hospital, they wanted Shs 1.5 million to treat him. These people looked for money and unfortunately, by the time we raised the money, the doctor who was supposed to operate on him was not available and others were in theatre. So, by the time they eventually did it, it was too late and the young man died.

If a Government facility can ask a villager for Shs 1.5 million, is this really the Uganda we like? Is this steady progress we talk about? We need to understand what the problem is. The minister comes here and says, “We have a problem, these people are poorly paid.” Why don’t you bring here the proposed salary structures so that we approve? We would rather not do roads but pay doctors to treat us. We can do the roads using our hands but you cannot dig a road when you are not healthy. You need to be healthy to dig the road.

Mr Speaker, the minister should come here with how much she wants us to pay the doctors so that Dr Ouma, Dr Opolot, Dr Magero and many others can come back. Why can’t you bring those and we pay them? Now Case Clinic is the one - imagine a private clinic has more facilities than Mulago. How can an individual beat Government? This country! (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, when I joined Bugisu Co-operative Union, I went there to understand why the board was consisting of men only. I needed to change the law to have women there too. Little did I know that the delegates were only men and they are the ones who always vote? That is why I would like to tell my sister, hon. Nambooze, that you cannot force it if there are no Medical Doctors who are Muslims. If they are there, they may be in other fields.

With professionalism, I have a problem. We can have equal opportunities, which does not need anything. However, there are professional boards where we must take professional persons. It is like saying we would like lawyers in Parliament to be on the Committee on Rules and Privileges but when you check and the lawyers are all men; will you then force hon. Ruth Nankabirwa to become a lawyer when she is a Fine Artist? (Laughter) These are things we must be careful with. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, this business of travels abroad is very bad. The moment people who should take decisions to equip Government hospitals decide to travel abroad, these hospitals will not be equipped. We should, today, ban all ministers, Permanent Secretaries and Members of Parliament - in fact, people who should go out are the peasants. I can afford a ticket; if you cannot afford a ticket when you are a Member of Parliament, you should leave Parliament now.

Mr Speaker, the people who should be treated abroad are those poor people who cannot afford anything. We should ban ministers, Permanent Secretaries and Members of Parliament from travelling abroad for treatment and then we will see Mulago Hospital functioning. In fact, you heard somebody say that Medical Doctors want to travel abroad because of the per diem. You are not sick but you want to travel. Even some of these ones, when they want per diem, will say they are sick and they will be given sick leave of 30 days with allowances. They will be out there enjoying luxuries and buying suits. (Laughter)

If Parliament does not stop these things of overseas treatment, we are cheating Ugandans. When we stop overseas treatment, Mulago Hospital will be equipped and medical doctors will be paid well. For example, $400,000 is equivalent to Shs 1.4 billion. Assuming you are paying medical doctors Shs 1.4 billion, you will have treated many people in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, personally, I will never go to the medical board. If I fall sick, Mbale Hospital is there. If it fails, I would rather go to heaven; but for you, using the public funds to go out at the expense of those poor taxpayers - we shall not accept. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need to draw this to a close.

6.04
MR LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the minister for bringing the statement. I have a few issues that I seek clarification on.

You stated in your point 1.2 that the process of referring a patient begins with a patient being presented to a specialist who will examine him or her, and carryout all the required examinations. Supposing the person is bed ridden, do you have provisions for home visits? 

Secondly, I looked at the case of hon. Betty Nambooze as that of emergency. As you clearly put it in the categories of emergencies, how come it was not treated as such?

Finally, in regards to the on-going development and building of our bunker; the other time when we were discussing here, we were informed of an agreement between the Government of Uganda and Aga Khan Hospital. However, a week or two ago, there was a story running on NTV that there are many cancer patients stranded in Mulago Hospital, and there are no drugs.

So, what is actually happening? Those are the issues that I seek clarification on. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have the minister respond to some of the issues?

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is everybody’s desire to say that we reduce on referrals abroad, and we have our own facilities in the country that can be able to handle all cases.

As I indicated, Mr Speaker, Government is doing its best to reduce on referrals abroad and if you go to Mulago Hospital, you will note that a lot of reconstruction and remodelling is taking place. We would like Mulago Hospital to be the National Referral Hospital as it is supposed to be. It has been handling all kinds of ailments, even those that can be handled at lower health facilities like Malaria and skin diseases.

Therefore, once the reconstruction and remodelling is complete, Mulago will be a National Referral Hospital, only attending to patients that have been referred from the lower health facilities that cannot be attended to at that level. We have put up Kiruddu and Kawempe; we are hoping to construct another hospital in Rubaga. Of course, Naguru is up and running to deal with the other minor diseases. You are also aware that we are constructing a state of the art women hospital at the same place using the Islamic Development Bank loan.

Mr Speaker, what hon. Nambooze explained is very unfortunate, but I would like to really appeal to my colleagues that the ministers are available. If you say that you went to the Medical Board and they could not attend to you in time, many of you have come to me and my other colleagues, and sometimes, we have been able to ask the Medical Board to speed up because they meet once a month. However, in case there are emergencies, the chairperson and the secretary are available. I have been able to help colleagues, unfortunately, some of whom have passed on.  However, we are there to always stand in.

Therefore, hon. Nambooze, I wish you had reached out to me, maybe we would have -(Interjections)- I have always advised colleagues that, if you call me and I am not picking, send me a message. Some of you can testify to this. When you send a message and I am not able to respond at that time, I am always able to get back to you at an appropriate time and find out where your papers are and we speed up the process.

However, as I indicated, the procedure must be followed. We know that there are political pressures. There are people who do not believe in the system and want to be referred abroad and this has happened even for other colleagues that I know about, but I will not mention here.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, in response to some of the issues that have been mentioned by hon. Nambooze about Dr Francis who was told that the budget had been exhausted and was not able to travel; I would like to state here very clearly that, a medical doctor will not tell you that you are dying. Sometimes, they have looked at the state. Dr Francis was their colleague, so, I do not think that even at the ministry, we would have failed to mobilise some money - because we have done this. 

The budget of Mulago or whichever institution he was working for can be exhausted but sometimes we come in and look for resources from elsewhere so that we can support somebody who is in dire need of a referral abroad. Therefore, sometimes, let us appreciate - they are not able to tell you that you are going to die and of course, in that state, sometimes certain excuses are used.

Mr Speaker, I do not think the medical board can maliciously refuse to refer a person abroad for treatment when the person deserves to go. That medical board you are talking about is a professional board. If you look at all the 12 people, they are all senior consultants in a specific field. You do not just get somebody and say, maybe let us have a Muslim, Luo or let us have - there must be somebody qualified in that field. They might be senior consultants, but you may find that they are not any Muslims in the Government facility. They could be in Kibuli or other places. This is what I would like Members to understand.

The issue of leaders leading by example, I would like to assure you that His Excellency the President has his personal doctors; Dr Nekesa is one of them, Dr Diana also sometimes is available, and Dr Jesse Kagimba used to be his personal doctor. He cannot come and advertise that I have flu or this, but he is attended to by the doctors. 

The other day, when we were meeting the doctors at State House; when he invited doctors from this country, he called out one of them and said “Oh! you are the one who used to work on my eyes.” And he introduced this lady. He has personal doctors or doctors around but of course, when he is being attended to, it does not have to be a public issue.

For Gen. Ali that you mentioned, I am aware that he was attended to locally here, he was even admitted in Nsambya Hospital; some of you visited him there before he was flown abroad. When he was taken abroad, it was after a process. It is not because it is Gen. Ali in Government and he is just taken abroad.

Mr Speaker, the points raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi - as I indicated in my statement, Uganda has some of the best doctors in this world. Many of our doctors are in South Africa, Australia and other parts of the world treating people. You cannot have these people back here coming to work in our facilities at a low pay. This is something we have really been talking about. 

The other day, when we were meeting His Excellency the President, he committed to increase the salaries of the health workers. Let us see what happens in the next budget. Of course, most of these specialists, the referrals I was talking about abroad are in orthopedics, heart diseases and cancer, and most of the specialists we are talking about are in those fields.

This is what I had even explained earlier, that by having the Uganda Cancer Institute and the Uganda Heart Institute as autonomous institutions, we are definitely going to attract these people back, because their salary will not be paid on the public service rates. When you are in Government, you have to pay according to the Government rate. But as autonomous institutions, they will be able to set their own salaries and with this, we shall be able to definitely have some of these good consultants back in the country.

Mr Speaker, we shall try to find the list of all those referred abroad and bring it here. There is no problem with that -(Interjections)- he talked of five years but we shall see what we can do. If we cannot find the five years, we will see what we can bring to this House. [MEMBERS: “When are you bringing it?”] Give us two weeks to compile this and bring it here.

The health insurance is an issue that we have taken on seriously and right now as we speak, the certificate of financial implications has been issued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, anytime from now, we will be presenting it to Cabinet and it will also come to Parliament. This will ensure that there is equity across the board for our people in the country.

Mr Speaker, hon. Nandala-Mafabi was talking about private facilities that are better than Government ones. I have mentioned what we are doing in Mulago, for instance, about the Cancer and the Heart Institute and the Kidney Unit that is being remodeled. Therefore, very soon, we will have services at these facilities.

The issue raised by the Woman Member of Parliament for Amuru about somebody being bed ridden; you definitely have people taking care of you, and it is these people who are supposed to take you to the hospital. You cannot be given a referral when you are not in a hospital. You must be in a hospital, diagnosed and investigated properly and a referral made by a specialist for you to benefit.

I would like to indicate here very clearly, the medical board is just a clearing house. Money for referrals is not with the medical board. The various institutions pay for your medical cost. For instance, if a Member of Parliament is sick and the board has cleared this Member to travel, then we clear you and also liaise with the institution to go ahead and facilitate your travel abroad for treatment.

Normally, it is advisable that as you are traveling for treatment as a patient, you should travel with a medial person on board. It is not advisable to move with just your relatives when there is no medical person on board –(Interjections)- no, those are issues we can investigate, but usually the health worker is facilitated to accompany and also be there with the patient. That is the procedure and these are part of the clearances that we make. Therefore, if there are those who misbehave and reach there and return after two or three days, then that is an issue for investigation.

Mr Speaker, the issue of cancer patients being stranded without drugs - we had a meeting with Uganda Cancer Institute and the National Medical Stores on the issue of cancer drugs so that we resolve the impasse. Please, allow us to conclude this, because we shall even be appearing before the committee and we hope this will be in the committee report that will be coming to this House. With that, I thank the Members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children invites you all for the breakfast meeting of the National Integrated Early Childhood Development Policy scheduled for Wednesday, 21 September 2016, tomorrow starting at 8.00 a.m. in the Member’s Lounge on the third floor adjacent to the Parliament cafeteria. Please, be there at 8.00 in the morning.

Honourable members, it is now past 6.15 p.m. and normally, I do not like going beyond 6.00 p.m., especially when matters are like this. Can we pause the business now? We have a statement from the minister on yellow fever, which we will take tomorrow. This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.18 p.m. and adjourned until tomorrow Wednesday, 21 September 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
