

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 2 September 2021

Parliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE deputy SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are most welcome to today’s sitting. I would like to thank you for keeping time.

During yesterday’s sitting, I made a number of directives to various ministers on urgent questions that required responses today. The relevant ministers below who are supposed to present, are urged to make brief responses:

    1. The Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to update the House on the schedule of fact-finding on visits to areas that are affected by wildlife and give us a programme on how they are going to areas that have never been visited and how they are going to meet the Members of Parliament of the affected areas.

    2. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to respond to the concerns of delayed payment of salaries for primary school teachers, especially in Masaka City. Since 01 July, these teachers have not been paid. Remember one thing that they are Government workers and ought to be paid.

    3. The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to update the House on the rampant power outage in Kanungu District, especially in the industrial area, that is affecting production in that area.

As a consequence of our debate on rationalisation of Government Agencies, we resolved to appoint an ad hoc committee as per Rule 191 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. I now nominate the following Members to constitute the Ad hoc Committee on Rationalisation of Government Agencies:

    1. Hon. Nathan Byanyima
    2. Hon. Abdu Katuntu
    3. Hon. Dan Atwijukire
    4. Hon. Ayoo Tonny
    5. Hon. Apolot Christine
    6. Hon. Patrick Nsanja
    7. Hon Bakkabulindi Charles
    8. Hon. Adeke Anna, and
    9. Hon. Nambeshe John Baptist.

The terms of reference (TOR) of the ad hoc committee are:

    1. To study the justification of the merger of Government agencies,
    2. To conduct a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) of the merger of Government agencies,
    3. To study the effect of the merger of Government agencies on the current employees,
    4. To assess the impact of the merger of Government agencies on service delivery to the people of Uganda,
    5. To make appropriate recommendations to Parliament in relation to the merger and rationalisation of Government agencies,
    6. To recommend on any issues incidental to the merger and rationalisation of Government agencies.

The committee is required to report to this House within a month and comply with the provisions of Article 90(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda on hearing of interested persons and receiving written memoranda. 

I want to thank you and hope the committee will do their best. 

2.06
Ms lucy akello (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. On Tuesday, during your communication, you reported about the message of the Pope during the International Catholic Legislators Network (ICLN) meeting. I beg your indulgence, if you could give me five minutes as the chairperson of the Catholic Chaplaincy of the Parliament of Uganda, to give more information about what was discussed. 

The Deputy Speaker: I am giving you three minutes.

Ms akello: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A team from Uganda went to Rome for the International Catholic Legislators Network meeting. This is a self-sponsored meeting. 

Briefly about the International Catholic Leaders’ Network; it was founded in 2010 as an independent and non-partisan international initiative to bring together practising Catholics and other Christians elected in offices.

The reason I rise now is to read in full the message of the Pope when we had the private audience with him in Vatican on 27 August 2021. If you may, I will read verbatim:

“Honourable ladies and gentlemen, I am pleased once more to meet you, lawmakers and political and civic leaders from various nations, at this critical moment in our history. I thank Cardinal Schonborn and Dr Alting Von Geusau for their kind words of greeting and introduction. I am also happy that His Holiness Ignatius Aphrem II, Patriarch of the Syro-Orthodox Church, is present with us. 

From its founding in 2010, the ICLN has accompanied, supported and promoted the work of the Holy See, bearing witness to the Gospel in the service of your individual countries and the international community as a whole. I am grateful for your love for the Church and for your readiness to cooperate in her mission.

Our gathering today takes place at a very troubled moment in time. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to rage. Although significant progress has been made through the creation and distribution of effective vaccines, much work remains to be done. There have been more than 200 million confirmed cases and four million deaths due to this terrible scourge, which has caused immense economic and social devastation. 

“As a result, your work as lawmakers and political leaders is more important than ever. Charged with serving the common good, you are now being challenged to direct your efforts to the integral renewal of your communities and societies as a whole. This entails more than simply combating the virus or seeking to return to the status quo prior to the pandemic. It demands confronting the deeper causes that the crisis has laid bare and aggravated: poverty, social inequality, wide spread unemployment and the lack of access to education.

In an age of upheaval and political polarisation, legislators and politicians, in general, are not always held in high esteem yet, what loftier vocation can there be than that of serving the common good and placing the welfare of the community before our personal advantage. That must always be your goal for good politics is indispensable for the universal fraternity and social peace. 

In our age, particularly, one of the greatest challenges confronting us is the administration of technology for the common good. 

The wonders of modern science and technology have increased our quality of life. It is the right to rejoice in these advances and to be excited by the immense possibilities that they continue to open up before us, for science and technology are wonderful products of God given human creativity. At the same time left to themselves and to market forces alone, without suitable guidelines guided by legislative assemblies and public authorities guided by a sense of social responsibility, these innovations can end up becoming a threat to dignity of human persons. 

This has nothing to do with curbing technological advances. By means of policies and regulations, policy makers can protect human dignity from whatever might threaten it. I think, for example, of the scourge of child pornography, the misuse of personal data, attacks on critical infrastructure such as hospitals and the spread of false information on social media. Prudent legislation can guide the development and application of technology in the service of common good.

I heartily encourage you, therefore, to make every effort to undertake serious and in-depth moral reflection on the risks and possibilities associated with scientific and technological science advances so that the international laws and regulations governing them may concentrate on promoting integral human development and peace, rather than on progress as an end in itself.

Legislators and political leaders naturally reflect the strength and weaknesses of the people they represent; each has his or her own specific gifts to offer in service to the welfare of all. 

The involvement of citizens in the various sectors of social, civic political life remains essential. All of us are called to foster the spirit of solidarity, starting with the needs of our weakest and the most disadvantaged brothers and sisters.
 
If we are to heal our world, so harshly tried by the pandemic, and build a more inclusive and sustainable future in which technology serves human needs without isolating us from one another, we need not only responsible citizens but also capable leaders inspired by the principle of common good. 

Dear friends, may the Lord enable you to become a leaven for renewal of minds, hearts and spirit, witnesses of political love for the most vulnerable, so that in serving them, you may serve Him in all that you do. 

To you, your families and your work, I cordially impart my blessing and ask you, please, to pray for me. Thank you.”

This was the message from His Holiness, Pope Francis. The President of the International Catholic Legislators also had a message but I will summarise it in the last chapter, where he said, “Our work of peace must begin within the private world of each of us. To build for a man without fear, we must be without fear. To build a world of justice, we must be just. How can we fight liberty, if we are not free in our own minds? How can we ask others to sacrifice if we are not ready to do so?” 

Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, thank you very much for giving me time to read this very important message that I thought I needed to share with colleagues. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can you lay it on the Table so that it becomes part of our documents?  

MS LUCY AKELLO: With your guidance, and thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to lay on the Table a document entitled, “Private Audience with His Holiness, Pope Francis, 27 August 2021” and “The Address by Dr Christian Alting Von Geusau, President of the International Catholic Legislators Network.” I beg to lay. 

Allow me to also lay, on the Table, the Address of His Holiness, Pope Francis, meeting of the International Catholic Legislators Network, 27 August 2021. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to inform the House that of the five permanent working committees, I am a co-chairperson of the Human Rights and Dignity Working Committee. I represent Africa on the globe. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Lucy Akello. In the communication I made, the chairperson is hon. Nathan Byanyima and he is deputised by hon. Katuntu. 

HON. MBWATEKWAMWA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker - 

2.21 
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for the value and attention you have attached to the merger. I stand here, as the Shadow Minister for Public Service. You have put up a high quality team. 

As a scholar, I also look at the scholarly burden attached to the research. The research would probably take twofold. One will focus on quantitative research and the other will be the qualitative research. Since Parliament does not have a lot of time, we might focus on qualitative research. 

Madam Speaker, from your communication, I am asking you to explore the possibility of deploying the scholars that we have in the country, so that they use their research and scholarly capabilities to reconcile with what we have. This will help us to get feedback from the high quality team of the House you put in place. 

Madam Speaker, it is also good to tap into the human resources we have in this country especially, the professors; both from the humanities and sciences. The scientists will look at the generation of knowledge while the humanities will look at application and use, as it relates to this particular subject matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins, you will be welcomed to give your ideas to the committee. 

2.22
MR FREDERICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to respond to your communication and I am grateful that what I wanted to raise is that when you named the members of that ad hoc committee, you did not tell us who the chairperson and the deputy chairperson would be. I thank you very much for that quick response to correct that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister?

2.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine was in relation to the message from His Holiness, the Pope. One, I really thank Lucy for delivering this important message and the key issues that His Holiness has urged us, as legislators, to put as part of the agenda for this House. 

Let me also say that when we attend these international networks, there are important issues that we discuss. It would be good if Lucy came and, probably, presented a report in addition to the message from the Pope so that we follow up on the issues that they deliberated on and the resolutions made - I know issues of pro-life, issues of political love and all that - so that as a House, we can seriously take these recommendations at the international level. 

Finally, I want to really thank God because hon. Lucy Akello has not been feeling well. I see she is now very upbeat. We are very happy that you are back and in full gear. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Hon. Akello, the chairperson of the Catholic community here, kindly, prepare a report and submit to the House. While we were in Rome, there was no matter of politics. We were all one and we went there to pray for our Ugandans – praying for everybody and we thank God for that. The Pope emphasised the issue of loving each other as you love yourself.

2.26
MR MBWATEKAMWA GAFFA (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have consistently noted that the Chair is uncomfortable with politics. When there was no politics, we were all one. The other day you guided that when we were discussing Masaka -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is because the Chair is independent.

MR SSEMUJJU: So, I wanted to find out, Madam Speaker, how as an elected politician, I will avoid politics so that I do not offend the Chair.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, the Chair is independent. So, I do not entertain NRM, NUP, DP. I am in this House as an independent person who should guide the House. I am the referee. Actually, when we were there with Flavia, you would not tell whether Lucy is UPC, Flavia is NUP or hon. Tayebwa is NRM; it was oneness, which I laud for Ugandans, who were the majority. (Applause) You know, one has to realise that hon. Ssemujju is in the House. (Laughter)

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have also realised that he is around. The matter of national importance I am raising is about the Government’s initiative to upgrade health centres II to the level of health centres III.

In the last Parliament, the Government of Uganda got a loan from the World Bank -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mbwatekamwa, bring that up during the Prime Minister Question Time for you to have an exhaustive response to it. It is not very urgent per se.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: It is very urgent because the contractors have abandoned the sites, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will not get feedback today. What we want is action-oriented response. We want these people - when you put it down for the Prime Minister’s Question Time, these people should be able to go on the ground and come with action taken. That is what we have agreed on. Can we have your statement written and delivered immediately? In addition, it must be something of life and death. If it is something that needs a response, then you should be able to put it in writing.

2.28
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance. Schools in Uganda, basically, Senior One, Senior Two, Senior Three and Senior Four plus Primary Two up to Primary Six - leaving out Primary Four and Primary Five and nursery classes - have taken almost two years without having classes.

What is in the public is information that is not coordinated, between the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation and the Minister of Education and Sports about when schools are going to be opened.

Madam Speaker, I am happy that teachers are being vaccinated at rapid speed but the Government has not come out clearly to give this Parliament the proper position on how schools are going to resume. The last time they opened, a school was given Shs 1.3 million - I am talking about my rural schools - yet buying one simple foot-operated hand wash machine is worth Shs 300,000 and a primary school requires more than four of them.

The matter of national importance I am raising is; when is the Ministry of Education and Sports coming to Parliament to inform us about how schools are going to open? Some of us from -(Interjection)– let me first drive this point home and then take your information.

Madam Speaker, for some of us who come from rural areas, schools are dilapidated, desks are broken and indeed the situation in the schools is not good. Some of the teachers have lost morale; they need some bit of workshops.

Lastly, for the selection of children going to Senior One and Senior Five, there is no clear picture as we talk now. However, what we are hearing is that some private schools have already selected children. Government schools such as King’s College Budo and St Henry’s College are waiting. We want to get proper information from the minister about what they are preparing so that Parliament knows what is taking place before children resume –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I am born at the border between Kenya and Uganda, in a town called Busia. Every morning when you stand at Busia border, you will see 88 per cent of Ugandan students crossing to Kenya. When I asked my colleague from Lwakhakha, he told me the same.

Yesterday, I had a chat with hon. Geoffrey Lutaaya over the Tanzania border and he told me the same. Madam Speaker, Kenya has scientists like Uganda’s. Here, every day, a generation of almost 30 per cent of children from Primary One and Primary Two, Senior One, Senior Two and Senior Three have sat in their homes and girls are getting old and married. 

My information is that in Uganda, we have a generation that we are leaving behind in education because of mixed understanding in statements between hon. Musenero - whom I do not know whether she is a minister or presidential advisor in charge of COVID-19 – and at the same time, we have mixed statements from the Minister of Education and Sports.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, as we talk, we have a number of girls who were impregnated. Some were in P.5 and others in P.6. What is the fate of those children as you open schools? We want a comprehensive statement before these schools are opened. 

Otherwise, what is happening is that the Minister of Education and Sports is going to push the entire burden to District Education Officers and Members of Parliament and we shall see them directing head teachers. At the end of the day, they will lose their jobs. 

That is the matter of national importance so that Parliament is well abreast with what is going to happen. You should direct the Committee on Education and Sports to interface with these people. Otherwise, they are so quiet but a lot of information is flowing to the public and daily papers - the New Vision and Daily Monitor - and none of them is disputing what is coming out. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrisestom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We very well know that schools were closed as a measure of enabling this country to fight off COVID-19 that was eating up our people. 

The President communicated after carrying out a lot of consultations. What is happening now is, we are trying to see that almost all our teachers get vaccinated and very soon, the public, including Parliament, will be informed. I am happy to hear that hon. Ssewungu wants a comprehensive statement about when and how we are going to open. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to assure you that after consultations and advice of –(Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is painful to raise a point of order against the doctor but it is also very important for people to hear and comprehend what Members say. I have not said that I have a comprehensive report or statement. I said that we want the Ministry of Education and Sports to give this House a comprehensive statement on how schools will be opened.

Therefore, is the honourable minister in order not to pay proper attention in this House yet he is well known for being an educationist, who is supposed to teach and train children without making mistakes in any particular lesson and above all, he is the Minister of State for Education and Sports? Is he in order not to pay attention in front of this august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, come with a comprehensive statement on the plan for reopening schools.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is whether the minister should not be given a timeframe because he may come here next year. Also, international schools are operating so when he says schools are closed, maybe he closed the ones of the ordinary people. However, the international schools, where his grandchildren go, are open.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, you need to give the House a report in seven days.

DR MUYINGO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

2.37
MS JOYCE BAGALA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance and it is a matter of life and death. We have been here discussing about the murders in greater Masaka. This morning, the residents of Kiyudaya, Mityana Municipality woke up to anonymous letters indicating that what is happening in Masaka is coming to Mityana. They said that they are going to start with the RDC and his entire office.

My prayer is that the Ministry of Security together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs swing into action before someone loses life. About a week ago, there is a convent in Busunju, Mityana South that was attacked. The Rev. Father and a nun were injured. We do not know if that is related to these anonymous letters but it happened. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I saw the Minister of Internal Affairs here. Government Chief Whip -

2.39
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, I request that you give us a few minutes as you handle another issue. I will ensure that the minister comes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Handling another issue within the premises?

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, we want action to be taken. We want a team in that area to ensure that we protect the lives of the people. Remember, that is how it started in Masaka and now it is moving to Mityana. Next, it will move to another area. Therefore, we must take caution on that.

2.40
MS AGNES KIRABO (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the youth-led NGOs that were suspended on 20th August 2021 by the Chairman of the NGO bureau. The reasons were that some NGOs were not filing returns, some for not registering with the bureau while others for operating with invalid permits.

These NGOs, as I have mentioned, are youth-led and we all know that our country has been hit by the pandemic for the last two years. Some of the NGOs were unable to access their offices while others were shut down completely. Therefore, some were unable to file returns for a year. However, they have filed their returns and have been on my neck to raise their issue that they need to be given a chance – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kirabo, can you write that down and bring it during Prime Minister’s Time so that we give the Prime Minister time to investigate as to why they were closed and then they give you a comprehensive response.

MS KIRABO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The youth have to continue working.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is okay, you will have a response next Thursday.

MS KIRABO: Thank you.

2.42
MS SUSAN MUGABI (NUP, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Please allow me to appreciate the people of Buvuma who gave me this opportunity to represent them in the Parliament of Uganda. (Laughter)

I am here to raise an urgent matter of national importance. Over 100,000 people from the Buvuma fishing community are living in fear and panic over the insecurity caused by the Marine Police, the Revenue Police and the UPDF Fish Protection Unit. 

The marine and the revenue police are confiscating fish, fuel and fishing gear even when they are of the right size and of good quality. This is something done contrary to the duties of the marine and the revenue police. 

I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the confiscated items are being traded by these very security agencies. What makes it worse is that they ask for kickbacks from the fishermen and after that they abandon them in the middle of the lake where there is no network. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are your prayers? 

MS SUSAN MUGABI: Madam Speaker, this is my maiden speech. Please allow me emphasize my point. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please continue.

MS SUSAN MUGABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As earlier on said of these three para security agencies, people believe that one of them has been stealing their boat engines at gun point in the lakes for the last three weeks. This is happening especially in the subcounties of Lubya, Lyabaana, Lwajje, Bweema and Bugaya. This has brought a lot of confusion on which security agency the fishermen can work with in Buvuma District. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to also report to you that the illegal fishing suspects arrested by the UPDF Fish Protection Unit during the operations are being taken to Kitalya Prison and not Buvuma Police Station and the public court there. This makes it difficult for their relatives to access them. 

I would like to inform you that most of these suspects are arrested from their houses very late in the night without any evidence but only on assumption. This has been witnessed in the sub-counties of Nayirambi, Buwoya, Busamuzi and Buvuma Town Council. 

As a result, many people have lost livelihoods and worsened the poverty levels in the district. It has also contributed to heightened domestic violence in the families in my constituency. 

My prayer is that the ministers responsible for defence and fisheries should address the enforcement issues in Buvuma District. Let them investigate officers involved in extorting money and stealing boat engines, the fish and fuel from my fishermen. They should streamline the provision of security in the islands to ensure continuity of the livelihood of the fishermen in Buvuma District.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Susan Mugabi. Ministers of fisheries and security, you should go to Buvuma Islands and find out what is happening. 

I have seen you, honourable member. We do not want you to respond when you do not have the facts. You need to have the facts on what is happening in Buvuma. 

Hon. Suzan Mugabi, were you part of the meeting with the minister for fisheries? 

MS SUSAN MUGABI: Madam Speaker, I did not attend the meeting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is where the problem is. 

MS SUSAN MUGABI: I was not invited, Madam Speaker. I do not know why.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We announced in this House that the ministry should have a meeting. Do you have something to say, honourable minister? All said and done, we need a solution, whether she was part of the meeting or not.

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of enforcement is very detailed. 

The first point is that people resist regulations. We had the sector minister meeting all the MPs representing the fishing communities. 

However, like you already ruled, we are going to take up her matter and address this issue squarely and report back to this House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I would like to guide you on matters that require policy. These should be brought at Prime Minister’s Time. Please look at rule 45; it is purely matters that are very urgent regarding life and death that should be brought as matters of national importance. 

2.50
MR GEOFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance, relating to a point of procedure that I raised yesterday. 

Almost 80 per cent of the business community, dealing in importation of textiles, is on strike in Kampala’s downtown shops. 

Uganda Revenue Authority is taxing imported textiles in terms of kilogrammes and this has caused a crisis whereby almost 100 containers are – the URA, through their new taxation policy, instead of taxing percentages in terms of purchase price per textile, are taxing textile traders a percentage that is very abnormal, in terms of kilogrammes. 

There have been endless negotiations for almost two months because there is no flexibility and clarity between the URA and the Ministry of Trade and Cooperatives that aims to help traders on this matter. 

I would like to inform the House that a 20-foot container, which previously cost taxes of between Shs 20-40 million now costs almost between Shs 260-300 million. This has made many importers to abandon their containers at the seaport and in the warehouses. (Interjection) I will give you the chance later, my sister.

At the same time a 40-foot container that previously cost taxes of between Shs 40-60 million to clear, now costs between Shs 400-600 million. 

It has been three weeks since KACITA, the main body that organises traders –(Interjection)– I will give you. You are a shadow minister and so, you will speak after her. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, as I speak now – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, I am still chairing this House - (Laughter) – and your time is over. Can you give us your prayers?

MR MACHO: Apologies, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your prayers?

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, my first prayer is that the Government should drop the idea of clearing textile in kilogrammes but adopt the principle of the Fourth Schedule of the East African Community Customs Management Act because it is very clear. It allows customs officers to calculate the cost, vis-à-vis the tax.

The second prayer is that the traders who have almost 100 containers at the seaports and in the warehouses should be allowed to clear, using the old tax regime since this policy was passed when their goods were in transit. 

The third prayer is that Uganda Revenue Authority should adhere to the World Trade Organisation General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs, which is the basis of the invoice and is the best method of evaluation, as stipulated in the Fourth Schedule of the East African Community Customs Management Act –(Interruption)

MS MALENDE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give to my honourable colleague and this House is that the entire business community in Kampala is currently suffering; KACITA and the business community are under lockdown.

Madam Speaker, the problem is that there have not been any practical Government interventions on the ongoing evictions by the landlords. The hawkers and street vendors in Kampala operating along Namayiba Bus Park have been fenced off and are no longer working. The boda boda riders are also suffering; their motorcycles are being confiscated –(Interruption)

PROF. MUSHEMEZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This House knows very well that a few days ago, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry presented a comprehensive report on issues of trade, industry and tourism and it is yet to be debated.

During that presentation, hon. Macho was in this House. Are we procedurally moving –(Interjections)– I am on a point of procedure and the rules are very clear; procedure takes precedence over order.

Madam Speaker, are we moving procedurally well, for hon. Macho to preempt the debate and issues being raised in the report of that committee, which I belong to. Are we moving procedurally well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When were the shops closed?

MR MACHO: Yesterday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If they were closed yesterday, then it is a matter of national importance. The committee report was presented on Thursday, meaning the report did not capture what happened yesterday. A Member of Parliament can raise what happened because our traders are suffering.

What we can now do is to send the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to go and find out what is happening. We have the minister here. [Mr Ssewungu: Order] Point of order on what? Minister, can you talk? Sit, hon. Ssewungu. Can we hear from the minister? 

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Macho, for raising this important point. We have held discussions with KACITA –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, are you listening? Do not send me chits.

MR BAHATI: We have held discussions with KACITA that is representing traders on these important matters. As of yesterday, we came to an understanding that we should charge 35 per cent, as opposed to what has been happening.

We think that the matter is being resolved. Unless there are some issues which have come up, we would request that on Tuesday, we come here and make a statement on this matter. We are handling this matter in the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is the indiscipline I do not like, hon. Ssewungu. The minister is saying he is coming with a report on the action taken yet you want to raise a point of clarification. This is a very serious issue. Can you sit? Hon. Ssewungu, I will apply Rule 79 to you.

MR BAHATI: In brief, Madam Speaker, we have listened to the cry of the traders and we are handling this matter. On Tuesday, we shall come here to report to the House the resolutions that we have come up with, together with the traders. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you are meeting the traders, honourable minister, I want all the Members of Parliament from Kampala to be present in that meeting because they are the same people who will come here and make statements. So, they should be part of the meeting so that they know what is taking place. [Mr Ssewungu rose_]

Hon. Ssewungu, there is a Chair in this House. (Laughter) Hon. Kawalya, you have the same issue and it has been responded to. I am communicating to you, hon. Kawalya. Can you make a follow up with the minister so that the meeting takes place and report back to this House on Tuesday? The report we want is the action that has been taken, not lamentations.

3.00
MS SUZAN ABEJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Madam Speaker, this is my maiden speech. I am raising a matter of national importance but before I do that, allow me to also congratulate you in that office. We over sang, “Anita, very good”. You are really very good. (Applause)

My issue is on the looming status of schools in Uganda. As my brother was crying for the day when schools reopen, it is the opposite in my constituency. Otuke has got the worst state of schools.

We have parishes without primary schools. There is a parish called Atira - pupils are studying in a kraal; not even a school. I remember one day, I shared the photos with you and I am glad that today, my minister is around today. 

There are subcounties without secondary schools, amidst the creation of more subcounties and parishes in Uganda - I do not support that. 

Madam Speaker, teachers in our schools in Otuke lack accommodation. A school like Amwa Primary School has 14 teachers but only three of them sleep in the school. Other teachers normally move far distances to the school. There are not enough toilets in other schools.

I am also here to inform you that we have structures that have been blown off by wind. While we are here, at times we are sent requests to go and roof these schools, yet from here we are told not to spend our money to do Government programmes. 

I am also glad to inform you that there was a project that was taken to Otuke District, called the Netherlands Project. Honourable Minister of Education and Sports, my people are inquiring whether the money for this project was given to the ministry or it was allocated to the district local government. There are structures which are not completed in these schools. In other schools, the walls are there but the roofs are not there. In others, floors are being made but there are no walls. So, the status is not good.

Our teachers in Otuke District are crying. I have a letter that has been sent to you, written by our CAO. Districts bordering Otuke such as Alebtong, Agago and others in Karamoja - that have faced challenges of insurgencies - have been designated as hard-to-reach districts but Otuke has been ignored. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your prayer, hon. Abeja? 

MS ABEJA: My prayers – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Omara, are you from Otuke? 

MR OMARA: Yes. I rise on a point of information to this House. We have the USAID report under the theme, “Centre for International Futures, November 2017”. This report gives a lot of data about GDP and GDP per capita estimates for 116 districts of Uganda. In that report, the poorest districts in Uganda are mentioned. Number one is Kagadi District with a GDP per capita of $56, followed by Alebtong with a GDP per capita of $64 and the third poorest is Otuke District, with $66 per capita.

The report shows that Otuke has been left out from the list of the hard-to-reach districts. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Omara, tell us what you want us to do for the schools.

MR OMARA: Our prayer is that Otuke District should be – (Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not worry, honourable members. These are the prayers of Otuke. Hon. Omara, give us your prayers, as Otuke District.

MR OMARA: I pray that Otuke District is included as part of the hard-to-reach districts of Uganda. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Abeja, do you still have another prayer?

MS ABEJA: My last prayer is that our civil servants are threatening to strike. They said that if the minister in charge does not visit them, they will lay down their tools. They have to accord the district the hard-to-reach district status. The minister must go to Otuke and I am going with him. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of State for Education and Sports (Higher Education), you must go to Otuke District, together with the Members of Parliament of that area. 

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will definitely do everything possible to go to Otuke District before this month comes to an end.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You report back to this House in two weeks, on your findings. You do not need to go to Otuke only. You can also check on all the schools in northern Uganda.

MR MUYINGO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I hope hon. Susan Abeja is aware that schools are closed but I will take all the trouble –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, now you are moving from school to school to verify. That would be the process you would take as we wait for the schools to open. You would verify the status of the schools. 

MR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I will definitely go and visit them and report back to this House. One other thing I wanted to add is that it is true that there are some areas that do not – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is an order here - somebody is ordering an elder.

MR SSENYONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I was joining Parliament, I was given a book called the “Rules of Procedure of Parliament” and I made sure I read it so that I do not offend any of the rules therein. 

I paid particular attention to rule 82, which talks about dress codes. As a result, I revamped my wardrobe. However, there are colleagues who are yet to read that rule. There is a colleague on the other end who decided that he would just put on a shirt and jacket, in total contravention of rule 82. Is the honourable member in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the dress code of this House is well defined under rule 82. Are you a Member of this House? (Laughter) Can we have you out of the House? Get out.

STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEKS, 7TH TO 9TH SEPTEMBER 2021

3.11
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament requires the Leader of Government Business to make a statement in the House regarding the Government’s business for the succeeding week. On behalf of the Prime Minister, I am, therefore, submitting the following businesses for the succeeding week, 7 to 9 September 2021:

    1. Charter of Fiscal Responsibility for 2021/2022 to 2025-2026.
    2. Statement on Government’s plan to operationalise new cities.
    3. Proposal to borrow $119.1 million for development of oil roads. 
4. 	Proposal to borrow US$ 130 million for the East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP).

On behalf of the Prime Minister, I beg to submit.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Honourable members, we have been given the business to follow in the coming week. Please take note. I urge you to prepare accordingly for what is to come next week. Thank you. 

Mr ssemujju: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rule 28, which the Government Chief Whip is using states, “…the Leader of Government Business shall…” It does not allow any other person other than the Prime Minister. If you go to rule 41 regarding the Prime Minister’s Question Time, it allows the deputy, if the Prime Minister is not around. There is a reason we have these rules.

The honourable Government Chief Whip may enjoy standing many times in Parliament even to do what he is not enjoying to do but this particular rule does not allow him. Rule 41 allows a deputy, if there is no Prime Minister, to lead Government Business during Prime Minister’s Question Time. This one does not allow any intruder –(Laughter)– maybe you have different rules. Your appetite to stand many times offends this rule.

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is whether any other person other than the Prime Minister can purport to be the Prime Minister when the rule says “shall” and does not create exceptions the way the rule on the Prime Minister’s Question Time does.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, the statement that was sent to my office was signed by the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, Rt Hon. Robinah Nabbanja. She requested the Government Chief Whip to read it on her behalf. Since it is signed by her, maybe what we can do is to tell her to read it herself next time. Anyhow, it has been presented.

LAYING OF PAPERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 31 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE, 2018

3.16
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (NUP, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Madam Speaker, as a Parliamentary Commissioner, I wish to lay the different reports of entities from the Auditor-General.

I wish to lay reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the financial year ended 30 June 2018 on:

    a) Kyenjojo Town Council -

The Deputy Speaker: Can you read the names then you lay them at once.

Mr zaake: Okay, I will lay them at once. First, I will lay the Kyenjojo Town Council report from the Auditor-General and continue to lay the reports for:

    b) Kinyamaseke Town Council report;
    c) Hakibaale Sub-county, Kabarole District;
    d) Bihanga Sub-county, Kamwenge District;
    e) Kirumya Sub-county, Bundibugyo District;
    f) Kateebwa Sub-county, Bunyangabu District;
    g) Kisomoro Sub-county, Bunyangabu District;
    h) Bubukwanga Sub-county, Bundibugyo District;
    i) Buheesi Sub-county, Bunyangabu District;
    j) South Division, Fort Portal Municipal Council;
    k) Busaru Sub-county, Bundibugyo District;
    l) Bukonzo Sub-county, Bundibugyo District;
    m) Kyamukube Town Council; and
    n) Mpondwe Lhubiriha Town Council.

Madam Speaker, I still beg to lay reports of the Auditor-General –

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, the reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the financial year ended 30 June 2018 are referred to Public Accounts Committee (Local Government).

MR ZAAKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to lay the reports from the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2018 on:

    a) The 132KV Mirama-Kabale transmission line and Distribution Project-Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL); and

    b) The Opuyo-Moroto 132KV transmission line project-Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL). 

The Deputy Speaker: The Auditor-General’s reports being laid are on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2019. These are referred to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE).

Mr ssenyonyi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a motion that was passed by this very House, not with specificity to this one but the 10th Parliament in May, as the Parliament was coming to a close. That motion was moved by hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi and it was to the effect that Parliament adopted all the Auditor-General’s reports up to 30 June 2020.

Madam Speaker, as you know, my committee on COSASE, which I chair, has had challenges. We have approached your office in regard to that motion to see how we get to deal with it. We have wanted to look at those past years that were closed by that particular motion because what that motion meant is that COSASE, for example, has got to wait for the next Auditor-General’s report, which comes in December. For that matter, we begin doing work next year, which is in itself problematic.

In specificity to this matter, the Auditor-General’s reports fall within the ambit of 30 June. That would mean that the other motion covers them. Therefore, I request you to guide us –

The Deputy Speaker: Why don’t we first receive the reports? I know that you want to bring your motion on the Floor. You do not raise it here; you know how a motion is put on the Order Paper; so, do not raise it here. First receive the reports and then you challenge what was being done in the 10th Parliament. For now, let the committees first receive the reports. We shall handle the rest. 

MR ZAAKE: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2020 on:  

    a) The Uganda Export Promotions Board; 
    b) The Uganda Communications Commission Employees Contributory Pension Scheme; 
    c) The Embassy of the Republic of Uganda (Copenhagen Denmark); 
    d) The Uganda National Oil Company;
    e) The Opuyo-Moroto 132KV Transmission Line Project – Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL);
    f) The 132KV Mirama-Kabale Transmission Line And Distribution Project – Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL);
    g) The Presidential Initiative On Banana Industrial Development (PIBID); and
    h) The Uganda Seeds Limited

I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Auditor-General’s report findings on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2020 are referred to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) while the report on the Embassy of the Republic of Uganda in Denmark is referred to the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government). 

MR ZAAKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to lay the reports from the Auditor-General on the financial statements on:

    a) The Uganda Petroleum Fund for the six-month period ended 31 December, 2020;
    b) The Environment For Development Initiative  Project Makerere University for the period 01 January to 31 December 2020;
    c) The Handicraft and Souvenir Development Project in Uganda for the six-month period from June 2019 to December 2019
    d) The Handicraft and Souvenir Development Project in Uganda for the year ended 31 December 2020

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements are referred to the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government). 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CONGRATULATE HON. ACON JULIUS BUA FOR HIS INDUCTION INTO THE WORLD OLYMPIANS ASSOCIATION AS AN “OLYMPIAN FOR LIFE”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we debated almost the same kind of motion last week; so we are giving this motion only 20 minutes. 

3.25
MS DORCAS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate Hon. Acon Julius Bua for his induction into the World Olympians Association as an “Olympian for Life.”

“WHEREAS Hon. Acon Julius Bua, a Member of Parliament for Otuke East County, is also a world-renowned middle distance runner with the following remarkable achievements; 
    1. He won a gold medal in 1994 at the World Junior Athletics Championship in Lisbon, Portugal; 

    2. In 1995, he won a bronze medal in l,500 meters in Harare, Zimbabwe at the All Africa Games; 

    3. In 1996, he participated in the l,500 metres race finishing with a timing of 3:43:08 at the Olympics Games hosted by the USA in Atlanta City; 

    4. In 1999, he set a National Record in the 1,600 metres (a mile) with a timing of 3:55:38 at the TFA Pro Championships in New York, United States, a record that stood for 22 years before it was broken; 

    5. At the 2000 Olympics in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, in the l,500 metres, he qualified for the semi-finals and came sixth with a timing of 3:40:32;

RECOGNISING that due to the above unprecedented record, hon. Acon Julius Bua was on 26 July 2021, among the five people who were inducted into the World Olympians Association as Olympians for Life of the Tokyo 2020 Olympic Gomes; 

COGNISANT that only five Olympians ore inducted into the "Olympians for Life" every four years, one from each Continent; and as such hon. Acon Julius Bua was the sole inductee representing the whole of Africa; 

NOTING THAT the "Olympian for Life" award aims to celebrate the lives of Olympians who have left a positive and lasting legacy on the World, even after retiring from active sports and further demonstrate that the Olympics spirit lives on well beyond an Olympian’s competition days; 

AWARE that hon. Acon Julius Bua has reflected that true Olympics spirit by; 

    a) founding the Acon Uganda Children's Fund; 
    b) constructing Health centre grade III in Otuke District;
    c) repaired l00 boreholes; 
    d) drilled 46 new boreholes; 
    e) Installed two solar-powered water pumps; and 
    f) Introduced the seed scheme to all households in Otuke District;

ACKNOWLEDGING that it is imperative that his efforts are recognised; this will help to encourage the young generation to embrace sports as a profession;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that the Parliament of Uganda; 

    1. Congratulates hon. Acon Julius Bua upon being inducted in the World Olympians Association as an "Olympian for Life". 

    2. Urges Government to recognise hon. Acon Julius Bua's tireless efforts in promoting Uganda by naming at least one of the stadiums or streets in Uganda, "Acon Julius Bua". 

    3. Urges Government to continuously sponsor athletes who embody a true Olympian spirit to the Olympics Games.”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Acen. Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by hon. Stephen Kisa, hon. Tom, hon. Galiwango, hon. Kawalya; the whole House is seconding the motion, including the youth and Government Chief Whip. Speak to your motion. 

MS ACEN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Julius Acon Bua is a true example of a resilient Olympian. Today, we are able to recognise his hard work, his perseverance and resilience that he has been able to demonstrate in order to be able to achieve the thrilling victories that we have seen in the past years. 

The lesson that we pick from these, as a country, is that very many of our athletes go through a lot of hurdles and tough times, before they get to the point when they become champions; a lot is happening behind the scenes. For example, hon. Julius Acon Bua was able to represent the country even during the time when Northern Uganda was at war but he remained resilient and he never gave up. 

Hon. Julius Acon at the time ran 72 kilometres; from Otuke up to Lira on bare foot yet he was going for competition. He was not doing it because he was enjoying it as a form of exercise but he had to join the competition because he lacked transport. In fact, the following day, he had competitions. He was able to win three races in one day; 800 metres, 1,500 metres and 3,000 metres in one day, even with fatigue. (Applause)

This is the man who joined his colleagues in 1994, when he represented Uganda in the World Junior Athletics Championship in Lisbon. He boarded the plane barefoot; without shoes, again to represent Uganda. Madam Speaker, look at that level of resilience. He actually borrowed a pair of shoes from a Kenyan colleague to use for the competition. This is the level of resilience we are talking about.

Even along the line of education, it was not easy for him. In fact, these are some of the things our young people are going through. He was only given a one-year scholarship in Lango College but he was chased from that school, just after one year, on account of failure to pay school fees. Thanks to Makerere College that was able to support him at the time, until when he was able to get an athletic scholarship. He managed to graduate in 2011 from the University of Phoenix Arizona, with a Bachelor of Science in Communication, after going through a lot of hurdles. Madam Speaker, this is the man we are talking about.

Amidst all these challenges, our Government has never been able to recognise or even reward hon. Julius Acon Bua up to date. We can say they are yet to recognise him.

This is a man who has not given up the true Olympian spirit. From the support he got from elsewhere - the American people - he was able to construct a whole unit of a health centre III, which is now supporting women and children.

This is the man who, in 2019, became the first athlete to run 500 kilometres from Entebbe to Lira, via the east coast and that action alone enabled him to raise Shs 700 million, which he used to drill 47 boreholes in Otuke. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the lesson we pick from this is that our young generation is going through a lot. For this reason, I implore our young generation throughout Uganda to be able to pick a lesson from hon. Julius Acon Bua. Colleagues, from today, hon. Acon has become someone in the entire global fraternity. This is why he was inducted into the Olympian for Life, as the sole inductee, who represented the whole of Africa.

Allow me to salute the World Olympian Association for recognising our son of the soil, as an Olympian for Life, at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics Games. I believe that this recognition will go a long way in inspiring the young generation.

Madam Speaker, this does not come easily; it comes with a lot of resilience and preparation. If I may borrow words from Mark Spitz, a nine times Olympic Champion who was a great swimmer; he indicated that nothing got him to where he was, apart from preparing. 

As a country, I want to reiterate that if we fail to plan and prepare, we are surely preparing to fail. Therefore, if we are to maintain this legacy and sustain some of these gains that hon. Julius Acon Bua and our other children have been able to put forward as well as dedicating adequate funding to support the sports sector, I think that will help us to nurture the great potential we have in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I ask you to support this motion. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Acen Dorcas. Seconder, you have only three minutes. Today is Thursday, which is for Prime Minister’s Question Time and she must start at 4.00 p.m. 

3.37
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second this motion. Hon. Julius Acon in 2013, invited H.E the President to commission Kristina Health Centre III. The President delegated me to represent him to commission this health facility.

Madam Speaker, I have been reading about Acon – during my first meeting with hon. Acon, he narrated a story of how he was able to run bare foot for 42 kilometres from Awake, present day Otuke District, to Lira District. The rest is history. He ran on his bare feet and he was able to win and represent his district at the national competitions.

In 2014, hon. Acon constructed a staff house, where he again invited the President and the President delegated me to represent him. However, the first time I went there, Acon said one thing. He told me, “All that I need - let me also have this handshake from the President. Can I be recognised for having won all these medals?” I said fine, I will take the message to the President. Subsequently, H.E the President was able to meet hon. Julius Acon with his wife and hon. Acon requested to be employed and a sponsorship to pursue his master’s degree.

When I went to commission the new staff houses, he did not yet have a job. I want to thank hon. Acon for listening to me because I saw a lot of support from the community. People loved him for having turned around their lives. This health facility has saved many mothers from dying. Many of the women could not move from Awake to Lira District to receive antenatal services. He has turned around that community and the health facility has reduced maternal mortality. I told him that the job you are looking for - why don’t you contest and become a Member of Parliament? Today, hon. Acon is here, as a Member of Parliament, having listened to me and he won with a big margin. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the Olympians for Life are people who dedicate their time in promoting peace and supporting other initiatives that improve the lives of the people. The other Olympians are supported by their governments. Since the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is here, I want to say that hon. Acon still needs to construct a theatre in Awake at Kristina Health Centre III. Therefore, the Government should support him and turn this facility into a health centre IV by constructing the theatre that is lacking.

He has bought an ambulance and those cases that cannot be managed at his health facility are quickly taken to Lira Regional Referral hospital.

This young man, hon. Acon, was abducted by the Lord’s Resistance Army rebels and his mother was killed by the same LRA. He constructed this health facility in memory of his sister, who lost her life while giving birth because she could not access healthcare services. We need to appreciate him for his big heart. It is my humble appeal, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that the Government - in support of Acon as an Olympian - gives him the necessary support so that he turns Kristina Health Centre III into a health centre IV. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, personally, I would like to congratulate hon. Julius Acon for being inducted as an “Olympian for Life.” Congratulations and we wish you well. 

Some Members do not know who hon. Acon is. Hon. Acon, can you stand up so Members get to know you? Congratulations once more. Remove the mask; some lady here wants to admire you - (Laughter) - that is hon. Acon. 

MR TOM AZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the Chairman of athletics -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tom Aza, I told you to always respect the Chair. Okay, speak for two minutes.

3.43
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to congratulate hon. Julius Acon for his induction into the World Olympians Association as an “Olympian for Life.” I am the Chairman of the Athletics Club at the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda and an Executive Member of the Parliamentary Football Club.

Hon. Julius Acon joined the Parliamentary Club in 2016 as its captain. Other Members who participated in the club from 2011 to 2016 were hon. Nulu Byamukama, hon. Odonga-Otto, hon. Bagole, hon. Zaake (our Commissioner), hon. Pentagon and hon. Mbwatekamwa, who is also present here. 

Madam Speaker, from 2014 to 2019, we have always collected gold, silver and bronze medals from the first, second and third positions in 100 metres, 200 metres, 400 metres, 800 metres and 1,500 metres in the East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Games for fast-tracking the integration process. 

I would also like to congratulate all the Ugandan athletes, who previously participated and won gold, silver and bronze medals. They include people like Ms Dorcus Inzikuru, Mr Joshua Cheptegei, Mr Moses Kipsiro and Mr Davis Kamoga, among others.

Madam Speaker, I remember these people were promised monthly allowances. I will be grateful to the Government if our hon. Acon is put on that stipend –(Member timed out.)

3.46
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion to congratulate hon. Julius Acon upon becoming a lifetime Olympian. Congratulations, my brother!

Hon. Acon, the man we are talking about is the only honourable member who has been making us win Inter-Parliamentary games. Kenya is good at running and athletics but hon. Acon has tried to keep the candle of this Parliament burning. 

The mover of the motion has talked about the resilience of hon. Acon. This was reflected onetime when, as he was jogging in the morning around Namugongo, he encountered a stray dog which bit him. However, due to hon. Acon’s resilience, he chased the dog, grabbed it, killed it and took it to the police. This is the gentleman we are speaking about today. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, by grabbing a dog - he must have grabbed my brother since I am “Mbwa.” (Laughter) I would like to tell you that the guy can run faster than a dog. 

I also pray that that the Government recognises hon. Acon and, as Parliament, we can even put up a monument here in recognition of the works of –(Member timed out.)        

3.48
MR PATRICK NSANJA (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I am a former team captain of the Uganda Parliament Football Club and I speak from that background.

In sports and games world over, there are two major factors that affect the performance of a team or an individual:  resources and discipline. I stand to testify that it is evident that hon. Julius Acon is disciplined. We are proud of you and indeed, you have made a tremendous contribution. 

I would like to implore the Government to invest in sports because indeed, sports have ceased being a mere leisure or recreation activity and turned into a lucrative commercial activity. For instance, in football, an international game is played and football fans are able to fund other sports. You will find an international game being watched by over three billion people and Uganda is able, from taxes, to pay Shs 600 million to watch a Premier League.

Madam Speaker, it is important for the Government to revise the current law to suit the commercial activity such that private investors and creators are protected. World over, we have been emphasising the issue of discipline –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We asked the minister to bring us the plan and we hope he will bring it in time.

3.50
MR GABRIEL OKUMU (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): My brother, Julius Acon, congratulations! I would like to add my voice to the voices of the youth of Uganda that we can make – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that hon. Okumu?

MR OKUMU: Yes, I am Gabriel Okumu. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, mention your name so that the Hansard can capture it.  

MR OKUMU: I would like to add my voice to the voices of the others, to also congratulate you and also call upon you, when we invite you, to go around the country to inspire our youth. I would like to be on record that I am extending an invitation to you to meet the many talented youth in Zombo, to inspire them. 

I would also like to speak to our youth of Uganda and remind them that from nothing, we can make something. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to extend my voice to Government that we cannot do business as we did it yesterday. I would like to call upon the 11th Parliament that in this coming budget, we should fund the sports sector of Uganda once and for all. After all, we have a very high level of unemployment in Uganda. I would like to call upon the House that when the budget comes, let us support our youth. I beg to submit. Thank you. 

3.52
MR STEPHEN SSERUBULA (NUP, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the profile of our colleague, you can realise that he was a self-made Olympian. This means that he struggled on his own. This also means that there are very many Ugandans with talent who would like to be like him but have not been helped. We thank you very much. 

I come from Lugazi Municipality where we have a lady named Halima Nakayi. She won gold in 2019 and when she was asked by the President what she wanted, her humble request was constructing a house for her parents. Nakayi’s parents reside in one of the villages called Ssesse in Nsakya Ward, Najjembe Division, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe District. 

To date, her parents who are aged, have never felt the pride brought by their daughter getting gold or being appreciated. Whenever these Olympians bring us gold, we are always very excited but the excitement at times goes without us appreciating them. 

My humble prayer is that the President and the Government fulfil their promise to construct a house and other promises to the parents of Halima Nakayi who is in my constituency. Thank you very much. 

3.54
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 

I have been part of the Parliamentary football team for seven years now. We have travelled with hon. Acon to participate in Parliamentary games. Not only do I want to testify to his competence but also to his conduct; he is a very modest person. 

Hon. Acon, I congratulate you. Sports in Uganda is one of the few sectors where you will not find children of leaders or their wives because in football, you will be substituted automatically. It is the only sector where people grow because of merit. You cannot fix your wife or son there. That is why we are here celebrating those who make it on merit. 

Maybe it is also the reason it does not attract funding; because those at the top do not have their wives and children there. I imagine if hon. Acon had been as connected as the others we see rising, maybe the recognition would have come much earlier. It wouldn’t take even a resolution of Parliament. 

I, therefore, want to invite those who are in Government to celebrate merit. If you are choosing a Prime Minister, choose the one that merits it. If you are choosing an RDC, choose the one who merits it. You do not even surprise people –(Member timed out.)

3.56
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in congratulating hon. Julius Acon for the exceptional achievement that he has made by lifting our flag high. 

The mover of the motion brought forward many achievements by hon. Acon and among them is a gold medal in 1994, a bronze medal in 1996 and many others. As I congratulate him, I would like to also note that apart from these achievements at the global and national level, in the communities, the mover mentioned so many activities that he has done at community level. 

I would like to note that he did not only do these in Otuke. In Oyam District, which I represent, hon. Acon has also made a tremendous contribution to the community. I would like to thank and congratulate you very much. 

As a Parliament, we have gained. As a nation, we have gained a lot of credit at global level. As a community, we have gained. It is now time for pay back. As other athletes have been recognised and appreciated, I call upon the Government to find it proper to also appreciate and facilitate hon. Julius Acon for this exceptional achievement. 

It should not only –(Member timed out.)

3.58
MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues in congratulating my dear brother, Acon. It is not easy; it needs persistence and consistence and you should be self driven to arrive where he is. 

We are proud of hon. Acon and we ask Parliament to have something specific to show that this is our first colleague and brother who has moved an extra mile in games. I join the rest to thank you. 

3.59
PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Independent, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and congratulate my brother, hon. Acon. He was an athlete and at his peak, I was in leadership of the Uganda Athletics Federation. 

I remember two things about hon. Acon. One is a high level of preparedness before the games. He knew what to do when it came to building endurance. He knew which hills to climb. 

The second thing I remember about him is decision making during action. Whenever he was running 1,500 metres and whenever the bell would be rung, he knew what gear to engage. When he reached 200 metres, he engaged another gear. When he reached the home stretch, you would think he was not a middle or long term distance runner; you would think that he was a sprinter. He knew what decision to take during action. 

I would like to support the proposal in the motion that hon. Julius Acon should be rewarded by the Ugandan Government as we have rewarded others. Thank you. 

4.01
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to congratulate hon. Julius Acon. Thank you very much for making us proud as a country. Thank you for the other achievements and the work you are doing for your community. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Acon is the captain of the Parliamentary Men’s Athletics Team; I am also the captain of the Female Athletics Team when we are in the Inter-Parliamentary Games. He has not just made us proud globally. He is doing the same because he still has the capability to run. When we go for these games, there is nobody who can run faster than hon. Acon. We thank you very much and we want to request you to continue serving your country.

There is one problem that I see. We want to celebrate these people but we do not know how they reach there. We have very many children who are making us proud. Recently, we had our children who made it to international level. We cannot now talk about them here but they are doing very well.

Madam Speaker, we just want to reap where we did not sow and yet these people want to be helped. They go through a lot to reach where they have reached; we need to support them. We need to give them facilitation so that they can do better than how they are doing now.

Hon. Acon, we thank and congratulate you. Thank you very much.

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise, once again, to support the motion of congratulating my friend, hon. Acon Julius.

Colleagues, this motion is not only congratulating hon. Acon, but it is a recognition of the potential our country has, in terms of sports. When hon. Acon won gold, bronze and all these prizes that he has achieved, he lifted a spirit of unity for this country. We congratulate you and wish you the very best for the future.

There are very many Acons in this country. There are very many Acons in Lango, Kigezi and Teso. As leaders of this country, it is our duty to make sure that this potential we have, as a country and a continent, is fully realised. 

On behalf of this side of Government - I know the Minister of State for Education and Sports will add on – the commitment we have led by His Excellency, President Yoweri Museveni, to fully appreciate this potential and support and develop is a good one. 

It is a commitment that we bring to this House and to say that together as legislators, let us work hard to make sure that this potential of our children, who can lift this country in terms of sports, is fully realised and supported. 

I congratulate you and wish you the best for the future. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Bahati. We recognise the arrival of the Vice-President. (Applause)

Minister of Education and Sports, would you like to comment, before the Prime Minister commits Government, mindful of the Prime Minister’s Time? We have already encroached on the Prime Minister’s Time.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please put on your mask.

MS OGWAL: I put it on but I did not cover my mouth. Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity. We are appreciating the achievement of hon. Acon and I think we are all concerned about it.

We know that the basketball team is now playing and winning in Rwanda but are being chased out of the hotel because they have not been paid. So, I wanted to have this information on the Table before the minister makes a reply. 

Secondly, it is important that we facilitate the several Acons who are scattered all over Uganda. In Dokolo, we have very many Acons who have even played in Britain barefooted. So, the Acons are there. If you go to Kapchorwa, they are there. If you go to Teso, they are there. We should promote them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what is the procedural matter?

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the procedure is that our basketball team playing right now in Rwanda must be facilitated. Secondly, can we facilitate the young sportsmen and women who are coming up? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Imat Cecilia, you just smuggled in your issue; it was not a procedural matter. (Laughter) Can we have the minister briefly? 

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda to pay tribute to our very own, hon. Julius Acon. Let me declare my interest that the late John Akii-Bua, hon. Acon and I are related. That is why hon. Acon is from Otuke and I am from Alebtong; so we are related.

Madam Speaker, in every cycle of the Olympic Games, five former Olympians are chosen from each continent of the world to be inducted into this prestigious Hall of Honour. For the 2020 Olympic Games in the entire continent of Africa, it was only this Ugandan called hon. Julius Acon –(Applause)– who was inducted into this Hall of Honour. 

Hon. Acon has a story. The story is very humbling and yet inspiring and motivating to young athletes in Uganda. When you sit down with hon. Acon and he tells you his story, you will feel like where he came from and where he is cannot meet, but he is here serving his second consecutive term.

As Government, we want to use the story of people like hon. Acon to better the lifetime of sportsmen and women, especially the emerging sportsmen and women of our generation. We can only do this by doing two or three things. Very important among them is the issue of sports infrastructure. 

Hon. Acon could have gotten an opportunity to speak but when you meet him, what he says is, “For me, at least I am alive and surviving but what about this person who motivated me, the late John Akii-Bua?” I have always consoled him that we are pushing.

Madam Speaker, you remember you made an order or directed that this Parliament be briefed on the state of affairs, in terms of securing the grant for constructing the famous Akii-Bua Stadium and Buhinga Stadium. 

You gave us two weeks, especially the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because we, as the Ministry of Education and Sports, are done with our role, as far as the construction of these two stadia is concerned. We also have a responsibility to better the funding, such that we can produce more people like hon. Acon in this Parliament.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, on the point raised by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the Government of the Republic of Uganda funded the national basketball team for the FIBA Afrobasket Finals in Rwanda to a tune of Shs 340 million. We have information that despite the fact that the tournament is ending on 5th September, the hotel, where the team is currently residing, has been duly paid up to 7 September 2021. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Rt Hon. Prime Minister – Honourable members, I have always told you - hon. Katusabe, you have just come back. You have the time to walk out of here and come back yet I sit here from the time we start until we leave. 

4.11
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, allow me, on behalf of the Government, to join the House in congratulating our brother, hon. Julius Acon, who was with me in the 10th Parliament. I also thank him for ably using the little resources he gets to better the lives of his people.

Honourable members talked about him constructing a health facility in his area. Since the President has already directed me and the Ministry of Health to come up with a framework paper to recruit doctors at Health Centre IIIs, I believe this is where hon. Acon’s health facility will fall. 

Therefore, I want to commit that as Government, we shall send a helping hand so that the intended communities can get an operational theatre. (Applause) This is where we are going right now. 

Hon. Acon, allow me to, once again, congratulate you for having made our country proud. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, thank you. Since the young man who is being talked about is here, can he just say a word to the House? 

4.13
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke District): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel like shedding tears of joy although I encourage you not to shed tears in a bad way.

I thank you, honourable members, for congratulating me, when I am still alive. I appreciate it. (Applause) As I speak, the small Acon from Awake village, in a small district called Otuke, in a small country called Uganda, was on top of the world on 25 July 2021.

When my story is told, it makes me feel like I was one of the greatest athletes on the planet - when God has prepared something for a poor man, He can never forget it. 

I want to say a few words to the world as we all share and celebrate together. The power and the fame we obtain from our achievements do not matter. Rather, it is what we do with the power that matters most. When I got the opportunity that life gave me, I focused on what matters most to my people who face numerous challenges in Otuke. 

As I speak, it is the joy of the people of Otuke who brought me here. I also speak for the joy of this country. When I competed in 1994, Northern Uganda was in hell. People were sleeping in the bushes because of the LRA insurgency but I did not lose hope to represent my mother country. (Applause)

I want to appreciate the major people who helped me, for example, Mr Christopher Mugisha from Makerere College, who picked me from my village in Otuke. I thank a white man from the Virginia State, United States, who took me to his house and catered for me as an adopted child. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I encourage you to do the best. When God has picked you, He has done it for a purpose and that is my message. It is the lesson that I have learnt. Never give up. God, by whatever name you call Him, is watching every effort you make. Your time is coming.

Lastly, the journey is not over. After the medal - many times, when we hit a goal or accomplish a mission, we sit back, relax and enjoy. I love sports greatly but my fame got illuminated not in the sports arena or at the height of the sports achievement, but it was more from what I did outside sports. My work with the community; my interaction with the sports fraternity and my commitment to the services of humanity. I say this For God and My Country. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Acon. Congratulations once again. Honourable members, we have had enough debate on this matter. I now put the question to the Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to congratulate hon. Julius Acon for his induction into the World Olympian Association as an Olympian for Life. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, this motion had prayers. One of them was to recognise hon. Acon. The second was to pay him like other athletes have been paid. In fact, I thought that when the three ministers spoke; hon. Obua, hon. Bahati and the Rt Hon. Nabbanja, they were going to tell us how those two prayers would be implemented. 

Unfortunately, they also just enjoyed making contributions. (Laughter) Otherwise, Government ministers do not speak like an ordinary Member of Parliament. The Government answers prayers. That is the procedural issue I am raising. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister committed herself to make a follow up on the resolutions that were made here including the one on the payment. So, the Prime Minister must follow up whatever has been said here. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I must report to you that we are not happy. We were supposed to have a statement from the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities at 2 O’clock. The minister responsible was not there in time. We were supposed to have a report from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but they were also not available. This House cannot be waiting for people. It was in the Communication from the Chair and we were supposed to have it immediately. 

I have seen the ministers coming past time. Kindly, whip your ministers to be here in time when they are supposed to make statements. You make your Government Chief Whip look like he does not know what he is doing. That young man suffers a lot. (Laughter) It is not good. We ask for reports today and they come at their own time. It is a sacrifice to be seated here from 2.00 p.m. and you come at 4.00 p.m. You have come at 4.00 p.m. because it is your time.

Mr ssemujju: Point of procedure, Madam Speaker. I am very sorry. The Leader of Government Business is supposed to be here, leading the Government. She only slopes in towards 4.00 p.m. to answer questions, leaving the former Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) Youth Leader Western –(Laughter) –

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ssemujju, hon. Tayebwa is in the National Resistance Movement (NRM) and he is the Government Chief Whip.

Mr ssemujju: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is whether the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business must not be coming to Parliament here to lead her team instead of abandoning her work to hon. Tayebwa, whose job is described in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and the Administration of Parliament’s Act as mobilising Members of Parliament to attend. He is the one taking notes –

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ssemujju, all these days we have had the Deputy Prime Minister. All the days, we have had a Prime Minister in the House and that was Hajat Nakadama. So, she was represented. Today, she has come by herself. We must be mindful that she is also busy. There are three people in that office. Once the deputy comes, it means she is here.

4.24
The prime minister and leader of government business (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I feel I should talk. When I was appointed Prime Minister, my brother – he claims to be my friend - ably went on television and claimed I could not even manage a garbage company. I have been watching him on television castigating me. I feel I want to ask him in front of everybody present because I think enough is enough: what is it that you want from me as an individual? (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I felt I must tell him in the face –(Interjection)

The Deputy Speaker: Order. Can everybody sit. Prime Minister, it is Prime Minister’s Time.

Ms nabbanja: That was a by-the-way. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues –(Interjection)-

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ssemujju, kindly allow the Prime Minister to answer the questions. Fine, you respond. 

Mr ssemujju: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If the Prime Minister focused –(Members rose_) - 

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, this is not a market.

Mr ssemujju: Madam Speaker, if the Prime Minister focused on answering, I certainly would not be standing here on a point of order. However, for her to suggest in broad day light that there is something I want from her –(Laughter)

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ssemujju, the Prime Minister was rising on the matter where you said she is never in the House. That is why she reacted like that. However, I clarified that the Prime Minister is always in the House. Let us not take anything personally. We are in this House today and tomorrow we will leave and other people will come. Whether we are fishermen or fisherwomen or whichever, it is our luck. (Applause) Let us co-exist. Honourable Prime Minister, respond.

Ms nabbanja: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. I had a question from hon. Isaac Etuka, the Member of Parliament for Upper Madi County in Madi-Okollo District, who asked me a number of questions. I do not know whether he is around so that he can repeat his questions. If he is not, I can go through them –

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Etuka, are you around? He is not here.

Ms nabbanja: Madam Speaker, the other time they would ask the questions and I would answer. If he is not here, let me go through the questions.

The question is that on 8 August 2019, the Office of the President directed the minister responsible for disaster preparedness and refugees in the Office of the Prime Minister to provide relief support to the people of –

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, do not go away. We shall have the reports on Emyooga, starting with Rwenzori and Lango.

Ms nabbanja: Arara Parish, Madi-Okollo District. These people referred to benefit from the relief aid were
affected by heavy hailstorms on 30 April 2019, resulting into loss of sources of livelihood, breakdown of classroom blocks hence, affecting teaching and learning of children in that area.

Since then, none of the affected persons and institutions has benefited from the relief aid. The impact of this disaster has remained fresh in the minds and livelihood of the victims. The relief items requested included food, iron sheets and other building materials, planting materials as well as household items.

The question was, can you assure the victims of the disaster as to when your office is providing relief support?

My answer is that my office receives requests for relief support from all parts of the country. The Department of Relief Disaster Preparedness and Management in the OPM reviews each request to establish its merit and sends a technical team to undertake a verification assessment and seeks further details and clarification from the respective district chief administrative officers or the District Disaster Management Committee Focal Persons. 

Furnished with the details and facts about the disaster incidents, the Office of the Prime Minister dispatches relief support, mainly food relief items such as maize flour, beans and basic non-food items like blankets, mosquito nets and jerry cans, where applicable, to the victims in the shortest time possible. 

In the event that the request does not directly fall within the mandate of my office, for example, reconstruction of damaged schools and other structures, planting materials, building materials to mention but a few, my office forwards such requests to the respective sector ministries for appropriate action. 

In this particular case involving victims of a heavy storm on 30 April 2019 in Arara Parish, Uleppi Subcounty in Madi-Okollo District, I have learnt, unfortunately, that no action was taken at that time. I am investigating the reasons for the failure to respond on time. 

In the meantime, honourable colleague, I have directed a technical team to work with the local authorities to establish the current situation and needs of the victims and an appropriate action will be taken within two weeks from now. Hon. Isaac Etuuka, I would like to request that we keep in touch so that the entire process is in the limelight. 

The same Member of Parliament asked a question that on 8 August 2019; Mrs Molly Nawe Kamukama, then Principal Private Secretary to His Excellency the President, in a letter addressed to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports, directed that new classroom blocks should be constructed at Katiyi and Eteleva Primary Schools, following a heavy storm that disorganised classroom blocks in those two primary schools. 

Since 2019 to date, children in these two schools learn under trees. This affects teaching and learning of those children in that area. He wanted me to update the country and the communities of the two primary schools as to when these class blocks will be constructed. 

My response is: 

Due to funding constraints, the Ministry of Education and Sports has not been in position to undertake civil works at Katiyi and Eteleva primary schools. As a way forward, I have directed the ministry to dispatch a team of engineers to conduct a needs assessment in the two schools to ensure that they are budgeted for in the next Financial Year 2022/2023 for implementation. 

The same Member of Parliament asked another question that on 15 July 2020, in a letter signed by Mrs Irene Kauma, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports, she addressed to the undersigned a response to a letter dated 28 May 2020 to the First Lady and the Minister of Education and Sports. 

The minister claimed that she forwarded the issue of constructing Anyiribu and Offaka secondary schools in the Upper Madi County to the Commissioner of Government Secondary Schools and that appropriate steps would be taken to undertake the construction of the seed secondary schools. 

To date, according to him, nothing tangible has been done on the ground to construct these schools. From my information, the contractors for Anyiribu Secondary School were diverted after the contract award to Gibo Cheap Stores and Dolphin Construction Engineering Contractors. His question was, when is the actual construction of these two schools starting? 

My response is: 

I would like to confirm that the two subcounties have both been earmarked to benefit under the Uganda Secondary Education Expansion Project. This project is to be funded by a loan facility from the World Bank and it is currently before Parliament for approval. 

The project will see 116 new secondary schools in the subcounties without and expand 61 existing government secondary schools. Anyiribu Subcounty will receive a seed school under the second phase of the Uganda Secondary Education Expansion Project while Offaka Secondary School has been earmarked as one of the 61 schools for expansion under the same project. For ease of reference, I have attached a list of beneficiary schools as indicated in your paper. 

Preliminary processes such as geological/topographical surveys and land confirmation have been concluded. The Ministry of Education and Sports is yet to embark on the procurement process for the contractors to undertake the civil works this Financial Year 202l/2022 upon approval of the loan by Parliament. 

It is also not true that a contractor for Anyiribu was diverted. In Financial Year 2017/2018, the Government of Uganda undertook construction of l2 Seed Schools among which was Pawor Seed School in Arua then before Madi-Okollo was created as a district. 

A total budget of Shs 1.4 billion was allocated over two Financial Years; 20l7/2018 and 2018/2019 for completion of Pawor Seed Secondary School. A request by Arua District Local Government to move the second batch of funds (Shs 700 million in the Financial Year 2018/2019) was not honoured since the funds were initially appropriated for one school (Pawor Seed School) which has since been completed.  

Colleagues, I have attached this list. There are other areas in the country for your information and of course, follow up because they are quite a number and I do not want to go through them. Since you have this on your iPads, you can go through all these lists. Most districts have benefited. 

You can turn to number 74 and see Anyiribu Secondary School in Madi-Okollo District, which is going to be worked on in phase 3. 

Honourable colleagues, let me go to another question. The same Member of Parliament asked a question. In a letter addressed to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Water and Environment, dated l3 July 20l7 by Nawe Molly Kamukama (Mrs), then the Principal Private Secretary to His Excellency the President, the ministry was directed to find water solutions for the people of Madi-Okollo County. 

Since then, no action, according to him, has been taken to help the people in the water-stressed areas of the Madi-Okollo. 

He asked me whether I can assure the people of Upper Madi County and Madi-Okollo District at large on the progress of providing piped water to the people of Madi-Okollo since boreholes have failed, particularly in larger parts of Okello and Anyiribu subcounties, Upper Madi. 

In regard to the issue raised by the honourable member on implementing a Presidential Directive on improving water availability coverage in Madi-Okollo, I wish to inform the honourable members that the Ministry of Water and Environment has undertaken the intervention in the three areas of safe water supply for domestic use, water for production and water for irrigation.

The safe water access rate in Madi-Okollo District varies from 39 per cent in Pawor Sub-county to 95 per cent in Okollo Sub-county. Madi-Okollo has 427 domestic water points, which serve a total of 110,814 people in the rural areas.

Madam Speaker, Madi-Okollo District receives funding from the Central Government under the District Water and Sanitation Conditional Grant to implement water and sanitation activities within the district.

For Financial Year 2020/2021, Madi-Okollo District received Shs 79,507,777 for non-wage and Shs 703,138,000 for development and Shs 19,800,000 for sanitation development. This makes a total of Shs 802,445,777 for water supply and sanitation development within the district.

It is important to note that in Madi-Okollo Constituency, there are planned interventions under the Integrated Water Management and Development Project funded by World Bank under the Ministry of Water and Environment. This is to construct Ala-Ora Gravity Flow Scheme, which has reached its final design stage and a tender for construction will be issued. This scheme will supply parts of the Sub-counties of Okollo, Anyiribu, Ogoko, Pawor and Offaka. The source of water for this is River Nyagak.

The second water supply system under the same project above is Anyau Water Supply and Sanitation System covering parts of Adupi and Uriama in the present-day Terego District. Rigbo in Madi-Okollo and Ariwa Sub-county in Yumbe District. 

The refugee settlements in the project area include Rhino Camp and Mvepi in Uriama and Udupi Sub-counties in Terego District and Bidi Bidi Zone-5 Refugee Settlement in Ariwa Sub-county in Yumbe District.

Under the same project, honourable colleagues, two solar-powered water supply systems will be implemented in Madi-Okollo in Ewanga and Edrayo in Ocodri Sub-county in Terego District.

Colleagues, attached is Appendix C showing the coverage of water and sanitation as of 01 September 2021. 

The detailed breakdown is equally attached.  

Madam Speaker, allow me to go to another question.

The other question is from hon. David Kalwanga, Member of Parliament, Busujju County in Mityana. He is asking me the following questions:

    i. In 2016, the President pledged to tarmac a number of roads in Mityana District including Kanoni-Misigi-Mityana Road and Kabasanda-Kakindu-Wabigalo-Mityana Roads. Subsequently, the feasibility studies and detailing engineering designs of the road were done according to Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA)

The annual report of 2019/20, the question is; may I know from the Prime Minister about the status of the road. He is also trying to find out if there is any plan to compensate the project-affected persons and if yes, how far has Government gone with this move?

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the honourable member requested for an update on the status of the following roads: Kanoni-Misigi-Mityana Road and Kabasanda-Kakindu-Wabigalo-Mityana Road.

These are national roads, which are managed by the Ministry of Works and Transport through UNRA.

However, the Kakindu-Wabigalo-Mityana, is a feeder road managed by the district. Kanoni-Misigi-Mityana is 39 kilometres. Madam Speaker, the Kanoni-Misigi-Mityana road is an existing gravel in the central region of Uganda.

The road was prioritised for upgrade to paved standard under the Integrated Transport Infrastructure and Services Programme in the Third National Development Plan (NDP III) and the designs for the upgrading of the road were completed in 2018.

The honourable member also requested for information whether there is any plan to compensate the project-affected persons on the same road project. 

The Government will ensure that all the affected persons - like it has been doing before - are adequately compensated for any land that is taken to be used in the road works.

Madam Speaker, Kakindu-Wabigalo-Mityana Road is an existing gravel road in the central region of Uganda. The road has two sections, including the Kabasanda-Kakindu Section and the Kakindu-Wabigalo-Mityana Section.

The Kabasanda-Kakindu-Zigote Road (21km) is maintained by UNRA and is currently in a fair condition. The first four kilometres of the road from Kabasanda were upgraded to paved standard under the Mpigi Town Roads Upgrading.

I want to assure you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, that the Ministry of Works and Transport, through UNRA, will ensure that the upgrading of the Kanoni-Misigi-Mityana Road is implemented as planned in the NDP III period.

Secondly, the Ministry of Works and Transport will ensure that the Kabasanda-Kakindu-Wabigalo-Mityana Road is maintained in motorable condition.

In conclusion, Government is committed to ensuring that key transport infrastructure is developed and maintained to support the national programmes aimed at socio-economic transformation of Uganda. And Government will ensure that the key transport routes across the country are developed and maintained. 
I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for the responses to those questions.

MR KALWANGA: Madam Speaker, there is something that is missing in the explanation the Prime Minister has given. These were pledges in 2006 and they are not supposed to be repaired. We are looking at tarmacking them. Therefore, if you are telling me to go to UNRA, it is quite unfair. We need to understand whether they are going to be tarmacked or not. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is looking at tarmacking vis-à-vis maintenance.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, like I said, the roads that are under NDP III will be tarmacked as programmed by the Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that clarified? 

MR KALWANGA: Madam Speaker, I am happy with it; that is if the pledge is going to be pretty fast.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR MATOVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 41(3). On 22 July 2021, I wrote a question for the Prime Minister’s time and I forwarded the same to the Clerk to Parliament for response. I have been told that the question was forwarded to the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business. 

The question relates to health concerns. In Busiro Subcounty, a total of over 35,000 people are using dilapidated toilets. My question was seeking for an intervention by the Government to erect the toilets.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Matovu, if you wrote a question, it is going to be responded to.

MR MATOVU: Well, the Prime Minister has just answered questions that were raised on 8th August.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When did you write?

MR MATOVU: On 22nd July and another on 29th July. What procedure does the Prime Minister use for the selective response to some questions? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The questions are not determined by the dates. They carry out a raffle and they just select 15 questions and pass it. Yours could be coming. However, if it is very urgent, please walk to the Prime Minister’s Office. If it concerns any minister, we have advised our ministers to be accommodative to Members of Parliament.

MR MATOVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The raffle says 15 questions but she has only attended to five. Thank you.

4.53
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My curiosity has been aroused by the concern of the honourable member from Busiro that his questions have been lagging for long yet, we are strictly operating under the rules. 

Remember, in the 10th Parliament and for whatever reasons Parliament thought, it amended the nature and scope of Prime Minister’s Time - the way we knew it under the Commonwealth practice - to allow the Prime Minister Time to offer more robust and cogent responses. We even amended the rules. Otherwise, the Prime Minister was supposed to answer instantly. Even when Members write, the Prime Minister chooses when yet Members are speaking about months.

Madam Speaker, I do not think we need to have a more acceptable response as to why Member’s questions are lagging.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, I would like to refer you to your Rules of Procedure, rule 41(4). It reads, “The Clerk shall enter all questions in the Prime Minister’s record book and select 15 questions by a raffle, which shall be forwarded to the Prime Minister.” Therefore, the question would be: Were the 15 questions forwarded to the Prime Minister? We will follow up that with the Clerk to ensure that the questions are always forwarded to the Prime Minister. Mr Okema, take note.

4.56
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall this issue of our rules was raised by hon. Ssemujju. You directed the Committee on Rules, Privilege and Discipline to look at these rules and report back to the House. It has been over 60 days since you gave the directive. Can we get an update from the Chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on this matter? As you can see, these rules are really unfair and they are going to disadvantage Members.

I would like to request that you direct the Chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to give us an update on how far they have gone with this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We actually said that the chairperson should look at the rules exhaustively, not in particular rule 41. We will ask hon. Katuntu to review all the rules and report back to this House.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I concur with the submission of the honourable member that some rules need some urgency. You can see that under sub-rule (4) – of course, not that we mistrust the Clerk. Who attends the raffle, where the Clerk tosses these questions? Who is in attendance to determine whether the selection is not for convenience that Members are properly serviced?

I would like to appeal to the Speaker to reassert the urgency so that Members are facilitated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The time limitation of the Prime Minister’s Time is 45 minutes. Assuming the Prime Minister had the 15 questions, it would still limit her within 45 minutes. She can even end up answering three or four questions. That really raises an issue.

4.58
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to invite the Prime Minister to take time on Wednesday and watch the question time in the British Parliament. Prime Ministers in Britain, where we copy this culture, do not give lectures; they answer questions. 

In fact, on Wednesday, the Prime Minister can answer 100 questions in 30 minutes. I want to invite her to take off time and watch the British Parliament on Wednesday; they have a whole channel for Parliament. It will give her knowledge on how to answer questions such that you do not answer five, when the rules say you answer 15.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, a senior colleague, hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju, has always reminded us that we should follow the Rules of Procedure. 

Madam Speaker, questions are brought to the Prime Minister and she answers those that are brought. I would like to assure you that hon. Mpuuga does not have any evidence that there is any question, which has been brought – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why are you talking about hon. Mpuuga?

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: I am very sorry. Hon. Ssemujju, does not have any evidence that a question has been brought to the Prime Minister and she has not answered –(Interruption)– I am on order.

Madam Speaker, rule 41 is very clear. Where questions should be published so that Members can know whether their questions were taken to the Prime Minister or not. 

Is it in order for a senior legislator to keep ridiculing colleagues that, for them to know how to do their work, they should go on TV? Hon. Ssemujju has felt very big in this House. Maybe we create a chamber for him so that he is above us. 

Is he in order to continue belittling colleagues this way? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I had already made a ruling that let the Clerk make sure the 15 questions – if you want to fight, go and fight in the corridor. I have made a ruling: let the Clerk make sure the 15 questions are always given to the Prime Minister. 

Those who are doing the raffle must look at the dates when the questions were brought on board. Look at the dates and do not just make a raffle. 

The rules also say that they should be published. If possible, you should be able to publish the questions that have been responded to and what is pending. You can send more than 15 so that they respond to 15 as they prepare for the other 15. 

PRESENTATION OF REPORTS ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EMYOOGA PROGRAMME IN VARIOUS REGIONS OF THE COUNTRY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rwenzori? Members, you remember we asked you to go to the field. We gave you a recess to go on a fact-finding mission on Emyooga. Emyooga money was given out to our people and we needed to find out what had happened to Emyooga before we go on to the Parish Model. We need to learn some lessons from Emyooga. Hon. Alex Ruhunda is representing the Rwenzori Subregion. 

5.03
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My fellow Rwenzorian is here. (Laughter)

At the 12th Sitting of the 1st Meeting of the 1st Session of the 11th Parliament of Uganda, held on Tuesday, 3 August 2021, you directed all Members of Parliament to conduct oversight assessment of the Emyooga programme in their constituencies. 

We, as Members of Parliament from the Rwenziri subregion, divided ourselves into our respective constituencies and conducted a number of meetings and engagements to this effect. I have to say that we did not exhaust all that was required because of the timeframe, the COVID-19 restrictions and in some cases, unavailability of some of the Emyooga members, respectively. 

Largely, we managed to collect what I am going to present. I will not go to the background of Emyooga, as everyone knows about how it started - all that information is available. 

The objectives of Emyooga are very few. These include: increasing employment or job opportunities for the less-privileged but active Ugandans, increasing access to specialised financial services to rural areas, improving household income of the project beneficiaries, and enhancing entrepreneurial capacity of different categories through sensitisation, skilling and tooling.

I will go to page 3, where we did the summary of the funds disbursed to each district. I have to report that out of the nine districts plus one city, funds were disbursed and 90 per cent of the Emyooga SACCOs received the money.

The table shows a detailed breakdown for each district. For purposes of time management, I will just make a summary that the Rwenzori Subregion, in total, had 447 registered Emyooga SACCOs and received Shs 11,730,000,000. 

Out of the 10 districts, including a city, we were shocked that Kyegegwa District did not get any money of Emyooga. Up to now, the files are still stuck in the RDC’s office and the people of Kyegegwa are very disgusted about not having the chance of accessing the Emyooga money. 

As I explained earlier on the methodology and the type of questions which were asked, we were more interested in knowing;

1. 	How much money was released to each district?
2. 	The criteria for distributing Emyooga funds.
3. 	Who qualifies for the funds?
4. 	Which SACCOs or groups were registered?
5. 	What are the accountability measures for the beneficiaries? Do they exist?
6. 	What safeguards have been put in place to ensure that funds, which have been disbursed, are paid back? 
7. 	Were there extortions of the public involved?
8. 	What bank accounts exist?

Findings

In all the districts, it was realised that the timing of the Emyooga programme coincided with the political campaign period, leading to the populace misconstruing it to be a political reward. 

In some instances, transfers of cash to accounts were done immediately after elections and, as such, many beneficiaries saw it as a form of reward for “voting well” - that is, akasiimo. This has greatly affected the programme, especially when it comes to loan recoveries.

Limited knowledge on proper bookkeeping for SACCO treasurers and leaders, leading to poor financial records for most SACCOs visited. The planning of this programme was skewed because it did not allow communities to participate in identifying their problems so that the solutions could be meaningfully found and owned.

Determining the enterprises from the implementation side and not the beneficiary side caused some communities to simply attach themselves to the enterprises they had no idea about. 

So, people were there, running around with commercial officers and the RDCs to just fulfil the need for getting the money. Otherwise, the real essence of how they could make use of this money and multiply wealth was quite absent. 

3. 	Delayed and no payment for the CDOs and commercial officers who are supposed to do support supervision to the SACCOS. 

During the field visit, we were surprised to learn that the Microfinance Support Centre was supposed to pay a monthly facilitation of Shs 200,000 to each subcounty CDO and Shs 300,000 to the district CDO and commercial officer. 

However, we found out that the CDOs were last paid in December 2020 and had over seven months they were claiming in arrears. This non-payment and failure by MSC to fulfil the contractual promises greatly affected the Emyooga programme. For instance, 31 CDOs in Kyenjojo times seven months times Shs 200,000 - you can imagine.

The MSC promised to pay the staff the arrears but the question that remained unanswered was where they were going to get those funds when the financial year already ended. The arrangement is - you know how districts operate – these commercial officers and CDOs are starved; they do not have a budget to use to move to the field, monitor, do appraisals and ensure that there are right enterprises that are being financed. 

At the end of the day, they were simply doing paper work and, in some cases, even demanding money from the poor groups for their facilitation. This even tempted the CDOs and some commercial officers to extort money from these poor citizens. You can imagine the environment that was created as a result of that.

4. 	In the design of the programme, there was no plan for motorable means to facilitate monitoring and supervision yet the programme has a lot of community-based engagements. 

5. 	There were delays on the side of MSC to process certificates of some SACCOs. For example, by the time of the visit, one Emyooga SACCO of Mwenge South Local Leaders had not yet received a registration certificate and this was worse when it came to Kyegegwa District.

We found out that SACCOs with fewer associations like the Taxi Operators SACCO, Carpenters Sacco, welders, saloons, PWDs and media SACCOs were the worst performing entities with some indicators that the Emyooga cash could have been shared, though the groups are firefighting through making loan recoveries. 

On the other hand, SACCOs with many association members were doing fairly well. These were traditional SACCOs, which were well established like women entrepreneurs, local leaders, veterans, market vendors and produce dealers. They showed clear indicators of performance and some loan recoveries were on schedule. 

7. 	The higher commitment amount of saving required for associations – that is 30 per cent - to access a bigger loan from the seed capital is a big challenge. As such, people end up taking loans of less than Shs 500,000 which cannot create much impact. 

8. 	The seed capital of Shs 30 million per SACCO was too small, especially for associations with very many members like women entrepreneurs, local leaders, veterans, market vendors and produce dealers whose composition for some goes to 1,000 members. This Shs 30 million was really very small for such groups. 

9. 	On the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown, just like any other business, Emyooga SACCOs have been equally hit. This has now been used as an excuse for most of the groups which are failing to recover the planned loan recoveries. The whole notion was that after six months, recoveries are made.

10. There are no coordinated guidelines put in place for the effective management of the Emyooga programme.

11. 	On asking why there was a delay for the people to access the Shs 30 million on their accounts and why the process was taking so long, the district commercial officers expressed that the Microfinance Support Centre did not provide facilitation for them to do the work faster and that also the COVID-19 lockdown made it even slower because the SOPs could not allow them to conduct the general meetings for the respective constituency SACCOs to appoint their bank signatories. 

There was a big information gap on what was going on, what would be required next and this subjected them to extortionists in the guise that they were all required from Emyooga beneficiaries. 

Some misunderstandings had started developing between some SACCO leaderships for a number of reasons, including the lack of appropriate information. This caused a threat that maybe they would not be allowed to access their money as a result. 

The planning of this programme, as I stated earlier, was skewed because it did not allow communities to participate in identifying their problems to make the solutions meaningful and owned. Determining the enterprises was from the implementation side and not the beneficiary side. 

Observations 

    1. In general, it was established that the Microfinance Support Centre disbursed funds to the districts’ respective accounts, as required by the terms and conditions. In all the districts of the region, it is only Kyegegwa District where funds have not been accessed by the Emyooga SACCOs to date.

    2. The notion of Emyooga comes out to be very attractive with good intent to enable the lowest person access cheaper credit but the mechanism in which it has been executed falls short of the desired goals. 

    3. There is very little impact of the Emyooga programme given the timeframe and the context in which it was introduced, especially during the charged political environment. 

    4. Whenever a development programme is established, there is need for stakeholder mapping to apportion responsibility. Members of Parliament, district council members, RDCs and other relevant leaders be given adequate information so that we avoid a recurrence of us doing post-mortem like we are now doing on Emyooga. I think we did that with the other programmes like Entandikwa and so on.

    5. The local people should not continue to be excited and incited to just form groups for receiving money but rather, they form purposeful associations where they themselves collect the starting capital and are supported along the way. So, there is great need for mind-set awareness in this regard. This bottom-up ownership is extremely important if we are to empower our people.

Madam Speaker, I now move to recommendations, which will lead to the conclusion.

    1. The Microfinance Support Centre should come up and support the operationalisation of this programme. If that is done, better achievements will be registered if there are financial support and other synergies to that effect; 

    2. Commercial officers and CDOs need to be facilitated to train, monitor and supervise the Emyooga programme;

    3. The Microfinance Support Centre should add more capital to those SACCOs performing better to bridge the gap arising out of demands from the registered associations in the respective Emyooga SACCOs. 

    4. There is need for continuous and vigorous training and monitoring of association members to appreciate and own SACCOs as a means of sustainable cooperative development.

    5. There is need to provide for motorable means to facilitate commercial officers and other officers to conduct regular field travels. These are normal. I do not understand when Government is introducing such a big multi-billion programme, why they cannot have a holistic plan to know how it can be executed to give us results. 

We have many case studies in this country where we have seen success. So, I do not know why we go in a haphazard manner and then lose a lot of resources. I think the minister, hon. Kasolo, who is here will explain. 

Need for continuous and vigorous training is a must. There is need to provide proper and coordinated programme guidelines for harmonised implementation. 

Government should make provisions for additional seeds to benefit more Members within this period because some of the SACCOs are going to break down. They think since this was a political programme, therefore, there is no more commitment from Government. We need that confidence to address it as soon as possible.

The Microfinance Support Centre’s activities should be investigated especially on the issue of non-payment of the CDOs if that was in the contract. If they engaged the CDOs and the commercial officers, then they should have provided that funding. Of course, you cannot provide money without auditing to know how these SACCOs are functioning. So, we need that duty to be done quickly.

Decentralisation

Government should decentralise the Emyooga Programme. Much as we have regional centres, the way the Emyooga Programme was structured had so much control from the centre. So, we need more empowerment at the lower level.

Amend the cooperatives law and put clear penalties for those who default on payments and loan recoveries under the Emyooga Programme. That is if the mistakes are not from the side of Government.

There is need for training of association leaders. The information dissemination component should be mainstreamed throughout the whole implementation roadmap. It is because the duty bearers tend to deprive the right holders of information and leave them to be taken advantage of.

Government gets an inbuilt system that tracks every coin of money that is disbursed and cause duty bearers and accounting officers to give regular account of the progress on implementation in their respective jurisdictions. 

Government should do a thorough risk assessment on the programme and provide mitigation strategies. 

In conclusion, given the above findings, it is important to note that the Emyooga Programme is a well-intended socio-economic transformational programme that, if implemented well, can enable the local persons to improve on their economic wellbeing. 

It is equally important to note that for many decades, the Government has made attempts to reach the common person through programmes like Entandikwa, among others, but the mode and manner of implementation has always failed the desired goals and the Emyooga Programme is no exception. It needs very quick remedial interventions to avert another wastage of taxpayers’ money.

I beg to move, Madam Speaker. The list of the members of Parliament is herein attached.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Alex Ruhunda, for a very good report. Listening to this report helps us form a decision on the next programmes. 

Honourable members, we will receive all the reports, and then we will have a debate on them after they have been submitted. Let us move to Lango.

5.24
MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the General Secretary of the Lango Parliamentary Group. So, I will present this report on behalf of the Lango Sub-region. The report is uploaded on the iPads and I will be giving highlights starting from page 1. 

We have already understood clearly the basis on which this oversight function was done. It was based on the directive that was given by the Speaker that this oversight be done from 05th to 17th August 2021. There were eight terms of reference which focused on the receipt of the funds, disbursements, recoveries, controls and systems that were in place.

In our methodology, the oversight focused on meetings with the district leadership; that is the RDCs, CAOs, LCVs and the District Commercial Officers. There were meetings with the SACCO leaders, the association leaders, the members of the different associations and the SACCO banks. There were also reviews of the documents of Emyooga guidelines, reports and the bank statements. 

On the scope of the Emyooga Programme oversight, Lango Sub-region is comprised of nine districts and one city, namely: Amolatar, Alebtong, Apac, Dokolo, Lira, Lira City, Kole, Kwania, Oyam and Otuke where hon. Acon comes from. We also want to congratulate him as Lango Parliamentary Group. 

Madam Speaker, I want to report that all the nine districts and city gave reports on the oversight of the Emyooga Programme within their respective constituencies.

The key findings on the Emyooga Programme
The first one is on the funds released to the Lango Sub-region districts. We noted that generally all the reporting administrative units - that is the districts and city - indicated that the SACCOs received the funds into their accounts. The local leaders’ SACCOs received Shs 50 million in their accounts while the others received Shs 30 million in their accounts. 

However, there were a number of discrepancies that we noted. In Otuke District, Otuke County Veterans’ SACCO did not receive their Shs 30 million although Microfinance Support Centre had indicated in their earlier letter that money had been sent totalling to Shs 560 million for all the 18 SACCOs. The bank statements showed no evidence of money sent to the Otuke County Veterans’ SACCO. 

In Kole District, it was noted that the Kole South Local Leaders’ SACCO received Shs 50 million twice on 15 December 2020, making a total of Shs 100 million. However, Shs 50 million was removed from their account on 21 December 2020. The bank manager indicated that this was an error and the money was reversed and sent back to the head office. The description of the transaction was Kole South Local Leaders which did not match the explanation from the bank manager. This matter is still a subject of inquiry by the police. 

Secondly, on matters to do with criteria for distributing the Emyooga funds and the qualification, the funds were distributed based on the associations’ savings, the registration with the SACCO, payment for membership, subscription fees and active participation in the enterprise. You needed also not to have a running loan and you had to apply through the associations and not directly. Further, you needed to have saved a third of the amounts that you wished to borrow. So, if you wanted to borrow Shs 3 million, you needed to have saved at least Shs 1 million. The maximum repayment period was four months. 

There was further guidance given by the Microfinance Support Centre that for all the withdrawals from the bank account, recommendation letters had to be issued by the District Commercial Officers. Therefore, no withdrawals could take place from any bank account without a recommendation letter from them. Also, they were required to witness the disbursement of the funds to the different associations. 

There were several observations in the various districts. In Amolatar District, whereas there was a substantive District Commercial Officer in place, the RDC instead appointed a Community Development Officer in his place to handle the Emyooga programme. In Lira City, due to lack of an existing independent administrative structure, the Emyooga Programme including the disbursements were managed by the Lira District Trade, Industry and Commercial Department. This, in a way, impacted on the implementation of Emyooga Programme within Lira City. 

In Alebtong District, due to the stringent requirements, whereas funds had been received in the SACCO accounts, none had been disbursed at that time of oversight. In other words, all the Shs 30 million and Shs 50 million had not been withdrawn or disbursed to any of the associations from the date of receipt. 

However, Moroto Journalists SACCO indicated that they had fulfilled all the requirements, but they were not granted access to the funds when they went to the bank though the District Commercial Officer had already given them a recommendation letter. We could not establish the reasons why the disbursements were not honoured. 

In Amolatar District, we also noted that no fund disbursements had also been made. In Otuke District, we found that three SACCOs had not yet accessed their funds. The reason mainly given was that because of the COVID-19 period, the members were reluctant to take up the loans since they would face challenges in terms of repayment.

In Kole District, there were several instances, where the one third savings requirement for the loan applied for was not complied with. As stated, you needed to have saved at least a third of what you needed. If you needed to borrow Shs 3 million, you should have saved at least a million. 

However, we observed that in several cases, as indicated on page four, this was not complied with. For example, in Apac Produce Dealers Association, Shs 910,000 was saved but what was disbursed was Shs 5 million; more than five times the savings.

When you scroll down to the last bullet at the bottom, in Opeta Performing Artistes, Okwerodot Performing Artistes and Adellogo Performing Artists; each saved Shs 250,000 but they received Shs 5 million, more than 20 times the savings that they had made.

On page 5, in regard to the SACCOS and groups registered, the 36 SACCOs in the districts reported were found to be registered with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives under the 18 categories. We also found hundreds of associations registered under the different SACCOs. For example, Amolatar District had 411 associations, 594 in Lira City and 495 associations in Dokolo District.

In Kole District, we noted some observations. Whereas the Kole North Women Entrepreneurs SACCO is for women, it was being led by a man, a one Okello Alex Jimmy as the chairperson.

We also found several other women entrepreneur associations, which were led by men, namely; Alito Women Joint Entrepreneurs, led by Okello Tomson and Lwara Joint Women Entrepreneurs, led by Obaro Boniface and Ogwang Alex.

Under accountability measures for the beneficiaries and whether they existed; the beneficiaries were expected to make their savings, loan repayments, memberships and subscription fees, recoveries and any charges to the SACCO bank accounts. 

We noticed that each association in each parish was required to contribute at least Shs 20,000 to the constituency SACCOs. That was as per the guidelines. However, we observe that in the different districts, there was varied implementation. In Amolatar District, the associations are being asked to pay registration fees of Shs 40,000, into the district collection account. This was not supposed to be money collected by the district. If there was any, it should have been collected into the SACCO accounts.

We also noted that the associations had to raise Shs 600,000 with each member paying Shs 20,000. Half of this would go into the SACCO and the other half would remain; we were told for purposes of registrations.

We also heard concerns that were being raised by some of the associations that they were being denied access to the bank statements to confirm their actual loan and saving amounts. They were even threatened not to question what did not concern them by the SACCO leaders. This was observed in Kole District.

In Alebtong District, we observed that there were funds that had not been disbursed. We noticed that in two districts whereas funds had been received, they had not been disbursed due to various reasons. 

We also noted that there was a lot of concern that the funds were not sufficient. For example, in Kwania District, Kwania Produce Dealers SACCO had 128 groups, each with 30 members totalling to 3,840. They had Shs 30 million. Dokolo District had 75 produce dealers associations. Oyam District also had the same challenges.

Across the various districts including Lira, Alebtong, Kwania and Kole. There was a perception that the funds were to be given as a grant and not as a loan. Therefore, they did not expect that it would be repaid. 

We also noticed that part of the savings that were being made in some of the districts were not part of the funds that were being lent out. For example, Otuke County, which had about 300 members in their Emyooga SACCO for produce dealers, had Shs 8 million on their account and that could not form part of what could be lent out.

In Amolatar District, we noted that there were suspicious deposits into the SACCO accounts, which were not known to the SACCO leaders. Even in Lira District, we observed there were deposits that were being made under the description; “Boda boda” in a Women Entrepreneur SACCO. It was quite difficult to understand the motive behind that.

In Lira City, it was reported that the Emyooga scheme was interfered with and manipulated by opportunists, the well-connected, and some unscrupulous and selfish personalities who diverted the collective benefits of the scheme for personal use. As a result, there were also claims of instances of discrimination of some individuals and persuasions reported, which discouraged some potential beneficiaries from participating.

Most group members of the SACCOS were found to have abandoned. The top executive also left due to lack of trust and confidence in the leadership of some of these SACCOs. That was in Lira City.

In regard to the safeguards to ensure that funds disbursed have been paid back, one needed to have saved at least a third of the loan, which acted more or less as part security. There was also a short repayment period of four months. There was leadership in place to run the SACCOs, a loan vetting process; a loans committee and members were even required to guarantee each other.

In Otuke District, we noted that the persons that had borrowed the money were freely paying it and no cases of default had been reported.

In Kole District, most of the Kole South SACCOs were found to have made deposits to repay the amounts borrowed. In Kole North, we found the default rate to be high. 

In Lira District, the Women Entrepreneur SACCO in Erute North had members both from Lira District and Lira City but all the leaders were coming from Lira City. They dominated the groups and that became a big challenge, especially when it came to the safeguards.

It was also noted that some of the leaders were handpicked by the implementers of the programme and it was not done through a democratic elective process. In Kole District, for example, the leadership to the SACCOs was selective and it had a person who identified himself as the coordinator, who selected the different leaders. This is why you note that the Chairperson for Kole Women Entrepreneurs was a man.

On page eight, we also noticed that in Kole North, specifically the majority of the associations had not paid up their loans. Major reasons cited were the lockdown and the harsh weather, which led to low yields. 

It was also noted that there were discrepancies in some of the claimed recoveries. For example, in the District Commercial Officer’s Report, it indicated that Opeta Parish local leaders had repaid Shs 3 million  but these funds could not be traced in the bank accounts and the account had only Shs 265,939.48.

We also observed similar discrepancies in the association for people with disabilities and Opeta Tailoring Association, where Shs 2,313,000 was indicated to have been paid but it could not be traced. 

By the time of writing this report, we could not establish whether these funds were paid but not banked by the respective SACCOs leaders or they were paid and embezzled by the leadership.

In Kwania District, a number of the Emyooga projects could not be undertaken because of lack of electricity. For example, the welders and salon SACCOs –(Interruption)

MS ADEKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry to interrupt my honourable colleague. Uganda is a small country, as hon. Acon noted and we have gerrymandered it to create 146 districts. With that bulk of districts, wouldn’t it be procedurally proper for every presenter to take the format that the Rwenzori Sub-region had taken?

It is a very good thing to give us the narrative of district by district, regarding the different defects they found but in light of the fact that we have very many districts; 146 in total and every sub-region has to present, wouldn’t it be proper that we take a more defined format to save time? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the format you would suggest?

MS ADEKE: The format that the Rwenzori Subregion started with. He gave us the challenges and the recommendations. He did not go into every district. He gave a few examples to build on his point like Kyegegwa, where there was totally no disbursement made. He structured his report in a much organised way because he had the challenges and the recommendations to the challenges. So, wouldn’t it be proper, instead of saying Soroti, Katakwi and Amuria?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What hon. Opio is presenting relates what hon. Alex did, only that there are some exceptions in some districts which must be mentioned and cannot go unmentioned. That is what he is doing.  

MR OPIO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are just a few pages left and I am on page 9. Please, be assured that we will be able to complete that. The next item was on extortion – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Anne Adeke, when you listen to the Lango report, you will notice that it is sad news. I would like you to listen attentively since you are a shadow minister on the Opposition side.

MR OPIO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Item No. 6 was on the extortion from the public and collection of illegal fees. We noticed that several incidences of extortion being undertaken. For example, in Amolatar District, Shs 40,000 was demanded to be collected. 

We also noticed that in certain SACCOs, they were demanding for certain funds that were not part of what was to be collected. I will give one example. Dokolo North Women Entrepreneurs SACCO, at the start, collected the following funds: Shs 5,000 for registration from each association; Shs 40,000 from each association for rent; Shs 25,000 from each association for transport; Shs 5,000 from each individual member of the association for loan pick-up; Shs 20,000 from each individual member of the association for SACCO registration; and Shs 10,000 from each individual member of the association for membership.

We also noticed in Kole District, specifically, there was a lot of extortion and the chairpersons of the various SACCOs indicated that they had to give kickbacks, ranging from Shs 4,000,000 to Shs 2,000,000 to Shs 1,000,000 or Shs 1.5 million, depending on the different SACCO that was involved. 

Review of the bank statements

This is the last finding. We made a review of the different statements. We found that some of the districts had no discrepancies and they were tallying. However, in some of the districts, we found that withdrawals vs disbursements were not tallying. 

For example, on page 11, if you look at Kole North SACCOs, you will realise that there was a total of Shs 540,671,900 withdrawn but what was received by the beneficiaries was Shs 409,542,000. Therefore, Shs 131,129,900 could not be accounted for and it was missing on the accounts. 

We also noted discrepancies between the funds withdrawn in the associations’ names and those received by the associations in Kole North - see page 12. We found a total discrepancy amounting to Shs 88,540,000. If you look at one example at page 12 of Okwerodot Performing Artists, you will notice that the amount withdrawn, as per the bank statement is Shs 10,000,000 but the amount received is Shs 2,000,000. 

When you look at the Kole North Carpenter SACCO, on page 13 where Ayala Oyaa Carpenters is, you will notice that the amount withdrawn on the bank statement in their name is Shs 16,000,000 but the amount that they actually received and what was disbursed is Shs 5,000,000. Those are the observations that we made, Madam Speaker. 

Recommendations 

We have general and specific recommendations 

General 

1) These funds should be placed under the responsibility of the CAO such that there is better accountability. We noticed that it was the RDCs playing the monitoring role and many of the CAOs indicated that they had no direct role on those funds and, therefore, could not account for them; 

2) 	The SACCO loan policies on repayment periods need to be revised from four months. We found that the four months as too short. If you look at Lango Subregion, which is an agricultural area, four months is much shorter than the agricultural seasonal cycle. Therefore, they would not be expected to have made any meaningful income to be able to repay. 

However, we also need to look at rescheduling some of the existing loans due to the impact of Covid-19 and the harsh weather in the past rainy season. In addition, the one-third saving requirement needs to be revised because it was deemed to be prohibitive and limiting uptake of funds by the different groups; 

3) The communication on the Emyooga Programme needs to be streamlined to ensure that the information received is clear and implementation is uniform. We saw a lot of variability in implementation; 
4) The savings also needs to be considered as part of the amount of loans that had to be given out; 
5) The SACCOs that have not yet received funds from the Microfinance Support Centre should have their funds disbursed, including Otuke County Veteran SACCO, which had been indicated to have received the funds but had not received it; 
6) Associations should be encouraged to open bank accounts to receive funds from the SACCOs’ accounts. We noticed that the accounts were with the SACCOs. Withdrawals are made in cash and then disbursements are made in cash to the associations. 

We recommend that the associations should also have bank accounts to ensure that funds are paid directly into the individual members’ mobile phones to ensure traceability and limit fraud and various extortions that we observed. 

The banks should also provide SMS alerts to the SACCOs and the association leadership in order to monitor the account transactions; 

7) 	The offices of the RDCs and the commercial officers should be facilitated adequately to support to the SACCOs and associations; 

8) 	We need to see more of the local leaders - political and appointees - at all administrative units included and to be part of the whole monitoring process; 

9) 	There is also need for the creation of a regional pool of funds, where the constituency SACCOs can borrow from. 

We have some SACCOs that were performing well but they need more capital and are ready to borrow and have capacity to pay but do not have any opportunity to tap into that. There is need for additional capitalisation. 

Specific recommendations 

This is restricted to the different districts where we had challenges. 

1) 	In general, what we are recommending is the reinstatement of persons who are the focal persons in the districts to be the district commercial officers. 

2) 	Persons who have been found to have connived with the SACCO leaders should be investigated for the loss of those funds and missing funds should be repaid within 30 days; and

3) Further, withdrawals from Kole North SACCO accounts should be halted until there are adequate controls because we found Shs 130 million missing. 

Conclusion

The Emyooga Programme is a key intervention in fighting poverty and promoting wealth creation through increased access to financial services, capital and strengthening collective and sector participation. 

The preparation, coordination, communication, management, monitoring, accountability, financing frameworks and processes need to be reviewed and strengthened to fully realise their potential benefits in driving socio-economic growth in Lango and Uganda, as a whole. 

I beg to submit. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Opio, for the report. Lango and Rwenzori subregions, thank you. All the other regions will also present their reports. 

We need a very comprehensive report from the minister in charge of microfinance. He will also have to give us a hint, when making his responses, on how he chose the Microfinance Support Centre to micro-manage this product. 

What I know is that the money is not disbursed from the district. It is sent directly from the Microfinance Support Centre. So, what was the basis for making the commercial officer the one to determine who should get the money yet that would amount to a one-person decision. 

The eligibility of the persons to get the money is upon the certificate sent by the commercial officer and that is where corruption now comes in. 

When you look at the narration of the transfer, it is a salary advance in the narration that is being sent to the accounts. 

In addition, the people who have not got the money - I have some petitions that the money was put on a fixed deposit by the Microfinance Support Centre. We will also want to know who benefits from the interest that is got from that money that is being fixed yet it is supposed to be sent to the SACCOs. We need all that information. However, the submission of the reports will continue on Tuesday and then we will have a debate on Emyooga.

I want to thank you, Members, for being that patient. After the presentation of the reports, the alternative Minister on Microfinance from the Opposition will also make a presentation and alternative policies on microfinance. That will be done on Tuesday. 

I would like to thank you, Members, for being patient. I, therefore, adjourn the House to Tuesday, 7 September 2021.
Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.51 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 September 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 


