Thursday, 6 September 2012  
 
Parliament met at 2.17 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 
  
PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 
  
The House was called to order. 
  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you for coming for this sitting. We have a lot of work and I urge honourable members that we continue keeping time so that we can cover more of the business set before us.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and colleagues. This is a ministerial statement to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda on the establishment of the fisheries fund. Hon. Badda Fred, who is the MP for Bujumba County in Kalangala District, asked a question, which was Q28/1/09, given in the letter from Parliament of Uganda, Office of the Clerk to Parliament, Ref. No.AD185/19601, dated 24 April 2012, on the fisheries fund.

Colleagues, the purpose of this statement is to inform Parliament about the urgent need to establish the fisheries fund to enable sustainable funding to the sub-sector. To reverse the continuous decline of fish catches and increase availability of fish for local consumption and export and develop aquaculture requires more funding than is currently being obtained through the current budget. 

The establishment of the fisheries fund is provided for in Article 153(2) of the Constitution and Section 22(a) of the Fish Act and Section 9(1) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs guided the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that it is the responsibility of the Minister of Finance to issue a statutory instrument for the establishment of the fund. Accordingly, on 19 August 2011, my ministry wrote a letter to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for the establishment of the fund, but the ministry objected to the establishment of the said fund. 

The fund, when established, is expected to be used purposely for management and development of wild fish both at the centre and the local governments as well as for the development of aquaculture. Mr Speaker, my ministry has selected fish as one of the ten commodity enterprises to be promoted to contribute to the development of this country. The ministry is embarking on efforts to ensure that fish stocks in Uganda’s waters recover from the current situation, which is alarming. However, it is facing difficulties in obtaining funds to sustainably address the unique challenges in fisheries. 

Colleagues, you may be aware that the fisheries sub-sector has grown to become one of the main sources of non-traditional exports for Uganda. It also provides an important source of livelihood and employment for more than three million people in the country. However, the fish catches have tremendously reduced resulting in escalating prices. This has been mainly due to increase in fishing pressure, use of illegal fishing gear, catching of young fish, and the presence of very many unlicensed fishing boats fishing indiscriminately on the lake. 

About 50 per cent of the fish harvested in all Ugandan waters is immature and that puts the stocks at a risk of collapse. Lake Kyoga, for example, which used to produce 167,000 tonnes of fish annually in the 1980s has decreased production to a mere 50,000 tonnes. The annual international export of Nile perch, which was at 36,600 tonnes in 2005, fetching about US$ 143 million, decreased to 15,000 tonnes in 2010 fetching about US$ 83 million. This translates into a loss of about US$ 60 million.

Colleagues, although aquaculture has a potential to increase fish production from 100,000 tonnes to 300,000 tonnes in the next five years, it requires government intervention to support production of quality fish, feeds and equipment. In February 2011, my ministry amended the Fish Act, Cap.197, to provide for ploughing back of funds received from fisheries licensing activities to be used in fisheries management and development. 

The Fish (Amendment) Act, 2011 

This amendment allows for the retention and use of fees received by the chief fisheries officer from the issuance of licences, permits and other fisheries activities under the Act for the effective development and management of the fisheries sector. This amendment Act is envisioned to address the following:

1. 	To provide for the retention, by the Department of Fisheries Resources, of fees received from the issuance of licences, permits and other fisheries activities under the Act.

2. 	To require the chief fisheries officer to establish and maintain a register of all persons issued with licences under the Act.

3. 	To require fishing vessels identification plates to be displayed on every licensed fishing vessel.

4. 	To provide for the establishment of a register of licensed fishers.

The finances that are going to support the established fund will be from fisheries licensing fees, as I have mentioned above, and the fisheries permits and any other fisheries activities under the Fish Act. The Association of Uganda Fish Processors has also agreed to levy a tax in support of the established fish fund. 

Expectations from the Fund

The fund is expected to fill the following financial gaps in my sector:

1. 	Support aquaculture development in the country.
2. 	Support fisheries licensing.
3. 	Supplement fisheries’ licensing enforcement activities. 
4. 	Promote the sub-sector in doing research.

The fund will be shared both at the centre and local governments on agreed activities. Therefore, the way forward is that I have taken up the matter with my colleague, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. With a request from my colleague, I will provide guidelines as to what it will take to have a fisheries fund in place. Thank you for your kind attention. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this was the long awaited statement and it has now been presented. Any debates on the minister’s statement?

2.27
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement which she has presented to us. 

On page 3, the minister gives us some of the challenges; for example, she is talking about decrease in fish production in Lake Kyoga. She says that it has reduced from 150,000 tonnes to 50,000 tonnes. I want to find out more about this. I have been hearing how in the sector they are struggling with this issue of using illegal fishing nets. For those of us who sometimes use the Soroti Road, when you reach Awoja Bridge, you see a lot of plants that are taking over the lake. What is the ministry doing about that so that fish production can increase again? Thank you.

2.29
MS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement. I understand the importance of having this fund as indicated by the ministry. However, I want clarification or more information on the reason as to why the Ministry of Finance objected to the establishment of the fund; it has not been given in this statement. It is important for us to understand on what grounds they objected to the establishment of this fund. 

We all know that it is important for us to have the fund to improve on the performance of the fish sector. We are expecting our economy to be growing and we want to do everything possible to improve on production and productivity of the resources that we have. So, what reasons are given for the objection? I thank you.

2.30
MR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement. You are aware that I am the chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; I will recall that for several financial years, this committee has been recommending for the establishment of a fisheries fund basically because the sub-sector of fisheries has not received the support, in terms of funding, it deserves. 

From the enumeration by the minister, this sector has all the potential to bring a lot of money into the coffers of Government, but for as long as it is poorly funded it will go on crippling. We thought that if we had a fund established and clear sources of funds indentified for this fund, possibly the department could build itself over time to the level that we want, because it is bringing in a lot of money to the coffers of Government. It really justifies the saying that you are milking a cow that you are not feeding.

One of our other recommendations as a committee has been that we want all the water bodies to be restocked because the level of fishing is more than the fish reproduction itself. We wanted to make sure that the agencies that are responsible for fish hatching can hatch and stock the water bodies. 

We have even tried to reallocate, despite the fact that the sector is not well funded as the entire ministry. We are trying to see how we can reallocate some money into fisheries so that we walk the talk that we want more money into this sector. I would propose that we support the ministry, set up the fisheries fund and if necessary, set up legislation on how it can be managed. I thank you.  

2.33
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Mr Speaker, this is a very important sector and, of course, we are happy with the minister for the work so far being done. I also happened to have chaired the agriculture committee in the previous Parliament. What is absurd is that much as we are talking about establishing this fund, which is correct and I support that, as my colleague has just said, from our own budget as a country we have not done justice to this important sector. The allocation that we are giving this sector is really very small so that even if we establish this fund, it may not adequately answer the questions. 

On the other hand, the minister has shown what we are losing. We are losing Shs 150 billion. Honourable minister, these people who are involved in illegal trading are citizens of this country and we have a government in place. Previously, I had an opportunity to follow these things when I was chairing the committee; our own people, senior people in Government, are involved. When the Police are doing their duty and they arrest these illegal businessmen and women, the same officer will call and say, “You release these people.” I think the minister has noticed this and I believe that you are addressing this issue. 

On the issue of the illegal fishing nets, we are a country that has a government in place; really, how do these nets get themselves into this country? Maybe the minister will update us as to what measures are being taken – how many people are in prison because of illegal fishing activities. I would like to say that as Parliament, we need to prevail on Government so that this sector is well funded and we also look into the issue of illegalities of these people who are arrested and are just left to go. 

Mr Speaker, I think that the minister will also address the issue of corruption in the sector. We are building landing sites and when I was still chairperson of the committee, we found a lot of problems. Somebody is paid money and he or she does not complete the work but eventually all the money is paid including the retention. So, I think the minister will address those issues. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.36
MR YOKASI BWAMBALE-BIHANDE (NRM, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement. It is very timely and good, although it only covers Lake Victoria and not Lake Edward and Lake Albert, which is my area of concern.

The problem with our fisheries industry is that we are still living in the Stone Age and at the same time in the dotcom age. I am saying we are in the Stone Age because fishermen are still doing the business of hunting and gathering, which our forefathers used to do during the Stone Age. We have not put in much to modernise the industry. I would be very happy if the minister would take serious concern about fish farming. 

I have a hatchery in my constituency and every three months, I produce between 400,000 to 500,000 fish fries, which I supply to fish farmers. We are getting almost a half of the fish that we are eating in my constituency from fish ponds compared to getting from the lakes. If we could concentrate on fish farming, we would not be incurring these losses in terms of exports because Uganda has the capacity to produce more fish in the fish farms than we are producing in the lakes. That would move us from the life of hunting and gathering to modern fish farming. 

I would suggest that these areas near the lakes, the fishing villages, should be encouraged to go fish farming because the cost of a hatchery is not very high. I spent about Shs 60 million to put up the one I am talking about, and every time we stock it we spend between Shs 10 million to Shs 12 million to produce 400,000 fish fries. That means we are producing each fry at a cost of between Shs 30 to Shs 50. When you feed it for a period of between three to six months, you sell it for about Shs 10,000 to Shs 15,000. So, we would be getting much more money in fish farming than in hunting and gathering on Lake Victoria and other lakes that we have. 

I support my colleagues who are saying we should have a fish fund in the ministry so that we concentrate on fish farming. The few farmers who are doing fish farming need special support because the feeds are expensive; a 40-kilogramme sack of feeds costs Shs 75,000. At times, you find that peasants cannot afford this. However, if you have 100,000 cat fish in your pond, you end up spending not more than Shs 1 million to have them fed to maturity and at the end of the day, when you sell, you get between Shs 5 million to Shs 7 million. So, we could really improve on this sector if we financed fish farming, in addition to these areas that we are trying to protect in the lakes. Thank you.

2.40
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to thank the minister for her presentation. Fish farming is a sector which is very pregnant in Uganda. It is an area where we can export and get a lot of foreign exchange. Our fish is so sweet; it is so nice. Mr Speaker, if you ate fish from Lake Victoria in Uganda and you ate fish from Kenya, you would never like any other fish apart from the fish from Uganda. So, we have a high demand for fish. I am talking about this from experience. I was born in a cattle keeping area but I got married in a fish farming area because I liked fish. (Laughter) 

I support the fish fund. The minister has been traversing the country and I want to thank her for that. She came to my place in Majanji and launched a landing site. People are now using it. Fish is now selling like hot cakes. 

Mr Speaker, we are losing some species of fish in Lake Victoria, for example Tilapia. Some big fish are eating smaller ones. We would also encourage fish farming. Farmers have come up to do fish farming and once we have a fish fund, we can encourage these farmers so that they are many and we shall have more fish to export. I support the fish fund with all my strength. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you should take the honourable member for Busia Municipality very seriously. She became very poetic about the subject, talking about pregnant, nice, sweet, and she even got married to it. (Laughter) These are serious matters, honourable minister, so you should take serious cognisance. 

2.43
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say something on the subject that is being discussed. I want to also thank the minister for bringing up this serious topic.

On behalf of the people of Toroma County, I support the fish fund 100 per cent because when we improve the fishing sector, I am sure it can contribute more than 20 per cent to the economy of Uganda. Like my colleague, the Member of Parliament from Busia Municipality, said, fish from Uganda is very delicious; it has captured world attention. So, I do support the fish fund 100 percent. 

I would like, however, to challenge the minister to improve the fish from smaller water bodies in Uganda. In my place, we have got Lake Opeta and Lake Bisina; these lakes have smaller fish. If we could improve with bigger quality of fish, I think Uganda would be at a different stage. Put improved species of fish from Lake Victoria into these other lakes. Otherwise, Mr Speaker, I have nothing much to say but only to support the fish fund. I thank you very much.

2.45
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for bringing up the proposal about the fish development fund. As we all know now, fish is more expensive than beef now. Many families cannot afford fish simply because exporters have a way of exporting good fish and leaving the skeletons for the population of Uganda, many of whom cannot afford a kilogramme of fish, which goes for Shs 1,300. That is very expensive. 

I am looking at the expectations from the fund. I am happy that you are talking about supplementing fisheries enforcement activities. As you are all aware, much of the fishing activity takes place in the night. That means that fishermen from other countries can easily cross the borders into the fishing waters that do not belong to their country. I would like to know the magic, later when this fund is developed, that we shall have to manage the boundaries in the waters between the neighbouring countries whose fishermen engage in the same activity of fishing in the night.  I wish to thank you for thinking of these enforcement activities because they are responsible for the overfishing on our Ugandan waters. 

Secondly, I am impressed by our Members of Parliament who live around Lake Victoria who are saying that our fish is very tasty. I would wonder, because Lake Victoria extends to Tanzania and Kenya; so when the fish is in Tanzania and Kenya, do we still call it Ugandan fish? When it is in the Lake Victoria in Kenya, do we still call it Ugandan fish? I think Lake Victoria is shared by many of us and you cannot tell which fish is Ugandan or Kenyan; all the fish keeps swimming in Lake Victoria.

Thirdly, we need to know that the population has increased. Unlike in the 60s when fish would be sold by the roadside, now you cannot easily get it in Katwe, Katungulu and on the highways like our fathers used to. Competition has also increased. All the neighbouring countries are now very aware of the money that can be got from this fishing activity. So, as I said, the boundaries on the waters need to be very clear so that each country gets to know where it stops. 

Lastly, the communities that do not have lakes and rivers around them or whose culture is not to prioritise fish should be considered. I wish to ask the minister to look out for these communities, get them interested in the consumption of fish and support them heavily in aquaculture activities. My district, for example, is traditionally not a fish-eating one, but we have of recent learnt about the quality and usefulness of fish. May I now ask you to get interested in people like us and support our aquaculture activities to enable us compete in the consumption and trading in fish. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.46
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to join my colleagues in thanking the minister for presenting this statement.

Any producer, industrial or agricultural, if you are producing for a market that is not satisfied, that is the best time for you to produce more. In this country, the demand for fish, both locally and in terms of exports, has gone up and this is good for us. So, this is the time when we should be investing a lot in fish production because the market is available. One will not say that they cannot produce fish with no market. This is the best opportunity for us as a country.

Just like hon. Emma Boona has said, I also come from an area where people never used to eat fish, but now I think fish is the first item on my menu. I am sure very many people in my area are also getting into that bracket. I would like to appeal to the minister to push for a programme to promote fish farming as much as she can, so as to supplement fish in the lake, which of course we have been depleting. I am glad that the minister has made this department visible by getting a little bit more serious in doing some work on stopping those who are depleting our fish.

When I got interested in fish, I travelled to the former TUFMAC because I wanted to get ideas on how to produce fish.  Not only can you get fish from the lakes, you can also do cage farming. You can put a cage around some portion of water, put fish – you do not have to dig a pond - and produce fish. You should also look at TUFMAC; it is in a sorry state, far from its old days. It is a commentary of how we have not cared for this industry. I think Government needs to inject money into this sector and generally mobilize the citizens to produce more and more fish.

Finally, the minister says on page 4 that she has approached her colleague, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, with a request to provide guidelines as to what it would take to have a fisheries fund. I wish the minister could do these consultations quickly, get to know what it takes to set up a fish fund, and then we get on to serious business and set it up. Thank you.

2.52
MS JUDITH AMOIT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for this presentation and for choosing fishing as one of the priorities and enterprises to promote development in this country. I have been in Pallisa for quite some time and I can report that it is one of those districts surrounded with water bodies. However, we have been having a challenge on how to benefit from these waters. We have a fish species that does not grow. Our people always go to get this fish although they are prohibited by laws relating to fishing activities. We have suggested the development of a cage farming system around the water bodies. That would help our farmers.

Secondly, we discovered that fish farming in Pallisa, if promoted, is one way of undoing poverty especially amongst the youth. The youth around the lake region are very active and I am sure they would wish to do fish farming very well. I wish the minister would interest herself in doing research on how to train these youth to undo poverty. That would help us so much.

I also would like to support this fund on the basis that it is not run the way the youth fund is being run. That youth fund has brought us many problems. My prayer is that the minister should involve some of the Members of Parliament whose areas have these water sources to put their efforts together in order to enable the communities benefit from this fund. In Gogonyo, in Pallisa, we had a fish pond which could generate over 600 products, but because the people around it were not trained and had no skills, that pond eventually collapsed. So, with this fund, it is my prayer that the minister involves some of us here to help her identify those people who can effectively participate in its implementation. Thank you so much.

2.55
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. While I would like to thank the minister for presenting a good report, I would like to pose a question to her in respect to page 2. Under point 1.6 she says that the fund, when established, is expected to be used purposely for the management and development of wild fish both at the centre and local governments as well as for the development of aquaculture. The question here is: if this fund is only meant for the development of wild fish, what about the consideration of the private farmers? I do believe that this should come out clearly in this statement so that we do not only limit ourselves to the wild fish and keep quiet about the development of aquaculture in the private farms. So, could the minister make it clear whether it includes the private fish farmers? 

On page 3 of the report, there is an example given at 2.1 and it says that Lake Kyoga, which used to produce 167,000 tonnes annually in the 1980s, has now decreased production to 50,000 tonnes. That tells us a lot. She should be able to tell us what was good in the 1980s and what has happened now. This therefore means that if we can get to support the private fish farm developers, they can control their fish farms unlike these lakes which are controlled by nobody and everybody runs there to get what he or she likes without any control. Thank you. 

2.57
REV. PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the honourable minister for this statement and for the effort she is putting in to save fish in our lakes, most especially Lake Victoria. 

I agree with this fish fund but we also need to carry out some good studies to see how it is going to operate. At one point, as my colleague has said, it talks about wild fish; this maybe refers to wild fish in our big lakes like Lake Victoria. We also have the local fishermen who operate in those areas and when you talk about licensing, taxing and other things, they are also going to affect our fishermen who need to be sensitized and brought on board. 

When we talked about this fund, I thought it was targeting both the local fishermen and those who are practising fish farming on Lake Victoria. We also have those who are practising fish farming in their local ponds elsewhere. So, the idea of this fund would be good, but we also need to see how it is going to operate if it is not going to affect our people. 

Some time back, this kind of fund was introduced but when His Excellency was looking for support somewhere for a certain individual in Kalangala during hon. Badda’s by-election, he scrapped the whole idea after pleas from the local communities. I do not know whether it is the same fund that is coming back and I do not know how it is going to affect our local fishermen, those who have the boats and those who do not have the boats. 

I am also glad that she has talked about government intervention. Government intervention is also very important. As I speak, we all know that there is a big reduction in the local catch of fish; this only occurs because Government has not come in to support our local fishermen by providing fishing gear, simple loans, money to buy boats, fishing nets and the rest of it. I think when time allows, the minister should have a meeting with some of us who come from these fishing communities - I have five sub-counties but four of them are entirely for fishermen - and we can discuss and see a way forward on how to support this arrangement. I thank you. 

3.01
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I represent the 52 islands of Buvuma, so I do not touch the mainland. I have heard many people talking about fish to the extent that fish is delicious; I represent that delicious item that you are talking about. I can say I am the MP for fish. (Laughter)

Whereas we can say that the farms are good, fish that is hunted is more delicious. As we talk about the fish fund to support fish farming, we should also emphasise supporting those involved in traditional fishing. The problems of the fishing sector are more than the establishment of a fish fund. They go far beyond the prices, the scarcity, the illegal fishing and so on. So, I may pose a few questions to the minister, and she knows that I am a very good supporter of her project. 

Establishing the fish fund calls for money. Our people are paying money through boat licences and so on. I am a bit worried that by supporting the fish fund, I may support more money coming from my people to the government coffers and a little returning to them. Maybe the honourable minister will help me understand that.

The expectations from the fish fund that are listed include support to aquaculture and support to fisheries licensing. Are they aware that people all over Uganda from the fishing community have been paying money for boat number plates, and here we are saying this same money which they are paying will help to support them? Are we saying that people are going to get free number plates or are they going to be subsidised number plates? 

Illegal fishing is a problem. This same fund may actually increase illegal fishing because there is a lot of corruption within the fisheries sector among the fisheries officers, and the minister is aware of it. Actually, availing them money may allow them to establish the key points from which they will “fish”. When I say “fish”, I do not mean them going to fish but I mean where they go to fish money. So, the money will actually allow them to move all over Uganda - they have the vehicles, they have the speed boats. So, will get more money but without dealing with the problem. 

We also need to ask ourselves questions: where do these illegal nets come from? How do they enter the country? Honourable minister, today I can take you around Kampala and we shall see so many shops selling illegal nets and they are licensed, and they come in through the borders, save for a few that are made here. A number of them come through the borders. 

One of the problems is that we have different requirements for different lakes – you say inch 3 on Lake Kyoga, inch 4 on Lake Albert, inch 5 on Lake Victoria but all these lakes are in Uganda. So, when these nets are coming in, how do you differentiate a net that is going to Lake Victoria from a net which is going to Lake Kyoga? We have a challenge, which we need to address. 

The people of Buvuma Island sent me to support the fish fund if the fish fund is going to comprise a bigger percentage of the money coming from government and not from them. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had a long discussion on this subject. There is another similar statement coming, so I would like to begin closing down on this. I will allow two more members to contribute and the others will contribute in a related matter, which will come immediately after. I will allow the members of Budiope West and Buliisa. 

3.04
MR JOHN BOSCO MUBITO (NRM, Budiope County West, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy about the fish fund but I need to understand it further. My concern is, if the source is the people and the service is going to the people, isn’t it going to be misunderstood by the people as an increased burden on them? I expected the fund to come from government if it is going to support and supplement the fisheries activities. 

The intention is good but I am worried about the implementation. Will the people comply? They expect the government to support them especially through NAADS by giving them inputs for fishing. When you say that you want fishing permits, licences and other sources of finance from the people as a way of supporting their activities, I think my people will not accept this. I am worried about it, although I support the minister and I am happy with her activities. I, therefore, request for a change in that. Thank you very much. 

3.07
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this effort and thank everybody who has talked in defence of the fisheries sector, which has been feeding this country and exporting to other countries but Government has never ploughed anything back. As I said last time, this is also another Friesian cow which does not get fed but we expect milk from it. No wonder our exports have gone down. 

I speak as a member representing Bugungu, where the Nile perch originated before it was planted in Lake Victoria and Lake Kyoga - I am giving institutional memory - by the Colonial Government Commissioner, Thorman, from 1954 to 1957. So, when I see the Nile perch depleted, my natives in Buliisa, Bugungu, are being depleted. 

I am giving that information so that Government knows that the exports they have been enjoying are as a result of an innovation of the fisheries department at that time. It is easy to multiply. The fish was planted then but there has been no effort made to further multiply it. So, as you do research in aquaculture and all these other new innovations, you should remember that the Nile perch’s potential is still big. We should go back to those roots. 

I also want to bring out the fact that as a young boy, I remember there was an EEC project during the UPC regime – Obote II Government - where engines and the right fishing gear were given to fishermen, to which we were beneficiaries as young men. The last attempt to do this was around 1989 to 1991 under the Rural Farmers Scheme of Frank Mwine. That is when we last got the right fishing gear and engines from Government as loans. I was at the university at that time and it really helped us after the war.  

Currently, my sister, the Minister of State for Fisheries, has a hard task of taking away what fishermen bought on the Ugandan market, and Government collected taxes from these traders for illegal gear without even giving them anything. When rebels denounce war, they are given something in form of amnesty and resettlement but our fishermen get nothing from Government. When poachers are arrested in my neighbourhood, in the parks, they are taught how to look after goats. But when my fishermen are arrested with fish on the lake, the fish is either burnt or confiscated. 

I am a very good supporter of hon. Nankabirwa’s efforts, but I would like to make this appeal on behalf of the fishermen in this country who have always got a raw deal from Government. We do not give them anything but expect everything from them.  Even those who are promoting caging - we had a problem on Lake Albert in Bugahya, in Tonya, where the caging was being introduced by people but without a community component. I would like to request the minister and government that whoever is introducing caging must involve the community. You cannot take away part of the lake and deny the community an alternative livelihood. Every time we have these programmes, they end up in the hands of the rich. 

Fisheries is one area which has kept poverty levels low because it gives food, money for shelter and school fees. It has a very big potential if Government finds interest in making it a money making activity. As we speak, most of the factories are operating below 30 per cent capacity. I raised this matter in my maiden speech in 2006 and even wrote a letter to the President that there was a looming calamity in the fisheries sector. As a Mugungu who has done fishing on almost every lake in this country and even in the neighbourhood in Congo, I had a stake and I knew what was going to happen. 

I would like to end by thanking the minister but also requesting her to have a substantive programme and we discuss it. For now, it is a proposal but can we have a substantive document and get to know who you are targeting with the funding and then we can enrich it. As it is now, I know it is a very good intention by the minister to silence us from the fishing communities, but please, we would like to support you when you have a fully-fledged document so that we can understand how it is structured, how it will be funded, for how long it will run and what levels of output it will give this country. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much. As we draw to a close, I will allow the honourable Member for Busongora North, who is also the acting Leader of the Opposition, to say something. (Applause) 

3.13
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for presenting her statement and I thank the colleagues who have contributed. Their contributions have been watched all over Uganda since there are pockets of fishing communities all over Uganda, be it in the north, east, west or central. Fishing is deep rooted and so the sector we are talking about is not foreign to all of us. 

I just want to point out two issues about this fund. One, it is good that the minister who presented this statement is a lady because I would like to refer to her gender. I know that the issue that I am going to point out will touch her as a lady. During the month of June I was in Kasese Municipality and the women there had gone to one of the nearest lakes to purchase fish which was classified as immature fish. They got the fish from Lake George and Lake Edward and they transported it to Kasese Municipality as part of their business to feed their families. No sooner had the vehicles reached Kasese Municipality than the URA staff landed to arrest every woman aboard the vehicle and confiscate their fish. 

Unfortunately, these women had borrowed money from banks. All the money they had borrowed had been used to purchase the immature fish. I asked myself whether it was the women who had bought the immature fish to blame or the people who had sold them the fish. I am stating this because when a lady goes to the lake to buy fish, she believes – most of them are illiterate - that the fish she has bought is legitimate. 

So, what is it that constrains this country from establishing a fund that can prepare the lakes and swamps of Uganda and the other environments where fish can be bred? Why don’t we establish this fund so that the misery of women in rural and urban areas is actually put to a halt until we have only mature fish on the market? That is why I thought the minister would have indicated that there are also women who are suffering out there because of the recklessness of our efforts.

The second aspect that I want to point out is on the issue of insecurity. Lack of a fisheries fund can tantamount to insecurity. I have seen the Inspector-General of Police addressing the press saying that he is going to smoke out all those redundant people who are in Kampala here, and he is happy because he is going to smoke them out from wherever they are hiding. You will hear that maybe tomorrow our UPDF is crossing to Congo because there are rebels there and yet we have a lot of intelligence systems here. The relevant ministers of security are here but have they ever had an opportunity to interact, based on their intelligence findings, and discover that indeed lack of a fish fund can tantamount to insecurity in this country?

The other day we were scrambling over the borders of Migingo. I can tell you that the problems that we are experiencing in this country - You will talk of classified expenditure, which only goes to facilitate the allowances of these people who are seated in front here and Government will never ask how much each one of them took. Instead, if the fish fund could be boosted, I want to tell you that this country would be - (Interruption)

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, when ministers are appointed, they are given instruments of power that spell out which allowances and facilitation they are supposed to get, and they are paid by the accounting officers of the ministries where they work. Those who are Members of Parliament and ex officio Members of Parliament have their salaries and facilitation paid by the Parliamentary Commission as Members of Parliament. So, is the honourable member in order to say that the ministers are paid allowances under classified expenditure? Is he in order to misguide the House and the country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members of Cabinet who are Members of Parliament are indeed paid by the Parliamentary Commission. Even members who are ex officio are actually paid by the Parliamentary Commission. Allowances of ministers are paid from the funds appropriated directly by this House to the ministries they are in charge of. Classified expenditures, as we know them, relate to matters which have security inclinations and other matters, which should not be disclosed except in limited circles. The salaries of ministers could not, by any shadow of imagination, fall among those which can be considered to be classified. The remark of the honourable member is untrue and I therefore ask him to withdraw that particular statement.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I was very honest and I started with a security issue. I actually find it a complicated situation that the ministries of security and defence actually access classified funds -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As salaries and allowances?

MR NZOGHU: I think the honourable member who raised the issue of order did not quote me very well. So I do not withdraw my statement that the ministries of security and defence -(Interruption)

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, the member has made an allegation in the presence of the members of the Opposition, the ruling party and even the Independents. He used very good English and everybody understood what he said. You have ruled clearly, after listening to him and to me who raised the point of order. If the member is not willing to follow your ruling, may he not be listened to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please withdraw the particular statement that has offended the House.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I want to withdraw the statement but I also want to give my concluding remarks. As I conclude my submission - (Interruption)

MR BALYEKU: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the honourable member for withdrawing the statement in his capacity as the acting Leader of the Opposition. However, in his statement, he also said that short of this fund being created, we are going to have insecurity in this country. Is he warning us in advance that insecurity is coming as the acting Leader of the Opposition, or is he trying to inform us in advance that actually short of this, we shall be under attack? May he explain that further to the House?

Mr Speaker, I would like the acting Leader of the Opposition to inform us or to inform the Minister of Security if there will be insecurity short of this fund being put in place because it is a very serious matter as far as security is concerned. Is he in order to threaten the Minister for Security and the government side that we shall have threats of insecurity?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member was painfully trying to demonstrate how security threats could be linked to lack of funds being made available to the youth who are likely to be smoked out and could be a threat to security. He was just demonstrating his anxiety about displacing the youth without an alternative for them to live a life that brings a livelihood to them. That is the point he was trying to make. Honourable member, have you finished? I will now allow the honourable minister to comment on the fish fund.

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I would like to record on the Hansard my great thanks and salutations to my colleague, hon. Nankabirwa, for the manner in which she has handled this sector since she took it over. She has demonstrated focus, agility, robustness and anything that would go to demonstrate that she is an efficient minister. So, honourable colleague, I would like to thank you.

Secondly, fish is a wonderful source of protein. For those of us who no longer take red meat, it is a wonderful substitute; therefore, every Ugandan, especially those who do not take red meat, need to support this effort.

Thirdly, I see in the statement that the Ministry of Finance has declined the establishment of this fish fund, but this is because we have not harmonised our thinking. This fund can be part of our budgetary process. We can budget every year and allocate money there. What the Minister of State for Fisheries is talking about is using what we call the Non Tax Revenue (NTR) to create this fund. Now, that has got its own challenges. What I promise this House is that we shall definitely get back together and re-organise and find more resources to go into either directly funding this fund or to increase the funding of this sector in our budget. Thank you.

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleagues for their overwhelming support. I will try to respond to the issues raised, but I have also taken note of the advice given by my colleagues. 

There is a member who raised a concern about the aquatic weed that is on Lake Kyoga. She wanted to know what the ministry is doing. We had a project called the Egyptian Aquatic Weed Project with which we used to secure machinery, which can be seen on the Ugandan waters handling the weed. This project ended but there is hope for a renewal. If it was not for the problems which affected Egypt, we were supposed to sign a new contract last year in September, which has been postponed several times. I hope that we shall be able to renew the project so that we can continue handling that weed.

The Minister of Finance has tried to give the reasons as to why up to now they have not established the fish fund. My colleague wanted to know the reasons that the ministry of finance gave. Let me also inform members that the fish fund, as has been stipulated in my statement on page 2, paragraph 1.4, emanates from Section 22 (a) of the Fish Act, which was passed by this Parliament, having been passed by Cabinet. Therefore, Government agreed that the establishment of the fish fund is the way to go. 

The reason being given by hon. Kasaija, that because the money would come from non-tax revenue, can be harmonised as he has said. I thank colleagues for their support then and now. We need this fund to help those people who are carrying out surveillance and control to have logistics so that we can reduce on the depletion.

I thank hon. Kasirivu for the support. He has, time and time again, raised the issue of restocking of our water bodies. My response is that restocking would be okay but if we have not sensitised our communities that are responsible for capturing immature fish, you will restock as they keep capturing the immature fish. So we are handling it from both ends. We will restock beginning from this financial year - a few lakes will be picked - but we will continue sensitising the communities to avoid capturing immature fish.

Hon. Kagwera raised the issue of the illegal nets – where they come from, where they pass and why we allow them to go to the lakes. Many other colleagues also raised the same issue. The Fish Act banned these monofilament nets and Uganda Revenue Authority of recent requested me to write to them giving all specifications, so that they include these nets on their banned list. That was the only missing link. So we are going to write to URA so that they can begin impounding them at the border - (Interruption)

MR BWAMBALE-BIHANDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving way. Some of the nets we use on our lakes are not necessarily imported; they import the nylon thread and make nets locally. So when we are banning the imports, I do not know what we shall do with the nylon threads and these people who are making nets locally.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have another statement coming, so I would like you to summarise the responses.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much. Of course I am aware that the nylon threads can be used to mend shoes and make fishing nets and therefore we cannot ban those threads. What we shall do is to deal with nets that come from those other countries which I do not want to mention here. We will also deal with the local nets, like we have been doing with the kokotas - the homemade nets. (Hon. Anywar rose_) – I have been reminded by the Speaker that I am going to give another statement, so I request colleagues to allow me answer these questions. If there are other issues to raise, maybe we can deal with them in the next statement because they are similar. 

Corruption was another issue that was mentioned. It is true that we have many departments where we have corrupt people. As Government, we have to fight together. In my department, I have involved the district security committees. I have held meetings in very many districts and encouraged them to follow up the enforcement activities in their districts. I think this is working because we keep on netting impersonators and many of them have been reprimanded. 

I thank hon. Taaka and other colleagues who fully supported – and I took note of the tasty fish you mentioned. Another member wanted us to improve on the fish species in the small lakes. I want to say that we should not look at the size of fish and take it to be the same across. There are species like the silver fish which will never grow to the size of Tilapia. Secondly, we also do water suitability tests to see the type of fish which can breed in those lakes. So, do not get worried about the small fish in those small lakes. Probably, that is the type which can survive there.

How shall we manage the boundaries where people cross to come and do illegal fishing; are we going to use this fund to also cater for that? This was asked by hon. Boona. The fund is going to help us in surveillance, maintenance and control of our water bodies. It is not established like the proposed land fund where people will borrow from the fund to purchase pieces of land. We have been issuing licenses where people have been paying money and all this money has been going to the Consolidated Fund; none remained with the department of fisheries. When we go to the landing sites, the district fisheries officers challenge us saying, “You want us to help you in monitoring and controlling by making people pay licences but there is no single coin that remains at the district; honourable minister, why can’t you give a percentage back to the district so that we can use it to help Government control?” 

Many colleagues have been raising the question as to whether we are not going to task our people to pay more by creating this fund. The fund is just going to help the people because they have been demanding for it. The officials have also been demanding for the fund because they know they will be getting logistics to help Government control. 

I am pushing for fish farming, I can assure you. I have managed to influence the guidelines of NAADS to take fish as one of the commodities which we have picked both under food security and as a commercial commodity. So I can assure you that I am using all my capabilities to make sure that fish farming takes root.

The aquaculture policy, which we are working on with the Uganda Investment Authority, is about to come out. The very final draft is now out. This will help us guide the people who would want to engage in cage farming and other fish farming methods. 

Lastly, if I may answer the Leader of the Opposition; I want to thank you for your submission. As a lady, I also get touched when women who are majorly engaged in fish mongering are arrested. I just want to invite you to read the fishing rules which we passed in this Parliament and other laws relating to fishing. He who captures immature fish from the waters, that one who smokes it, that one who buys it from there and that one who transports, the one who buys it and cooks it and eats it all commit an offence. (Laughter) 

It is only the minister, who is given the mandate by the Fish Act, who can pardon such a person upon being apologetic and swearing that they will never do it. The Fish Act gives the Minister of Fisheries that mandate. Nobody else can forgive them. So, unless the laws are amended, those are the laws. If you are captured trading in immature fish you will always be netted. Why did we pass these laws? It is because we want to save our natural resources which are diminishing while our population is very elastic. I want to thank you very much for your submissions. Let the struggle continue to save our natural resources. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Kakira Secondary School from Butembe Constituency, Jinja District, represented by hon. Daudi Migereko and hon. Agnes Nabirye. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)   
 
MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a point of procedure pursuant to the Order Paper, item 5. I belong to the Committee on Natural Resources –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we deal with that when we come there? I have a statement -

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I have already, in writing -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I deal with that when I reach there? We have another statement coming. Please. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, this is a ministerial statement to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda on the Lacustrine Protected Areas (LPA).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have 15 minutes.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, hon. Dr Lulume presented to this House complaints from his constituency regarding LPAs on 23 February 2012. He was supplemented by hon. Peter Bakaluba Mukasa, MP Mukono North. The Speaker directed me to present to this Parliament a statement on the issue. 

Colleagues, the purpose of this statement is to inform you about what lacustrine protected areas are, why they are created, and the purpose these areas serve in fisheries conservation and how that purpose is achieved through enforcement. Section 2 of the Fish (Permanent Closed Areas) Rules of 2010, under section 35 of the Fish Act, Cap. 197, provides that Lacustrine Protected Areas are closed areas whose fishing activities are banned. In the interest of conserving the natural environment and its surrounding waters, LPAs will include some areas of water bodies even if it is a very small percentage of its overall size. 

Colleagues, establishing and monitoring LPAs is an internationally accepted natural resources fish management practice. You may also be aware that the fisheries sub-sector has grown, like I explained in the previous statement, and that the volumes now captured from our water bodies are decreasing. Therefore, the Department of Fisheries Resources is mandated by the Fish Act, Cap. 197 of 2000 of the Laws of Uganda, to regulate fisheries activities. In order to perform this function better, new and existing legislations are continuously revised and the most current ones in context of fisheries control include the following: 

a) 	The Fish (Fishing) Rules No. 51 of 2002 and No. 42 of 2009 that were revised to the Fish (Fishing) Rules of 2010. These rules now guide the requirements for fishing with the main purpose to control over fishing.

b) 	The Fish (Permanent Closed Areas) Rules of 2010 under section 35 of the Fish Act, Cap. 197 of 2000. This statutory instrument provides information on the areas and location, to help all stakeholders know the bounds and locations of the lacustrine protected areas in that locality. 

The LPA in reference is on Lake Victoria between Koome Islands and the mainland, enclosing the islands of Makusu, Sanga, Tavu, Kimi, Kizima, Miru and Kawanga Light House. The map attached serves to show the location of the area on Lake Victoria. Colleagues may note that Lake Victoria has 300 areas identified for lacustrine protected areas. These areas were identified by district technical staff and committees. The National Agricultural Research Organisation through the National Fisheries Resource Research Institute (NaFIRRI) is in the process of verifying them. Once the verification is done, my department will quickly ensure that they are also gazetted. 

At regional level, the joint communiqué of the Council of Ministers of Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation (LVFO) issued in Kampala, Uganda, on 29 October 2008 requested countries to gazette some areas of the lake as lacustrine protected areas closed to fishing to allow regeneration of stock. Again, the Council of Ministers of LVFO, in their seventh regular session meeting of February 2009, requested Partner States to implement the decision of the Council of Ministers on LPAs as agreed upon in 2008. They also urged the Partner States to adhere to overall objectives of the regional plan of action on reduction of fishing capacities as approved by its Council of Ministers. This approval requires that countries provide for a legal framework for managing fishing efforts on their water bodies.   

The purpose of the lacustrine protected area is to control over capacity on the lake. There was urgent need to identify areas that are “no fishing zones”. The objectives of creating an LPA were to enable recovery of fish stocks and enhance conservation of aquatic biodiversity to promote compliance with the law on fishing and allow sport fishing other than economic activity. 

Colleagues, in the exercise of the powers conferred upon the minister responsible for fisheries, who is now speaking, by section 35 of the Fish Act, the rules were made on 29 June 2010 for closed areas and provided for the following:

1. 	The minister, by order in the Gazette, to close or ban fishing activities on any landing sites, fishing grounds, fish markets or on any fisheries vessel for a specific period of time or indefinitely.

2. 	No fishing in the lacustrine protected area referred to in 2.2(b) except for recreational fishing; and

3. 	Requirement to have a recreational permit to fish in an LPA.

The Fish Act Cap. 197, Sections 24 and 30, provide for enforcement of fisheries regulations by delegating powers to authorised officers. Section 34 provides for informers to assist in giving information leading to conviction for contravention of provisions in the Act. A lacustrine protected area is protected under the same provisions. 

The Department of Fisheries Resources and my office conducted sensitisation to persons in the affected areas with special emphasis on Mukono District. Meetings were held with Mukono District leadership and communities. Information was also given on radio for better understanding of the purpose and need to conserve the fisheries resources through protection of some areas of the lake. 

Fishing communities within the LPAs may experience negative social economic effects in the short run, but after a period of about one year or so the positive benefits are realised as the lakes have high capacity to regenerate as has been scientifically proven. Fish in the protected area will multiply and fishers outside the protected area will benefit by getting more fish and more revenue will be generated from the fisheries resources. 

The ministry promotes core management of fisheries resources and encourages stakeholders to support good practices regarding fisheries management. Mr Cooper, who was mentioned in the statement by the honourable member, stays at Bulago and the area around the area is a lacustrine protected area. In restraining fishers to fish in the protected area, he is being a responsible stakeholder.

Regarding Bulago Island, his highness Muwenda Mutebi, the king of Buganda, is the bona fide free leaseholder of the island. King Muwenda Mutebi and Mr Cooper own and run the Lake Victoria Sailing Company as shareholders. Therefore, Government or Parliament has never sold any part of this lake. 

The Department of Fisheries Resources issued recreational permits for fishing in protected areas including the one around Bulago Island. Recreational permits are available for anybody that needs them. For recreational permits, fish is returned into the water is not for sale. 

Colleagues, I believe with concerted efforts of the leaders in that area, we should be able to protect the LPAs for the benefit of all the fishers in the lake. I want to thank you for this opportunity, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, I stated earlier that the issues were interrelated except this one is on some very specific aspects, if I can say that. So, I will limit debate on this matter. I will start with those who never contributed on the previous statement and then I will limit it to 30 minutes. Each member is taking three minutes.

3.51
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I commend the minister for the response to the question that was raised by hon. Dr Lulume Bayigga. She has in part informed those of us who had been green about what lacustrine protected areas are concerned with. 

I am concerned with just one issue, which hon. Lulume Bayigga was concerned about, and that is the livelihood of the people in those areas that have been gazetted as lacustrine protected areas. She has ably informed us that a number of sensitisations were done - I think on the second last page. She has talked about the regeneration after a specific period of time, but she does not qualify how, economically, the community that has been banned from these areas will survive. 

The concern initially raised was about the economic livelihood of the people and here she is talking about sport fishing for recreation purposes, where the fish is returned into the water. So, really, I see a very big threat. As earlier on raised, this economic threat or livelihood threat might be of interest first of all to our ministry because even if tourists are to go to that area, which initially was an area for the livelihood of the locals, they will be threatened.
 
What alternative economic venture has your ministry prepared? These are the concerns which I thought would be taken care of. I know lacustrine protected areas are both of national value and of value to the local community. So, it would be very relevant for you to come clear on the alternatives that you are providing because initially, the local people depended on those areas which now you have gazetted. That is the question I thought you should come clear on. Thank you.

3.53
MR FOX-ODOI OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to register my appreciation to the honourable minister for a wonderful statement. I will put it another way. The minister has laboured to state that when your wife is in labour, you do not follow her up for purposes of procreation; she is already in labour. You do not follow her up for any other purpose; you only wait to receive the new born baby. 

The minister has created labour wards for fish in the lake and she is only asking that we restrain our citizens from following up the fish when they go to labour. I think this makes a lot of sense. She has said, in very many words, that it is a very responsible and sustainable way of utilising our resources and I think she deserves our support. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.55
MR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for the statement. I just have a few comments. The first one is to do with lacustrine protected areas; it is not clear to me whether the minister is talking about Lake Victoria or all the lakes in the country. If she is talking about all the lakes, she should have given us more information about those areas that are in the other lakes. I think this was a good opportunity to do that.

My second concern is to do with the small fish. There are two aspects she has mentioned here, immature fish and small fish. I am not familiar with fishing but my understanding is that some small fish are actually mature and therefore, edible. In fact, I want to state here that our colleagues in Congo, which is just across the border from my constituency, prefer mature small fish. So, I want the minister to tell me how the net can differentiate small immature fish and small mature fish. (Laughter) On page 3, the minister says that the composition of fish caught is now dominated by small fish - I assume these are mature fish - Mukene, Ragogi and Muziri.  These are mature fish which are actually small. So, how does the net differentiate these fish -(Laughter)- from the small fish which are immature? 

On that same page, I have much doubt about the figures the minister is quoting here - US$ 143,000,600. I do not know whether the minister is really sure about these figures. These do not sound like true figures. Can the minister correct or clarify on this figure? 

3.58
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to thank the minister for this report and at the same time, commend her for the wonderful work she has done to revamp the department of fisheries. I understand that before her, some in the fisheries industry, those dealing in fish, had closed, parked and gone back home but now they have come back. I congratulate her, the nation and His Excellency, and I thank His Excellency for appointing her. 

In addition to that, I would like to appeal to fellow Members of Parliament to support fisheries development by supporting her efforts, so that we can sensitise our people to appreciate the measures which have been put in place in order to rejuvenate this enterprise. However, I would like to urge her to enable us or to work out a modality of starting fish farming in our constituencies where possible, so that we can have fish fries in our ponds. I encourage her to do this, not for us as Members of Parliament - I am here for the people - but for the people in our constituencies who can manage it, so that we popularise fish farming because fish is on high demand in the country and even abroad. That is what I would like to suggest, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

4.00
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. From a scientific point of view or perspective, red meat predisposes people to cardio vascular effects; those are heart diseases. But fish, if you take it for long – there are a variety of amines in fish – I can tell you, you will die a brilliant person and your heart will be preserved. So, I support the fish industry and I support hon. Ruth Nankabirwa.

However, I have some few comments about this. I was very amused by this man called Mr Cooper who has gotten some very good links with His Highness Kabaka Ronald Muwenda Mutebi. This man, who is staying on this island which is being isolated as a lacustrine protected area, does he fish there or not? You have to be very careful. This man may come as a leisure business person and he is sailing on the lake as he is getting fish too and he is denying people who have been born there a chance to eat fish. That is going to be a very dangerous thing for our country, and we shall have sold our own country through you, Madam Minister. 

When you consider the number of islands which are in question, the ones where they want to make sure that people do not fish for almost one year, I want us not to forget our own children who are dying of malnutrition just because they do not have any other sources of protein and other things. Look at Koome Island, Sanga, Makusu, Tavu, Kimi, Kizima and the rest; why don’t we just say, “Let the very young fish not be caught”. But is there a possibility for the government to mitigate this and give these people bigger nets which can catch the biggest fish which are almost dying so that people can get some fish there? 

My problem is denying all the people staying on these islands a chance to eat fish because you want them to mature for one year. You are starving the islanders for one whole year! Somebody will have died. Soon you should get for us bigger nets to catch the biggest fish and then those ones which are very immature will be left to mature, they will grow big enough to produce some fish which we can use later.

What about Lake George, Lake Edward and Lake Albert which are in western Uganda? Also in western Uganda, we need some fish. Minister, do not be for Lake Victoria and forget all of us from western Uganda and Kyoga. We need your intervention so that you can create some more areas but do not deny our people chances to eat bigger fish. I thank you.

4.03
MR BAKER SSALI (NRM, Buikwe County West, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for this statement. However, as you have read, these areas which have been set aside in the LPAs, like Koome, Tavu, Miru, are vast areas where our communities normally fish from, but the minister has decided to make them LPAs.

Another issue is about this gentleman called Cooper; I do not think that his interest in the island is recreational. I think this gentleman is protecting the area so that he can fish and export the fish himself. He does not want our people, the poor ones, to go fishing in those areas.

I also want to raise this issue about cage fishing. I did not get time to talk about it but I want to inform you that we have vast water bodies around Lake Victoria where we can put cage fishing, so that our country can get fish and our people can eat fish which they no longer access. 

Honourable minister, I want to inform you that the fish fingers or the fish fries are very expensive these days. They cost between Shs 400 and Shs 500 yet our people are very poor. They cannot afford them even if they would like to do fish farming. I also want to bring to your attention the fact that the fish feeds are only sold by one manufacturer, and that is Ugachick. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I will stick by my earlier ruling that I will allow only those who have not contributed on the subject. Before I do that, in the public gallery this afternoon we have a coalition of youth led by hon. Amoding Monica who have come to Parliament to present a petition on early and unwanted pregnancy, which I received this morning. The group include, Uphill College Mbuya, Crane High School, Progressive Secondary School, Reach-Out Mbuya and Initiative for Youth Action. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them (Applause). 

Honourable members, in the Distinguished Strangers Gallery this afternoon, we have Miss Uganda 2012/2013, Phiona Bizzu, together with the Youth Initiative for Youth Action Foundation. She has come to observe the proceedings of the House. (Applause)

Finally, I will allow the honourable member for Bujumba, Kakuto and the member who brought up the initial question, the honourable member for Mukono North, and then we will go to the minister. 

MS LEMATIA: Mr Speaker, on page 4, the first paragraph, it says that the map is attached but I do not see any map attached. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is the map there? Let me deal with the issues. Take note and supply those maps. 

4.08
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for responding comprehensively to our concerns. I also thank her for the efforts she is investing in the industry and for presenting this statement. 

However, I think it is very important that we support the minister’s efforts with resources. She has highlighted in this response the purposes of establishing a fisheries fund. How will she comprehensively enforce the laws without money? How will she develop aquaculture without enough resources? How will she promote research without enough money? 

In this response, she says that the Ministry of Finance objected to putting the fisheries fund in place but she does not tell us the reason as to why they refused to do so. Since the ministries of fisheries and that of finance are under the same government, can they agree and tell us the reason why government has refused to put in place this very important fund to develop the industry? 

I also want the minister to clarify further, since we are all trying as much as possible to develop the aquaculture industry and aquaculture parks. I know there must be an aquaculture park policy; how far has government gone in putting in place these policies so that we can develop the industry with guidelines? What are the guidelines of putting in place cages for aquaculture parks? Thank you.

4.11
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the honourable minister for the very good effort she has put in place in revamping the fisheries sector. I would like to support the policy of lacustrine protected areas. However, I have a few clarifications I would like to seek from her. 

I had an experience when the road to Kasensero broke down, and I think I told her recently, and this is a major fishing area and it also has a fish factory. The road broke down for about three months and when it was eventually fixed, there was a lot of fish coming from there. It means that for those three months when the road was closed, there was very little fish caught from Lake Victoria. That is why we were able to get bumper catches coming to the trading centres in my area. That means that if we give the lake a holiday, then we can most effectively create bumper harvests after every three months.

I am told that in the Scandinavian countries, fishing folks go on holiday for about three or two months and during that time, there is restocking of the water bodies. During that period, there is no fishing activity taking place at all. Is the minister considering that as an option? 

If the coffee farmers wait for three years, maize farmers wait for six months before they harvest, why don’t we consider having holidays in the fishing industry? Our children study for about three months and then go for holidays for about one month; why don’t we consider doing the same and say fishing activities will take place for four or six months and then take a holiday, which must be enforced? We let everybody come out of the lake to do other activities so that we can increase on the fish stocks and also regulate whoever is doing fishing activities on the lakes. 

Also, bring forth the cage fish farming policy. Instead of going into the wilderness to hunt for fish, let us do fish farming on the water bodies we have, which is about 15 percent of the entire land surface of our country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I allow the Member for Mukono North, I will allow the honourable member for Luuka to ask a specific question and allow the Leader of the Opposition, who has delegated the honourable member for Bukoto East, to raise some issues. I will then go to Mukono North and then I will allow the minister to conclude. 

4.14
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need a few clarifications from the presentation of the minister. I want to know how the LPAs are demarcated. If it is open water, how are the people going to know whether it is a protected area or not? How are we going to stop the fish from leaving that area to other parts of the water? 

Two, how are these LPAs monitored? Somewhere you said that Mr Cooper who stays on the island is also protecting the area around him. Does it mean that he has a licence to manage the area? If he has a licence, can the other people on the Island get licences so that they can also become responsible stakeholders and protect the areas? Thank you.

4.15
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for the effort she is putting in her ministry. However, when Dr Lulume raised this issue, there were complaints from the people. Honourable minister, I would like to appeal to you and your ministry that this should not be a cover-up. A lot has been said, that the lake has been sold, and this is going to come out like a manifestation that some parts of the lake are being reserved for certain people for their benefit. 

People have been hiding behind illegal fishing; they do it as if they are carrying out enforcement on people who are doing illegal fishing. Honourable minister, I raised this to you, that there are some people who go and arrest fishermen and yet they still take the fish and sell it for their own benefit. I would not want to discover that something is being hidden to benefit some individuals. It is being said that certain persons are reserving some bits of the lake for their benefit.

You have also mentioned that some consultative meetings have been held specifically in Mukono. You will realise that Bukakata Landing Site, where fishing is nominally done, is in my constituency. I would also like to see that my constituency benefits from the sensitisation and many meetings that you are holding.

I would also like to ask how long these LPA permits are going to take so that we explain to the people - those who have not benefited – so that they get hope to benefit at any one time. I thank you so much.

4.18
REV. PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Bakaluba Mukasa is my name from Mukono County South and not Mukono County North. 

My plea is that maybe after this wonderful report from the minister, we also need a thorough study of this area. When you look at this lacustrine protected area, it is concentrated in my constituency. Lake Victoria is bigger than my constituency but it is concentrated in my constituency and covers four sub-counties - Mpaata, Mpunge, Koome Islands and Ntenjeru - which actually have been affected in this respect. 

We brought this matter up about four or five months back and we raised a lot of concerns about this matter. It came up after Mr Copper, the owner of Bulago Hotel Investments, went around terrorising and beating up our people and telling them that their Member of Parliament and other Members of Parliament passed a law that protects him and makes him in charge of all the waters on Lake Victoria. He does not allow anybody to cross over and yet the people use this area for water transport, including myself. Even today, I use that channel, I no longer use a vehicle. 

Boats are arrested, engines are removed and people are detained in his kind of prison which is not gazetted and  they are beaten up.  We have a long list of people from whom money has been extorted in millions, engines have been taken, boats crashed and a lot of other things have happened. This is the concern that we are raising. How did they arrive at demarcating this lacustrine protected area in this limited area? When the RDC of Mukono came to Katosi, he was almost beaten up by angry people who were wondering how it came about. 

Our people have never been sensitised. The sensitisation that the minister is talking about happened just recently when she visited the district and met some leaders. Earlier on, even before she became a minister, this matter had come up. We do not even know the stretch of this lacustrine protected area. So, whoever goes through is beaten up, money has been extorted and a lot of things have happened.

Our plea is that a study be done in this area. This Copper white settler is protecting his investment. He has a big hotel in this area and that is why the honourable member who has just stepped out has supported him because he also has a hotel around that area - (Interjections) - I have raised that concern all along. We have people who have been born in this area and have to depend on this lake – (Member timed out)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are off the microphone now. Honourable minister, you have seven minutes. 

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank colleagues. Let me begin with hon. Peter Bakaluba Mukasa, the area Member of Parliament. He has just shifted to this constituency and by the time we enacted this statutory instrument which created the lacustrine protected area, he was not the area MP and I was not the Minister of State for Fisheries. However, I was informed by my people that sensitisation was done. 

I also agree that sensitisation is not a one-time activity or event and has to be continuous. That is why I laboured to fly over the LPA to appreciate the boundaries. I know that apart from Koome Island, other islands are very small and some are not habited. So, the point of demarcating physically is very important because when I flew over, I could clearly see the area - that triangle - but when you are just moving on water, you cannot see it.

When allegations were made, I went there again and the people who are carrying out enforcement are our marine Police authorised to carry out enforcement. I witnessed arrested nets, immature fish and sacks of salt that had been impounded from the people who were doing illegal fishing. I just want to pray that we all appreciate that enforcement will never be popular and the struggle for the meagre resources will continue as our population expands. All of us would like to see our voters, the people we represent, happy, but we are the very people who are supposed to tell them that we must have a future. Let us hold on to legal fishing, let us preserve the LPAs. 

To complain that the LPA is concentrated in your constituency is to miss a point. They are natural areas identified scientifically; I cannot shift them. (Interruption) 

MR MUKITALE: I thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for giving way. Breeding grounds are an indigenous technology and have since been confirmed by scientific research. On every fresh lake, we had traditional breeding grounds. Unfortunately, until recently – During Amin’s war is when we started fishing in them, for example, those in Lake Albert. Before, they were no-go areas. That is why I would like to invite the minister to interest the cultural institutions because in our case, the kingdom had a role to play. These areas were protected by chiefs and it was not allowed to go there.

There are other methods we used to use, which I would like to encourage the minister to look at. We used to use the moon time, which was a no-go time to the lake. You can also enforce the very unpopular banning of night fishing. For an area that has lost stock, you discourage fishing at night and you will have found a very big solution. I thank you so much.

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My friend, the minister, should not worry; we do not support illegal fishing. We support her in that arrangement of fighting illegal fishing. Our concern is just around what I have told you about, the lacustrine protected area and the Copper investor – those rows - and even on the Bulago area where -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You asked for clarification. 

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: Yes. I am just assuring you that you have our support. (Laughter) We are doing everything possible but be mindful of my constituency and the fact that I have this problem. If we do not solve it, it will be bloody. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I said earlier, sensitisation must be continuous. I want to assure hon. Namayanja Florence that I will come back. But I have visited Bukakata three times. I have been meeting district leaders and there has been a gap because people have feared to venture into this unpopular activity of enforcement. So, we shall continue with the sensitisation.

The honourable member from Luuka: How will the LPAs be demarcated? We need money to physically demarcate. There are floaters which we put to show the boundaries. However, guarding them is a problem because they are always vandalised by the fishers themselves. We have experienced this in the past. We hope that when we put physical demarcations, the fishers will respect them. 

Does Kupa have a licence to do so? Honourable, Kupa is a businessman who has a hotel at Bulago and tourists go there. So, we would like to see his 200 meter radius given to him through the licence with NEMA protection. But sometimes fishers want to go wherever there is fish, even if it is behind your house they will venture into it. 

So, Kupa has a right to protect the area for which he possesses a licence because he has a business there. He does not have a licence of exporting fish anywhere. He doesn’t export fish and he doesn’t process fish. His licence is for the hotel on the island. He does sport fishing, which is allowed; he has a licence for that.

Honourable Kasamba, thank you very much for the testimony. I want to assure you that after going around the country, which I have been doing since last year, where I have been informing and alerting the fishermen that time will come when we will introduce phased fishing. Because I don’t want people to approach you, colleagues, that they are dying of hunger because they have been economically affected, when we pronounce phased fishing. Phased fishing is on the way coming, but we are still doing sensitisation first. 

Phased fishing is not going to replace the breeding areas. As hon. Mukitale has informed us, these natural breeding areas for the fish are not supposed to be tampered with. Even if we introduce phased fishing, the breeding areas will always be gazetted. 

About the issue of providing nets, as hon. Bitekyerezo and other colleagues said, this is also my plea. We are looking at having a stick and carrot approach. You go to a landing site, you encourage people to voluntarily bring their illegal fishing gear and you replace them with good gear. We are looking for money to do that.

On page 3, where I mentioned small fish, it was just to emphasise the point that when you go to the lakes now, the big fish, tilapia and nile perch, are not there. We are just seeing mukene and lugoji. I was just emphasising the point. 

The honourable member wanted to know how the nets detect or save the small fish. When God created this biodiversity, He improvised a survival method. Where you find nile perch, you will not find lugoji. There are specific areas. So, if you are fishing for nile perch using the good nets, you will catch only nile perch. There are areas known for mukene. If you use a mukene net in an area known for nile perch, we shall know that and we will confiscate your net. 

So, there are specific areas for particular species. The by-catches, alright, those can appear, but the percentage of by-catches is negligible. So, we have no problem –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the information you have outlined for us. Honourable members, I will alter the Order Paper to go to item No.3 and then we move from there. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

I) PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (PPDA) REGULATIONS, 2012

4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to lay on Table the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) Regulations, 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much. Next item.

II) RELEASE OF USHS 64,820,285,657 TO ROAD FUND DESIGNATED AGENCIES FOR MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL, DISTRICT AND URBAN ROADS IN QUARTER ONE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to lay on Table the release of Shs 64,820,285,657 to the Road Fund designated agencies for maintenance of national, district and urban roads in quarter one for the financial year 2012/2013. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture both. They stand referred to the appropriate committees for their expeditious action and reverting back to Parliament when they are ready. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a point of procedure pursuant to Rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure. 

Mr Speaker, the contents of item No.5 raise my eyebrows because as a Member of the Natural Resources Committee, I have formally expressed the concern that a minority report be presented along with the main report. The manner in which item No.5 has appeared on today’s Order Paper is in open defiance of rule 194(1) to (3).

Under rule 194(1): “The Member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the committee shall be given time to present the minority report at the time of the consideration of the committee report.”

As if that was not enough, under rule 194(2): “Any Member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent, and the statements of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee.”

Mr Speaker, it goes on to say that in preparing a minority report, the concerned Member is even supposed to be assisted by the clerk to make sure that there is proper work appended for the good of everybody in the plenary session.

In light of that, is it procedurally right for the committee to isolate the Lukyamuzi minority report, when I have already given notice to the committee that I have a minority report. If so, is it not proper for me to be given some extra time so that I arrange my papers to be appended to the report before presentation? I have already formally written to you, Mr Speaker, protesting over the manner in which the committee wanted to discard my report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It is true, honourable members, the rule cited by the honourable member for Rubaga South is very clear on this subject. When a committee is taking a decision and in the course of the decision there is a minority opinion against what has been decided upon by the majority of the committee, an honourable member dissenting or a group of Members dissenting are accorded an opportunity to present a minority report. 

A minority report under the rules is supposed to be appended to the main report of the committee. This is done at the time of the discussion of the main report, to facilitate the minority members or the members with a dissenting opinion to be accorded an opportunity to speak to the House on their views and reasons why they dissent. 

The proper time for examining this would be at the time when the committee is called upon to present its report, and by that, I use the Speaker’s prerogative to allow the motion to be moved. At the time when the House is examining the committee report, and when the chairman of the committee finally presents the report of the committee, I will accord the honourable member an opportunity to submit the minority report, which he has ready to present to the House. So that the debate that ensues is on both the main report and the minority report that would have been ably articulated by the member presenting the minority report. 

4.38
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Bill, 2012” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, seconded by the hon. Government Chief Whip. Proceed.

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The object and principles of the Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Bill, 2012 are: To give effect to Article 244 of the Constitution. The Bill will also seek to regulate petroleum exploration, development and production, and to establish the Petroleum Authority of Uganda together with the National Oil Company.

The Bill also seeks to regulate the licensing and participation of commercial entities in petroleum activities, and to provide for an open, transparent and competitive process of licensing.

Further, the Bill seeks to create a conducive environment for the promotion and exploration of Uganda’s petroleum potential; to provide for efficient and safe petroleum activities; and to provide for sensitisation on petroleum activities and the commissioning of infrastructure.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, the Bill further seeks to provide for the payments arising from petroleum activities; to provide for the conditions for the restoration of derelict land; and finally, to repeal the Petroleum Exploration and Production Act, Cap. 150.

The existing law under which we are operating is inadequate given the new and emerging challenges created by the discovery of commercial petroleum resources in Uganda. In addition, the Oil and Gas Policy of Uganda, 2008 requires new legislative actions to be taken in order to operationalise the policy measures. Thus, there is need for this Bill to overhaul the existing laws to facilitate the effective handling of petroleum activities.

Mr Speaker, as I have said, the Bill will establish the necessary institutions and a conducive environment for the development of petroleum in Uganda through effective and efficient resource management. The outcome of this Bill will ensure a high degree of confidence among Ugandans and the World at large. The newly discovered oil and gas resources in Uganda will be well managed in order to create lasting value for society. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, that is the motion for the second reading. This matter was referred to our Committee on Natural Resources. Therefore, this is the proper time for us to hear from our committee on what they think about this particular Bill. Yes, chairperson of the committee, you have 30 minutes to present the report. After that, I will accord the hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, the opportunity to present the minority report. Please proceed.

4.42
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of procedure?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I think there is need to be fair. After noting, with negativity, that the committee did not want my report to be appended to the main report, I wrote to you in protest. But I have not heard any response. So, it would be unfair for you to catch me unaware to present the minority report, which has not been shared by the rest of the members. So, I am humbly begging you, Mr Speaker, to accord me a day or two in which I will organise the minority report. Because, that report is intended for the good of everybody in Uganda, including this august House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable chairman will present the main report, and thereafter we will accord the honourable member the opportunity required to prepare the minority report. Please present the main report. A point of procedure? 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for according me this opportunity to raise this point of procedure. The hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is a member of this committee and he put it formally to your office that there was a problem with the report, which the majority had signed. It would be proper when the majority report is being considered, for the minority report to be appended. So, it would be unfair, Mr Speaker, considering Rule 194 (1), (2) and (3) for us to proceed with the main report without the minority report being appended. I would like to seek your guidance, therefore, whether that will be justified in this Housein view of our Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had previously ruled on this matter. What I said in my guidance was that it is true that the minority report should be appended to the main report, but that has not been done. The main report is here and has been distributed. What I am saying now is that let us first have the majority report presented – we will not debate it. We will suspend debate immediately after presentation to allow the hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi first present the minority report before any debate. If we suspend discussions on this matter now, we will be wasting parliamentary time for no good reason. Since we have a report that is ready, let it be presented. We will suspend any further debate on this matter to allow the hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi organise himself; come and present the minority report before opening the debate . Is that not fair?

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, allow me seek your guidance. In this situation, where the chairperson of the committee has not told us whether the Member intending to present the minority report informed the committee members or not - because the member could have informed you as the Speaker, but without bringing it to the attention of the leadership of the committee and the members.

Secondly, if we are to go by what you advised, can there be a timeframe because assuming somebody decides to take a year without presenting this minority report?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have guided the House and you have acknowledged that hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, who has a minority report, has genuine concerns, and you have guided that at an appropriate time, he will be accorded time to present his minority report. Is the Government Chief Whip in order to proceed and challenge your ruling and guidance that the honourable member had to first of all let the committee chair pronounce himself before we proceed? Is she in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I now seem to understand is that hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi does not have a minority report. He has a minority opinion. There is no minority report because if there was one and he was only denied the opportunity to attach it to the main report, I would have allowed him to do so now, to attach it and we debate it now, but what he seems to have is a minority opinion and not a minority report. There is no report to be attached to anything, but there is a minority opinion which by my guidance, I am trying to honour so that I accord him the opportunity to prepare and transform the opinion into a report. This is what I am guiding on. 

I am using the prerogative of the Speaker. For harmony, this is a sector that we should handle with care – I am using the prerogative of the Speaker to guide; to allow and accord, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, who has a minority opinion and, who possibly has not been given any opportunity or chance to prepare a report and attach it, to be given that opportunity; but we proceed and receive this report from the chair and stop any further action on it. 

We wait for hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to be given an opportunity so that when we open up next time, we will be listening to him after his report is ready and circulated, then we deal with the majority report and the minority report, in our debate and the report itself on the principles of the Bill. I thought that was what I had guided and I think it is clear enough! 

So, can we now allow the chairperson to present and the next time the House will sit on this specific subject, hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi will be ready because this particular matter after presentation shall be adjourned to Tuesday next week. So, that will be sufficient time for him to prepare.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, I want to put it on record that hon. Lukyamuzi does not only have a minority opinion, but he has the report and it is ready.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then if the report is ready, let us receive it now. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, let it go on record that I have a written report and I even presented it before the committee, but little did I know that in this particular session, the matter would come up. And I took the trouble, with humility, to inform you in writing that the committee has denied me the opportunity to append my report to the main report and you have got a written letter to that effect. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the difficulty that I have is that the letter that the honourable member wrote to the Speaker did not have the report attached. So, I am not in position to ascertain whether the report is in text because the honourable member went to the extent of saying that the rules allow him to get help from the technical staff of Parliament to help him prepare the report. 
So, the presumption I was reading was that possibly the report is not ready, but if it is ready, then we will need a shorter time. If this one finishes, then we will just append your report and proceed. I think that is easier. On Tuesday, when the matter comes up as a motion for second reading before we open the debate, you will present your minority report to the House and thereafter, we will open the debate. Is that clear? 

MS TAAKA: I think that is okay, Mr Speaker. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that guidance to the House because even then, Members will be able to go through the document to internalise it, and to also accommodate the minority position. But for the sake of future procedure questions on minority reports to avoid making it a passion – not just for “Ken-Lukyamuzi the man”. 

Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to guide the House on whether a Member is not supposed to put in writing the opinion to the whole committee. So that in the event that the committee cannot accommodate his views in a report, is only when the minority report will be necessary. Because, if you do not guide, Mr Speaker, we are going to be ambushed on the Floor by Members of Parliament coming up with minority reports even when the views could have been accommodated in the major report. 

We need to discourage as much as possible where views are accommodated in the report and documented in the report and observations and recommendations made so that we do not create a new style in this Parliament of minority reports just emerging. It is very important because I have earlier had challenges where Members have not written to the committee, but want space for a minority report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, it is true and the rules are clear on this subject for the information of the House, so that nothing is unknown to the House. Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi appeared before the committee and articulated his view not on the report of the committee but on the Bill, and he raised objections to the introduction of the Bill itself. So, he is objecting to the Bill; that you need to amend the Constitution for this Bill to be brought. That is his opinion; and it was brought to the committee; but now, this is the committee report which has examined the Bill. This is the report of the committee that has discussed the Bill itself. 

Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi did not even want the committee to discuss the Bill because the entire Bill is unconstitutional - that is the background to this situation. That is why I ruled the way I ruled. So, in this situation, it would only be proper for hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to raise this at a good time because it could not be appended to the report because the committee never examined whether the Bill itself could not be examined at all. They examined the principles of the Bill and dealt with it. So, that is where the difference is. 

So, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi will be given the opportunity, but ordinarily, a minority report is on the report of the committee. This is what makes hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s case different, and actually distinguishable from all the proceedings that I have known about minority reports. In any minority report, you take a decision as a committee, and once you have taken a decision as a committee on the Bill or on the subject before the committee, and a member disagrees with the position of the committee or a member dissents, that member has that right to access Parliament through this process called a minority report. That is why it is in the law; and remember in our previous discussion, we talked about the principles of parliamentary procedure. Majority reports must be respected, but minority rights must be protected. That is the protection we have inserted in the rules to enable us proceed. Please, let us leave this matter and proceed with listening to the report of the committee. It is clear enough now. 

4.57
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just had to follow your guidance. I proceed to present the report of the Parliamentary Committee on Natural Resources on The Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Bill, 2012. 

The Petroleum Bill, 2012 was read for the first time in February, 2012 and in accordance with rules 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda then - Mr. Speaker at that time when the Bill was committed to the committee, we had the old rules, however, under the new rules, it is rules 177 and 118. That is how I am going to proceed. 

Methodology

We scrutinised the Petroleum Bill and held meetings with the various Government departments, ministries, agencies as reflected on pages 2 and 3.  On page 3, under XII, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi was even accorded the opportunity as the Shadow Minister for Water and Environment to make a presentation. But since you have ruled, we shall wait and see. It goes on up to page 5. 

Objects of the Bill

These have been laid out in the Bill itself. So, I will not go through them.

Defects in the existing law

The legal framework that currently governs the activities of the petroleum industry include: The Petroleum Exploration and Production Act, 1985 Cap. 150 and the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003. The Petroleum Exploration and Production Act, 1985 Cap. 150, which is currently over two decades old, is inadequate and ineffectively governing the oil and gas sector, given the new and emerging challenges created by the discovery of commercial  quantities of petroleum resources in Uganda. 

In addition, the National Oil and Gas Policy for Uganda, 2008 requires operationalisation. Further, there is need to give effect to other constitutional provisions under Article 244. 

Paragraph five gives the historical perspective to Uganda’s oil and gas. I think honourable members will look through that. 

Observations and recommendations

The committee’s observations are thematically structured around the core areas of transparency and accountability, environmental concern, local content, equity and participation, micro-economic implications of petroleum, institutional arrangements and legislative oversight.  

Transparency and accountability

The committee is cognisant of the centrality of openness, transparency and accountability in enhancing the efficacy of institutions tasked with governing Uganda’s petroleum sector.  In the same vein, The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995; the Access to Information Act, 2005; and the National Oil and Gas Policy of Uganda, 2008 all recognise and seek to safeguard openness and access to information.  

However, it should be noted that since 1993, when the Government of Uganda signed the first Production Sharing Agreement, the secretive manner in which production sharing agreements and their inherent clauses have been kept has raised a lot of consternation in the public. 

Much as the government argued that disclosure of information in the PSAs would compromise its negotiating position in the allocation of the remaining oil exploration blocks in the Albertine Graben, it goes without saying that transparency and accountability is an indicator of good governance and in the absence of which, good governance will always remain a dream. 

In pursuit of transparency and accountability, the committee further notes that much as the Access to Information Act, 2005 sets the parameters of accessing information in the possession of Government, the Official Secrets Act of 1964, which provides for secrecy in matters such as security and defence, was not repealed by that Access to Information Act. This Act creates barriers to citizens’ access to a broad range of Government held information and its vague and broad formulation inevitably perpetuates the culture of secrecy and confidentiality. Therefore, there is need for this law that we are enacting to cascade openness and transparency, to provide sufficient checks and balances, and mitigate abuse of office and corruption. 

The economic implications of petroleum

Experts have predicted that oil is poised to double Government’s revenue from US$ 2.261 billion once full production is underway. This implies that with oil revenues, chronic budget deficits will be mitigated and an increase in receipts from exports due to petroleum exports will spur macroeconomic growth. However, if such hopes are to materialise, there is need for prudent and sustainable management of oil revenues. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that given the finite nature of the petroleum resource that Uganda has been gifted with, there is need for deliberate and sustained efforts to desist from over reliance on oil revenues and instead use and distribute the benefits accruing from petroleum equitably and sustainably to enhance national unity and cohesion, while at the same time nurturing and developing strong national institutions that will transcend the era of petroleum. 

Further still, it is imperative to align the expenditure of petroleum revenues to local needs that will enable natives to bolster their capability to effectively participate in the oil and gas sector considering that the revenue management dimension of the oil and gas sector is enshrined in The Public Finance Bill, 2012. The committee hopes that those scrutinising that Bill will bear this in mind. 

Environmental management

Uganda’s oil discoveries have occurred in the ecologically sensitive Albertine and Murchison Falls area of the River Nile. This calls for adequate safeguards to protect the delicate ecological balance. 

In addition, the committee notes that waste management and disposal is already a challenge and yet production is yet to commence. Currently the waste from exploration activities is being stored in temporary locations such as bitumen containers and polythene. Actual disposal awaits the requisite waste management regulations from NEMA. This, therefore, calls for rigorous, timely and sustainable interventions in as far as waste disposal and management is concerned.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the National Environment Management Authority, Uganda Wildlife Authority, the Water Resource Management Directorate and other state organs mandated to manage different aspects of the environment, need their capability enhanced and their operations adequately resourced if they are to efficiently and effectively monitor and regulate petroleum exploration and production activities and their ramifications on the environment. This may inevitably require an amendment to the Acts that establish the mandate and govern the operations of the respective agencies that superintend over the various aspects of the environment. This enhances the capacity to handle expanded mandates.

In addition, NEMA in consultation with other relevant Government agencies should efficiently and effectively devise modalities for waste management and disposal.

Local content and participation

In the recent past, there has been an upsurge in demands by locals in the Albertine Graben for a fair share of the proceeds of petroleum discovered in their vicinity.

More prominently, we had a number of prominent persons in this land including His Highness the Omukama of Bunyoro, the Ker Kwaro of Acholi and the traditional chiefs of Jonam, who actually appeared before the committee stressing the importance of local participation.

Recommendations

(a)	It is in this vein that the committee recommends the establishment of requisite and appropriate institutional frameworks to enhance the capability of local Ugandans to harness the demographic and economic changes that accrue to all exploration and production activity.

(b) 	The Government should strictly monitor and enforce local content provisions in all production sharing agreements, especially in areas such as labour, training and local goods and services provision, and generally facilitate Ugandan natives and local businesses to effectively participate in the oil and gas sector. 

This needs to be provided for in the law and this Bill provides an opportune moment. In addition, the capability of the state needs to be bolstered in as far as monitoring and enforcing local content provision is concerned.

Institutional arrangements

The institutional framework in the Bill is based on a tripartite model, separating Government bodies into policy, regulatory and commercial functions. Whereas the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is tasked with broad overall policy and supervision, the routine monitoring work is vested in the various centres of competence such as petroleum authority and the National Oil Company. The minister retains the role of making regulations and general supervisory role over the Petroleum Authority.

There is, therefore, need to clearly spell out the various roles, powers and obligations of the various institutions being established by the law. The volume of work for the regulatory authority is so enormous. Single point accountability where the regulatory authority grants a licence monitors the activity of the licensee and takes the decision to revoke the license.

The National Oil Company

The National Oil Company (NOC) as envisaged in the law will be the main commercial arm for state participation in the Oil and Gas Industry. There has been a realisation that the NOC should not only embrace suitable Private Sector tendencies, but also rapidly shed off some, if not all, of its pervasive bureaucratic tendencies synonymous with many parastatals. This explains why many national oil companies today have been modified to suit this trend and be able to attract private capital and ease technological transfer.

Furthermore, the challenge of limited resources in emerging oil economies like Uganda imply that the state alone cannot adequately meet the resource needs of the National Oil Company hence, posing a threat to capability growth and sustainability of the NOC.

This challenge can be ameliorated by setting up the NOC in a manner that makes it efficient and effective and suitable to attract private capital. As in the case of Uganda, the Companies Act has provisions that can permit the creation of such a National Oil Company.

Land rights and compensation

The committee notes the need to entrench the categorical principle of compensation prior to acquisition, drawing on the guarantee of the customary and other rights to land laid down in the Constitution of Uganda.

Much as the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has embraced the resettlement action plan as a comprehensive tool of handling matters of compensation in the Graben, there is need to ensure that:

(a)	In handling compensation, the Resettlement Action Plan conforms to the principles of fairness, adequacy, promptness and quick resettlement. These compensations should transcend land per se and cover aspects such as heritage and other livelihoods as well.

(b)	There is need to define guidelines for prior and informed consent to land acquisition, including the guarantee of an open and transparent public hearing. During these hearings, it is imperative to provide full information in the applicable local languages on the proposed development, its potential benefits and its potential impacts at the local, regional and national levels, as well as the proposed resettlement and compensation measures for affected people. Special emphasis on the involvement of women residents in public hearings and the incorporation of their perspectives on resettlement and compensation measures.

(c)	Further, it is important to urgently devise a policy of compensation that upholds the constitutional guarantees, protects the land rights of persons living in current and prospective oil rich areas so as to ameliorate the potential ramifications of unfair land alienation and malpractices accruing to oil and gas activity. This is particularly critical since land is not just the primary source of livelihood, but also defines the way of life for many rural Ugandans.

The other recommendation is that the consideration of land acquisition and compensation in the oil producing areas should take cognisance of the range of customary land ownership partners and the land rights of the people, which are recognised by the 1995 Constitution that exists in the affected areas. 

This should further be translated into physical land surveying on the part of the government and awarding of land titles to people, a process that remains prohibitive in terms of financial, legal and social resources and, therefore, cannot be undertaken by the common Ugandan, a significant barrier  in protecting himself or herself from exploitation and land alienation, and something which the government of Uganda needs to seriously examine and address.

Land use and physical planning

Recommendation

The committee appreciates that the Albertine Graben has been declared a special planning area, but further notes the need to expeditiously effect this plan and accordingly bridge the information gap about it.

Health and Safety

There is, therefore, need to develop the requisite health and safety capabilities across the various stakeholders operating in the industry. In addition, the policy and regulatory framework should address matters of health and safety appropriately.

The committee recommends that the Petroleum Exploration and Development and Production Bill, of course at a later stage, be passed subject to proceeding proposed amendments. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for the report and I thank the committee for this important job they have done. As I earlier communicated, we will, at this stage, suspend any debate. The rules provide that by now, upon presentation, debate should then open, but for the reasons I stated earlier, we will suspend debate on this matter and we will resume at the appropriate time when the other portion of the report is brought – the minority report is with us. I ask the chairperson to lay a full report on the Table so that we can proceed with other business. 

5.17
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the committee on Table. I also beg to lay the minutes that were taken during the proceedings of the committee while it was considering the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture both the full text of the committee report and also the minutes of the committee proceedings.

BILLS

SECOND READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2012

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Bill has just been put in our pigeon holes; but at the same time, as a member of the Budget Committee, we have not had time to look at it; we just received it today. So, the guidance I am seeking is whether we can proceed with this Bill before the committee looks at it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, nothing like that can happen unless we suspend the rules, but that will not happen. This Bill was read for the first time yesterday. By its nature – it is the Supplementary Appropriation Bill which should close the financial year, which has passed, to enable us move with the processes including the budgetary issues for this financial year, which has commenced. If the committee has not had the opportunity to examine this Bill, the motion will not be prepared because the committee will not be ready to report. We will defer this reading to an appropriate time. 

But honourable members, we should remember that there are implications of this on the entire economy given that some departments have already gone way off their money which we gave on Vote-on-Count and the situation is becoming a bit difficult. So, whatever we do, we should be able to do this fairly quickly so that we can mitigate the situation in the different Government departments. 

In the circumstances, we are even unable to handle item seven because we had thought we would supply yesterday. Then we again thought we would supply today. But it seems that with the current events, we are not able to deal with the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, and so we should close the other chapter. We cannot supply even if we were ready to do it. So, that item is also deferred. Let us go to the next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE STUDY TOUR TO THE PARLIAMENT OF RWANDA

5.21
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand following our Rules of Procedure. 

Part VII - Presentation of Reports of Parliamentary Delegations Abroad. 

This is the report of the Budget Committee study tour to the Parliament of the Republic of Rwanda, which took place from 16 -19 July, 2012. It contains the introduction, objectives, findings, lessons learnt and recommendations, as well as the conclusions.

The Budget Committee is mandated to carry out functions relating to the National Budget as may be assigned to it by Parliament or any other law. This includes, among others, considering preliminary estimates and the macroeconomic plan and programmes.

In a bid to build capacity, the committee organised a study tour to the Parliament of Rwanda. The delegation was led by hon. Cecilia Ogwal and included the following:

1.	Hon. Christine Acayo - Committee member
2.	Hon. Joseph Matte 	 - Committee member
3.	Hon. Amos Okot  - Committee member
4.	Mr Samuel Wanyaka - Director, Budget Office
5.	Mrs Ruth Ekirapa Byoona - Principal Clerk Assistant
6.	Mr Sulaiman Kiggundu  - Principal Economist

The tour was aimed at enhancing the capacity of the committee to handle the budget process. The delegation interested itself within the areas below, among others:

(a)	Consideration of preliminary estimates and the macroeconomic plan.
(b)	Organic Law on State Finances and Property, 2006 (Republic of Rwanda).
(c)	Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement.
(d)	Gender Budget Statement.
(e)	The Appropriation and Supplementary Appropriation Bills.
(f)	Preliminary Oversight of the National Budget Implementation.

As part of the methodology, the delegation met the following:

(i)	Members of the Standing Committee on Budget and National Patrimony in the Chamber of Deputies;
(ii)	Permanent Secretary, Minister of Gender and Family Promotion, Rwanda;
(iii)	The Chief Monitoring Officer of the Gender Monitoring Office;
(iv)	The Auditor-General and his technical team;
(v)	Director General, Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, Republic of Rwanda; and
(vi)	The Deputy Speaker, Chamber of Deputies.

Participants had a chance to visit the Gisozi Genocide Memorial Site to get an understanding of the country’s history. The delegation also visited the Uganda Embassy in Rwanda and discussed budgetary issues affecting their Embassies.

Findings

There are three legislative documents which direct the annual budget cycle: One, is the Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda; two, the Organic Law on State Finance and Property; and three, the Financial Regulations (Ministerial Order). 

The Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda was adopted in 2003 and establishes a bi-cameral legislature. It provides for key annual activities of the legislature, that is, submission of a draft finance law to cabinet, adoption of the finance law by Parliament and submission of budget execution report to Parliament. 

The Organic Law on State Finances and Property was adopted in 2006. It establishes the principles of planning, budgeting and monitoring of state resources, and management of the state budget. Financial regulations were published in 2007, and give further ministerial instructions regarding the budget calendar, expenditure categorisation, and re-allocations and accounting standards.

The Annual Budget Cycle

During the first four months (July to October) entities are involved in performance and action planning. This constitutes the review period where the previous year’s performance is assessed and national priorities are set for the coming year. In the fifth month (November) of the fiscal year, the National Medium-Term Expenditure Framework is established by the National Budget Unit of Ministry of Finance and Economic Development which also prepares the budget call circular.

In the seventh month, that is, January, sector plans and urgent MTEFS are prepared by line ministries after consultation with their affiliated agencies, projects and districts. The sector plans and agency MTEFs are submitted to Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, and analysed by the national budget unit. Budget consultations are then held between the line ministries and Ministry of Finance and Economic Development to agree on final ceilings to submit to cabinet and Parliament. 

In the eighth and ninth months, February to March, a detailed draft budget is prepared by Ministry of Finance and Economic Development along with the Budget Framework Paper (BFP) that sets out the macroeconomic context of the draft budget as well as the key policy choices underlying the proposed resource allocations. 

The BFPs are discussed by cabinet and recommendations are incorporated, and the draft budget is discussed with donors at the second joint budget support review. In the 10th to the 12th months, April to June, the draft finance law is submitted to cabinet for approval before discussions by the Chamber of Deputies. The finance law is ordinarily voted and approved by Parliament by the 15th of the 12th month of the fiscal year.

The Budget Execution and SmartGov

The budget is executed on the basis of the finance law, the action plans of the budget agencies and cash flow plans. Cash flow plans permit spending on a quarterly basis. SmartGov is the single integrated financial management information system used throughout Government for budget execution. 

During budget preparation budget data is entered into SmartGov. During executions spending commitments are recorded in SmartGov to track executions. A separate accounting module is currently used, but a fully integrated system is to be put in place soon.

Auditing and Accounting

The Accountant-General produces, on a monthly basis, a statement of revenue and expenditure, financial position, budget execution and bank reconciliation statements. The organic budget law provides for consolidated public accounts to be produced by the third month of the new fiscal year. The Auditor-General has then to submit his report to the Chamber of Deputies by the sixth month of the new financial year. 

The Office of the Auditor-General was established in 1998, and began operations in March 2000. The 2003 Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda recognises the Office of the Auditor-General as a supreme audit institution and defines it as an independent office vested with legal personality, financial and administrative autonomy. 

The Ongoing Budget Reforms

•	Improving the  quality of budget execution reports, including externally financed projects;
•	Gender budgeting;  
•	Improving the quality of the MTEF through improving the planning and budget process;
•	Aligning the fiscal year to that of East African  Community member states; and
•	Developing a roadmap for moving towards Government Financial Statistics 2001 complaint classification for budget and accounting.

Gender Budgeting

The committee was most interested in gender budgeting being a topical issue globally. Gender budgeting in Rwanda started in 2003 through comprehensive gender mainstreaming championed by the then minister of gender and family promotion.

The main objective of the programme was to integrate gender equity into the country’s development agenda and process. To enhance the gender responsiveness of the budget process, each budget agency is expected to use a simple policy analysis approach including the following steps: Situational analysis; assessment of the gender responsiveness of the sector policy; budget costing and allocations; monitoring, spending and assessment of policy and expenditure impact. A guide has been developed to provide guidelines for gender budgeting and gender focal point officers have been established in each budget agency by the Prime Minister’s Office.

A gender monitoring office was established to ensure the incorporations and integrations of the gender issues in the national policies, programmes and budgets.

The committee also got an opportunity to meet the gender monitoring office, which is a public institution that was established by the Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda on 4 June 2003. It has a legal personality, administrative and financial autonomy supervised by the Office of the Prime Minister.

One of the cardinal roles of this office is the monitoring of gender mainstreaming. The programme on monitoring gender mainstreaming consists of the following:

•	Monitoring how the fundamental principles of gender are respected in all organs at Government, private, non-governmental and religious levels;

•	Examining and monitoring the national policies and programmes intended at ensuring the promotion of gender equality, monitoring the existence of the policy programmes as well as different projects aimed at promoting gender equality, their implementation and the system of their budget allocations;

•	Ensuring the implementation of international agreements and programmes relating to the respect of the principle of gender.

Other issues of interest to the Parliament

Though the delegation’s primary interest was in the budget process in Rwanda, there were other matters that arose that the delegation took interest in, including the health insurance scheme, and the budget requirements of the Uganda Embassy in Rwanda. 

On the health insurance scheme, the committee was informed that Rwanda Government has a comprehensive health insurance for all its citizens, with 92 percent of Rwandans under it. This insurance system is celebrated as one of the most successful in the world at a premium of US$ 2 a year. It provides basic health services to ensure that even the most vulnerable and poor have access to health services.

The health insurance policy has largely contributed to the reduction of the national debt and increased access to health services and it is worth emulating in Uganda as efforts are underway to introduce the health insurance.

On Uganda Embassy in Kigali

The committee learned that there is a shortfall in the development budget regarding construction of the Chancery (Uganda Embassy in Rwanda). In order for construction to commence, at least one third of the total budget cost is needed. 

However, although Shs 3 billion had been approved for this financial year 2012/2013 to kick-start the construction - that is the report we got from the ambassador - only Shs 1.5 billion has been released. This may delay the project. The total project cost is Shs 9,700,000,000 with a projected release of Shs 3 billion for three years starting this financial year 2012/2013.

The construction of the Chancery would result in Government recovery of this investment in eight years through savings on rent. Above all, it will give Uganda a dignified presence in Rwanda. 

The delegation also met Ugandans living in Rwanda who asked Government for the following:

•	To authorise the embassy in Rwanda to issue passports making services more accessible. 

•	To put in place procedures to enable Ugandan citizens there vote from Kigali since coming back home for registration and voting sometimes is very costly.

•	To handle issues of security on the way, especially Kayabwe, where there are many robberies.

Lessons learnt and recommendations

It was established that in Rwanda, Government fiscal management and budgeting is based on a well functional development plan. The Rwandan Economy Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy provides a medium-term framework for achieving the country’s long-term development aspirations -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two minutes to finish.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you. In Rwanda, Vision 2020, the seven-year Government of Rwanda programme and the millennium developments. There are mechanisms of ensuring that resources are allocated efficiently to sectors that propel growth only. 

Rwanda has put in place strong institutional mechanisms for monitoring budget implementation or performance. 

The budgeting enhances transparency and cooperation in Government as it spans across different spheres of Government. Like in Uganda, there are various intergovernmental forums at the executive levels to give effect to cooperative governance.
 
There are several interactions between Government, NGOs and other stakeholders during the budget process. This provides a platform for sharing experiences and learning. It is comparable to Uganda’s scenario where Ministry of Finance runs consultative processes before the budget is passed. Government of Uganda should, however, endeavour to ensure that these views are incorporated in the budget estimates. 

The finance law is ordinarily voted and approved by Parliament by the 15th of the 12th month of June of the fiscal year. This practice has eliminated the need for Vote-on-Account, which is normally unscrutinised. The committee notes that the new Public Finance and Accountability Bill is introducing this provision and should be supported. 

Article 45 of the Organic Law lays down stringent provisions for revisions of the budget. The revised budget should, for example, be consistent with the approved medium-term strategic and budget framework. If there is a difference, an explanation should be provided. In addition, the revised budget must go through the same preparation process as the original budget. This is a good system that can be used to control misuse of funds associated with a supplementary budget. 

Similarly, there is a budget line for impromptu items to meet urgent and expected expenditure. This cannot exceed two percent of the total current budget. This is similar to our Contingency Fund that has never been operationalised. As above, this has been included in the new Public Finance and Accountability Bill which is currently before Parliament. The delegation recommends that the principle of using contingency fund be adopted instead of having endless supplementary requests.

The Auditor-General reports are instrumental in influencing the budget process and allocation to sectors in the following year. 

In addition to auditing the finance of all the government institutions, the Constitution mandates the Auditor-General to submit each year to Parliament, prior to commencement of the sessions dealing with appropriation, a complete report on the state financial statements for the previous year. The report must indicate the manner in which the budget was utilised, unnecessary expenditure which was incurred or expenses which were contrary to the law, and whether there was wasteful expenditure or misappropriation. 

The idea of the Auditor-General auditing planning documents during the budget process is a very proactive approach and an important lesson to learn. Normally, the Auditor-General is at the tail end of issues after mistakes have already have been made. Auditing of plans enables the Auditor-General to establish their feasibility and genuineness inter alia. This kind of assessment would serve as an early warning system to detect fraud and other forms of mismanagement of resources. This approach could be studied further in the new law.

There is strong political commitment towards gender budgeting. Gender machinery, legal framework and policy have been put in place -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member will conclude.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you so much. As I conclude, the trip to Rwanda was very significant, insightful and timely since Parliament is in the budget process. The lessons learnt will help the committee in improving the budget process, especially the mainstreaming gender issues in the budget and monitoring their implementation so that they do not remain on paper, the usual practice in Uganda. 

The delegation pledged to implement lessons learnt from the study tour and recommends that more Members of Parliament and staff be exposed to similar arrangements.  As I lay on Table this report, Members should go through points No.11, 12 and 13. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member for giving - I think this is your first time to present at the dispatch box. Congratulations for a very successful maiden presentation.

MR AMOS OKOT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report on Table -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was already laid.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are welcome. Honourable members, that is the report of our delegation to the Rwandan Parliament. In the time that we are dealing with the budget, this report as the presenter says is timely. There are issues to pick from there which can improve on our discussions and processes. We also have the Public Finance Bill before the Parliament, which also incorporates some of the ideas brought from Rwanda. 

Any discussions on this subject, Members?

5.44
MR STEPHEN MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the delegation to Rwanda but when you look at the conclusion of the report, they conclude with emphasis on gender issues. We are in the process of budgeting. This was a Budget Committee and we have a Bill before us; the Bill that is going to repeal the Budget Act.

Our biggest concern in that Bill if you realise is the creation of the Contingency Fund. I would have loved if the committee had concentrated a little more on how the Contingency Fund is managed in Rwanda because from what I have heard, it is a success story. 

Ours here of endless requests for supplementaries is a very bad story. So, if this information is indeed available to the committee, I would have loved that in future before we debate this particular Bill before us, the delegation that travelled to Rwanda could gives us more details on how the Contingency Fund is managed in Rwanda because that is something I think the committee should have dwelt on. This is something that we are going to debate and it is something that we hope will be able to cure our defects. That is the only concern I had. 

I hope the committee has picked it. Fortunately, the clerk who was on the trip is also the clerk at Table; I hope this one is captured. How successful has the Contingency Fund been and how does it operate in Rwanda? If we can get that information, it will be very helpful to this Parliament as we debate the new Bill on financial management.

5.46
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the team that visited Rwanda and has been able to come up with a very good report. I have two or three issues to raise on this report. The first one is the gender monitoring office. This is a very relevant issue in as far as this subject is concerned in Uganda. 

We have been meeting various Government institutions and entities where this issue of gender balancing has not been catered for. I think with the use of this report, if it can be implemented here, it will go a long way in solving the gender disparities in our institutions, mostly in the private sector, where a lot is not paid attention to.

Secondly is the health insurance scheme in Rwanda. Even before Rwanda implemented this scheme, Uganda had already started on it, but it has remained on paper for so many years. I am wondering, what the problem with Uganda is. Very many people have been saying that in Uganda, we prepare very good programmes, and the Rwanda people come, pick them and implement them. I think this will stand as a challenge to us as Uganda to see to it that this health insurance scheme is implemented here, since it will go a long way in solving our health problems. 

On page 7, on the recommendations and lessons learnt, the committee referred to a new Bill which is before the Committee on Finance as The Public Finance and Accountability Bill. But the Bill which is before the committee is the Public Finance Bill not Public Finance and Accountability Bill. I ask the committee to correct that mistake.

Finally, on page 8, they have also shown the intervention of the Auditor-General in auditing the budget process before it is implemented. I think this is a very good system if  –(Member timed out.)

5.48
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee which went to Rwanda and has given us very good information. We have learnt a lot from them.

I would like to talk about the issue of gender. The Rwanda group came to Uganda some time back to learn from us about gender budgeting. They moved very fast and now they are ahead of us. They implement gender budgeting more than us from whom they learnt. Now, what is the problem with us? 

Our problem is that, first of all, gender budgeting is put in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which is marginalised, given very little money and nobody listens to them. But the gender budgeting in Rwanda is in the Prime Minister’s Office because the Prime Minister is the overall person who monitors programmes and sees that things are done. That is one. So, as long as our gender budgeting remains in the Ministry of Gender, we may not progress very much.

Secondly, our people do not want to open their ears and accept gender budgeting. We have tried several times, but we do not implement what we have planned. I am urging that really, with all the knowledge we have, let us be gender-responsive, thank you.

5.50
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the team which went to Rwanda and for the good report, because they have given accountability. But I have the following issues.

On recommendations, I support these recommendations to be well-studied by the Ministry of Finance and some of these mechanisms which they have provided that can help us give better services to our people on the ground,  be adopted. 

However, on page 7, recommendation No.5, we all support that we should appropriate the budget right away as it is read. We should first pass through it before the President reads it so that there and then, we start spending and serving our people. 

However, this statement that it is the Finance and Accountability Bill which is intending to remove the Budget Act, I do not support. However, we shall tussle it out when we are discussing the Finance and Accountability Bill. Instead, we need to strengthen and amend our Budget Act then with regard to the Finance and Accountability Bill, those issues which are segregated, should remain in that Bill; but we shall have to strengthen our Budget Act. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.52
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjonjo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also wish to thank the committee for the report after the trip to Rwanda, only in relation to what is happening in Uganda, especially to our budget or our supplementary budget. I would urge that we copy these examples such that our supplementary budgets are not too many. 

I sit on the Committee on National Economy and we receive a lot of supplementary budgets. I wish we could borrow a leaf from Rwanda such that the supplementary budgets are reduced because on the face of it, it appears too much and it may raise suspicions that the money is going somewhere else.

About the embassy of Uganda in Rwanda, I have seen a very good attempt at constructing our own. It is unfortunate that the report is about the budget, but I would have pushed it at least to Foreign Affairs to find out how many embassies we own - the Ugandan embassies which are our own - those that we are not renting, such that we find out how much we save and how much goes out. I wish to get a report, but I do not know if we can get it from the Minister of Foreign Affairs. 

Rwanda has also got a very good environmental policy whereby it has managed its buveera. In Uganda, before I came to Parliament, you passed a law on managing buveera. I do not know how far it has gone. I would have also loved to know more about that because what I am seeing is that what you passed the other time has not been implemented. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.55
MR STEVEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are a number of lessons to learn, especially on the health insurance scheme, where these two dollars are put in a pool and people access the health services, and there is reduction in maternal deaths. We need to copy this thing because the moment citizens know that they have a stake and they pay this little money, at the end of the day, it brings better results. 

The other issue is about the idea of the Auditor-General auditing planning documents during the budget process. This is a very good lesson to copy because here what we usually do is to let things go and later, the Auditor-General comes in, which may not help. But if the programmes are audited, this one will help us.

The other issue is that it was established that in Rwanda, all accounting officers for each budget agency sign a performance contract with the President and ensure that the resources under their control are effectively used. I think this is a very good thing to copy so that if one misuses the funds under his or docket, this person is punished. Actually, what happens here with the officers, they really do things with a lot of impunity. Go to the districts, go to the ministries, you find people doing things with impunity. 

Therefore, I would urge this Parliament and our Government generally to make sure that officers are held responsible and whoever misuses Government money is seen to be punished. It is common knowledge – you know what happened in the Prime Minister’s Office recently - and you find someone is not punished. 

Rwanda is regarded as one of the countries that are strongly fighting corruption, because they are serious. If you embezzle Government money, you are punished. So, I call upon this Parliament and Government to be serious on the issues of –(Member timed out.)

5.57
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the group that went to Rwanda. Particularly, they made emphasis on gender budgeting. When you look through their report and recommendations, you find that a lot of emphasis is put on gender budgeting. This is something we have been talking about here in Uganda. 

What embarrasses me as a Ugandan is that part of the good things they do in Rwanda are from the training they got from Uganda; it was a small civil society that lifted them up from where they were to where they are. We really wonder why we should even go to Rwanda to study what we taught them. 

Mr Speaker, I wonder why we are spending all this money on experience-sharing. UWOPA sponsored a group of people; they went and came up with a report. The report was laid on the Table. The team on budget has brought a similar report and laid it on the Table. So, what is the purpose of this report if we cannot implement the little that we learn from these different countries?

Mr Speaker, I was shocked some time back when we went to Rwanda; they have managed to control Malaria. In fact, they were saying that the districts bordering Uganda were re-infecting them with Malaria. I want to disagree with the members of the team that went that we should avail similar opportunities to many Members of Parliament to go and study from there. Are you going to carry the whole Parliament of Uganda just to study what they are doing? 

I, therefore, request that maybe, you pick the people from Rwanda to come and take us through what they have done so that we can also begin to implement some of these issues –(Member timed out.)

5.59
DR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to add my voice to thank the team that went to Rwanda. There are two observations that I want to make from the onset. Rwandans have actually learnt from us, and now we are going back to learn from them. It seems there is something wrong in our system here. We have good policies that we are not able to implement. 

Secondly, Rwanda has taken relatively a short time to internalise good policies and put them in practice. I think we need to take note of that; we are unable to do that here in Uganda. 

But the main thing that I want to focus on is the health insurance. I think this team has not done us a good service by just glossing over this matter which is a big achievement for Rwanda. It is known worldwide that Rwanda has made that achievement of establishing a national health insurance. 

According to literature on this subject, there are two key factors. The first factor is the president himself. The president took this as a very serious project and made sure that it succeeded. The committee has not told us this. 

Secondly, there is already a culture in Rwanda of something they call “mutuelles” - some kind of cooperative movement, which the committee has not told us about; but it is partly the reason this health insurance has been successful. I think it is better we call another team to come here to tell us more about why this success occurred in Rwanda.

Secondly, I would like to endorse the idea that the Auditor-General actually looks at our plans before they are implemented. I want to tell you that we have gone through planning many times –(Member timed out.).

6.02
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to contribute on the debate on this report. I will specifically restrict myself to the health insurance scheme. It is apparent that Rwanda as a government cares and takes the health of its people very seriously. From the report, it is clear that they aim at providing health services to the poor and most vulnerable. What is the comparison with Uganda? From last year’s budget, if you divided the money which went to the health sector with the number of Ugandans, each Ugandan would get only Shs 600 for the whole financial year. That cannot even buy a dose of Aspirin. 

Mr Speaker, we the Members in this Parliament requested for the status of the hospitals within this country, but it did not come to the Floor. Now the answer has been provided that if Government is actually serious about the health of its people, it must adopt, copy and implement the health insurance scheme. It does not serve us in any way, whatsoever for us to fear. Even if it means charging some amount of money in as far as the sector is concerned the better; short of that, we as the Members of Parliament and other leaders of this country will continue to foot the medical bills of the people we represent in our constituencies. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

6.03
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend the honourable members of the committee which travelled to Rwanda for a job well done; but furthermore, for coming up with an idea that is tickling most of our minds; this is the health insurance scheme. 

Mr Speaker, in most cases, most of these pertinent issues come up in such reports and they are just talked about and are left to pass. Through your indulgence, Mr Speaker, I would like to make a suggestion, particularly on the health insurance scheme; that Parliament constitutes a select committee to go and make a detailed study of this idea so that we can see how we can incubate it and thereafter implement it. 

We appreciate the fact that Uganda is more populated than Rwanda, but still, we can come up with a system which is very convenient for Uganda’s case given the parameters and discrepancies as far as the two countries are concerned. By initiating that here in Parliament, we shall have assisted Government to come up with a very good scheme for the nation. That is my contribution. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.05
MR BAKER SSALI (NRM, Buikwe County West, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to commend the team which went to Rwanda and the recommendations they have made. Mr Speaker, I have only one issue, and this issue is about the Rwanda Chancery. I visited Rwanda last year and visited the plot where the Chancery is going to be constructed. By then, the Rwandan Government was about to take over that plot because we had failed to develop it. Now I am happy that we are going to develop it. 

But, Mr Speaker, the problem is that the construction of that chancery will take us Shs 9 billion, and it is supposed to be undertaken in three years, starting with this financial year; and this means that completion will be in 2016. 

Mr Speaker, we were supposed to remit Shs 3 billion per year to enable us construct that Chancery, but according to what I have seen here and what is in the budget, the money that has been provided is just Shs 1.5 billion, which means it will take us six years to complete this construction and by then, I think, compared to the way we are moving here in Uganda and the inflation in our country, the price of the construction would have moved from Shs 9 billion to Shs 18 billion. (Member timed out.)

6.08
MRS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers Representative): I thank you. I am sorry about that. I want to add my voice to those who have appreciated the delegation that represented us in Rwanda.

I also want to say that Uganda is known to be one of the countries with the best laws. Unfortunately, implementation and enforcement is a big problem that we have to analyse and find a solution for. You cannot believe it that Rwanda just came in recently in 2000, but the way they are progressing and implementing what they came to borrow from us, leaves a lot to be desired.

The health insurance scheme is a very good idea, where we have no corruption, but with the rate of corruption that we have, I am worried that it may not be very successful, much as it would be one of the best approaches to keep a healthy population.

The other issue is about the budgeting system, where the president has to sign and gazette it for the purpose of being transparent and accountability. By the way, it will reduce a lot of corruption that is prevailing in our Government institutions especially by the civil servants. Let it be open, and I know very well - because the other day when I was reading one of the papers here, they were showing very big storied houses and mansions owned by some of these civil servants. It is terrible. Corruption is not only by the political leaders, but even by the civil servants, and they must be checked. 

The other one is the idea of the Auditor-General auditing the planning documents during the budget process. I think it is a very good idea whereby in our case, the auditor only looks at issues after mistakes have been made. If it is copied, brought here and put into practice, it would help us a lot because it would enhance hard work, and will help us avoid this cut and paste system of Uganda by our ministries when we are making the budget here. I thank you.  
 
6.10
MRS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I will use the two minutes to first thank and that is enough. I have these comments to make:

You find that much as the Ugandan embassy in Kigali was given a deposit, we would like this Parliament to pass it as a policy that at least let the country get a loan to construct and acquire embassies. When I was in London, I got the shock of the day that our embassy premises had been sold and part of it was for renting and yet we can get a flagship of five years to look at our embassies. One time, one member of the Opposition was complaining about the leaking embassy in South Africa. So, let us pass it as a Parliament that we can have a five-year plan to at least have embassies so that when we travel abroad, we feel privileged to have embassies owned and not rented. 

The housing system in Rwanda – they have not commented about it, but that is also a way of planning. I do not know when ours will take-off because they said they were going to construct the first phase in Kampala, but we have not seen it and I think that as a Government in power, we should work on it and at least have the first housing system in place.

Lastly, we have got to know that the ministries sold their homes and and are renting. This is displeasing. For example, the Ministry of Gender is renting in a very poor place and yet it had a home. We also want this Parliament to also have a way forward. I understand that the Ministry of Agriculture shifted from Entebbe and I do not know what it wants in town. (Laughter)

Let us establish a policy – at least we should have a five-year plan for ministries, embassies and Government departments to have homes. I thank you.
 
6.13
MRS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Mine is, first of all, to thank the committee as my colleagues have done because this report is really going to open our eyes. We are learning a lot of lessons from their recommendations and yet Rwanda is a ‘baby’ country of Uganda. But why are we really below them? Why are we doing worse than them? This is a very big question and food for thought.

One of the lessons I have learnt on page 9  - and my colleague commented on it a bit - they have ways of fighting corruption, but in Uganda, the problem is that we set our bullets on people who are ‘eyes on’ leaving the people who are ‘hands on’. There are almost four people who are finance controllers in this country - I would say, who sign for finances; the PS, CAO, Town Clerk and the Sub-County Chief. These people handle huge amounts of money, but when we are fighting corruption – there are people who know how to fight corruption, but they set their eyes at a different angle leaving a gap for these people to steal Government money. 

I have to stand on my two legs to copy a leaf from Rwanda. In Rwanda, the President appoints the PSs’ on a contract, and the results from the Auditor-General’s Report are the ones they consider. If you they are negative, you are not re-appointed and if they are positive, then you are appointed, but -(Member timed out.)
 
6.16
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): I thank you. I join the others to thank the committee for the report. This issue of every time referring to Rwanda – some of those people who liberated this country were from Rwanda, including President Kagame who was among those who liberated this country. Why are we lamenting? We have laws, but enforcement is a problem. 

In Rwanda, there is a segregation of duties. Once you are appointed a minister, you are not a Member of Parliament, which is not the case with us here. Kenyans have also bought the idea, because it is really difficult to discipline our colleagues here, and so, it is a problem. Mr Speaker and Members, let us also come up with amendments. Once you are nominated a minister, you leave. That would help.

Mr Speaker, I see here that they have a budget line for making those emergencies. But we have a law here - Article 157, Contingency Fund. How far have we gone? I looked into the figures of the budget today, but I have not seen that line. Are we going to bring it? Because we are trying to avoid supplementary expenditure; how are we incorporating this in the appropriation - the Contingency Fund? I need clarification. 

There is the issue of pre-audits. Pre-audits are here, but you find now that members of the Auditor-General, who are external auditors, even have an office here at Parliament. You cannot audit your own home. They are based here. It seems there is a problem. I think these other people should come in to do pre-audits then they leave. Because later –(Member timed out.)

6.18
MS FLAVIA RWABUHORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the report. The Constitution, which mandates the Auditor-General to audit institutions’ financial statements, mandates also the Auditor-General to audit gender budgeting. Where is the gender audit report? With whom does the Auditor-General share this report? 

The Ministry of Finance always issues a budget call circular in every planning period to ministries for them to engender their budget. But this same circular never specifies any penalties and rewards for those who comply or don’t comply. 

Mr Speaker, the Budget Monitoring and Accountability Unit, is housed in Ministry of Finance, which it is supposed also to oversee. I wonder whether this is not hide and seek. This subjugation is the one that causes this Unit not to engender the budget or even to require for the gender budget statements. 

The Equal Opportunities Commission is subjugated in the Ministry of Gender. Up to now, it has been denied its semi-autonomy and yet it is mandated in the law. 

Mr Speaker, most of the ministries have gender desks and not gender officers. I, therefore, request that this Parliament comes up strongly to really emphasise and ensure that gender audit reports are brought and shared; and also have gender officers instead of gender desks. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, which part of the Constitution talks about gender auditing by the Auditor-General?

MS RWABUHORO: Mr Speaker, the Auditor-General is mandated to also carry out a gender audit –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You said it is in the Constitution. 

MS RWABUHORO: Yes, Mr Speaker. I wish I could get a copy of the Constitution. They are mandated to audit every institution’s financial statements. It is in the Audit Act.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Audit Act, but not the Constitution.

MS RWABUHORO: I am sorry; it is in the Audit Act. I thank you.

6.20
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also join my colleagues to welcome back the team that went to Rwanda to represent the Budget Committee. I thank the committee for the work well done and for the report laid on the Floor of Parliament. 

I am very grateful because some of these reports act as an eye-opener to the Parliament of Uganda or to the Government of Uganda. I also support their recommendations, but some of them may not work in Uganda since we have different policies in the two countries. 

For example, the committee did not think about comparing the Constitution of Rwanda with the Constitution of Uganda. Since they visited the Parliament of Rwanda, they did not also consider the Rules of Procedure of both Parliaments. Mr Speaker, that is why I am saying that some of these recommendations may be successful in Uganda and others may not. 

I, therefore, clarification as to why the committee did not compare the Rules of Procedure and the Constitutions of both countries. Thank you.

6.22
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I heartily thank the Members who went on this trip and the report they have come out with. I want to go straight to page 8 - No.9, on the idea of the Auditor-General auditing the planning document. 

I would like to observe here that most of the funds we raise in Uganda are not stolen at the time of implementation. Most of our funds, about 90 percent, are stolen at the time of budgeting and planning. Usually, the last nail is driven, with due respect Mr Speaker, when you put the question and we say “Aye” to the Budget and pass it. The technocrats go out and say we have finished. Because there are many hidden figures that we will not know given our low technical expertise; we just approve figures and then these people say we have done it for them. 

So, the idea of auditing the budget and the planning document is very important. We need to give it, as Parliament, a timeframe when we are adopting it into our policies to have it implemented.

Secondly, it is the idea of – which comes out in No.12 on recommendations and lessons to be learnt; they say that every financial year, the Auditor-General must give an opinion on each of the accounting officers, and a clean audit report becomes the basis for re-appointment while a negative report attracts punitive measures. I think this is also right, Mr Speaker, and it is very important. 

We need to have the Auditor-General to also guide us on which person has performed as per expectations, so that we do not politick on who should be appointed and who shouldn’t because we shall be having a technical report from the Auditor-General about the performance of the accounting officers. That is only when we shall be able to save –(Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, honourable Member for giving way. In Uganda, I think we use the Accountant General to audit or supervise the accountants, and once he reports that you are not performing or that you are performing, but going beyond your mandate, he is right to recommend so that you are apprehended. So, it is the Accountant General; the roles are different. Maybe they use the Auditor-General there, but here we use the Accountant General in as far as accountants are concerned. 
 
MR BIRAARO: Thank you for your information. Mr Speaker, whether the Accountant General looks at the accounts, I would want someone to look at the accounting officers, permanent secretaries, town clerks and the like. (Member timed out.)

6.25
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleagues who went to Rwanda and also thank them for the report. I want to talk about the health insurance scheme. I was born near Rwanda and I can tell you that a very big number of doctors who work in Rwanda were my classmates. Rwanda has a properly functioning health system. They have trained their doctors in South Africa and they have come back to Rwanda. The payment for a doctor in Rwanda is far much better than that for a doctor in Uganda. In fact, some of the doctors providing health services in Rwanda are from here. And I am saying these things while the Leader of Government Business is here; I am glad you are still around. 

You want to put a health insurance scheme in Uganda and yet you have no doctors. We are saying we should completely block your budget until you know that life is very important in this country. We have talked and we have even warned; there is no way we can hide issues of health when people are very sick and health facilities are going completely berserk. There are no people available to work there. 

Mr Speaker, if we sit down here and just eat food when the people who elected us are there suffering in our villages, while we are pretending that things are okay, we shall have made a mistake to this country. I am talking as a doctor; as a Ugandan; and as a person at 45 years of age who also needs health insurance. I am of the view, Mr Speaker, that before we talk about the health insurance scheme, we must first wipe out corruption in this country. Otherwise, we will allocate this money and it will be eaten up; it won’t reach the person it is intended for. 

Secondly, if you want to run a health insurance scheme in this country, yet you know that villagers don’t earn a living, and only pay taxes through buying things upon which a tax is levied; but you want to tax every civil servant. What about the villager who doesn’t earn a salary?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have the Acting Leader of the Opposition before we take a decision on this matter.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the team for the work they did, especially by learning from a country that we orientated, but now doing better than us.

The first aspect that I want to look at is the aims and objectives of the scheme as considered by the team. Let me look at the third last word on the aims and objectives paragraph. I would like to ask the chairperson of the committee to tell us what the team implied by the word, “understudying”. I don’t know; is it “understanding” or what is it?

Secondly, I also want to bring it to the attention of the members that as a country, there is need for us to have a strategy. Looking at the objectives which the team considered, especially bullets 5 and 6, you will realise that they bring us to two connotations: 

One, is about our strategy as a country in screening persons who enter and go out through our borders. I am saying this because, much as we have a budget, and much as we have a committee that scrutinises the budget, but for as long we don’t know the number of people we are budgeting for, we shall not succeed as a country. It was very paramount for the committee to have looked at this as part of its analysis.

The first time I visited Rwanda, I want to tell you that before we crossed the border, the Government and other officers in Kigali already knew of our going there. They knew where we would sleep and where we would pray from. This impressed me so much. But in Uganda, a person will enter through the borders today and pretend to be a Ugandan citizen yet he is not, and he is budgeted for. That is why sometimes, we think that we have either under or over-budgeted; it is just because we don’t know the exact numbers we are supposed to be budgeting for.

The second issue is that as a country – one of the honourable members mentioned that we need to fund our embassies. But as Uganda, is the construction of embassies abroad really our priority? Or is it health that is a priority. Which is which? Is it the education of our people that is our priority?

In my opinion, I would like to think that health and education should be our priorities in Uganda, if we must develop as a country.

On Page 6, there is something on the health insurance scheme, and I compared this project with the ID Project that we started in Uganda. You know that this project failed. You know that to be able to provide a good health system, you must have a mechanism of tracking the people you are going to treat. And I still think that Uganda must focus on its priority areas, one of which is knowing our citizens and those who are not citizens. I want to tell you that even when we start this health insurance scheme, for as long as we don’t know yet who our citizens are, we shall be wasting time.

Finally, when I looked at one of the recommendations on an issue on page 7 on Uganda’s Embassy in Kigali. I realise that the report is saying that the team also met Ugandans living in Rwanda, who asked Government to put in place procedures to enable them vote from Kigali, since coming back home –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, not in this debate. This is a parliamentary report and so there is no Government and Opposition side in this. Let me ask hon. Amos Okot to just re-state the prayer because I know he cannot respond to all the issues raised, before we take a vote on this report.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the Members for all you have said in response to the report. I want to assure you that I have been taking notes on most of them. My prayer is in the conclusion part of this report –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to have the report adopted or something like that?

MR AMOS OKOT: Yes, but before that, maybe – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is what I am asking you to do for now. Please move the House to adopt the report.

MR AMOS OKOT: I, therefore, move that the House adopts the report and all the good recommendations therein. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion is that the Report of the Budget Committee Study Tour to the Parliament of Rwanda be adopted by this House. I now put a question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable member from Agago County for doing the monumental task of making a great speech from the dispatch box for the first time.

Honourable members, it is now 6.30 p.m. We have one report to receive, but we will deal with it later. I would like to again direct that the Budget Committee continues with their meeting tomorrow though I have not been updated as to whether the matters before it have been reconciled or not. I have no information on that. But we have a Bill that is before that committee. In the circumstances, the committee should, therefore meet tomorrow at 10 O’clock at the same venue, to enable members facilitate this House to take decisions on the budget and also on the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. 

The House is adjourned to Tuesday 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.35 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 11 September 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 
