

Thursday, 28 September 2017

Parliament met at 3.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. First, I would want to amend the Order Paper to permit the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to make a statement about an event coming up next week. 

Secondly, in the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers of Pongdong Primary School represented by hon. Beatrice Anywar and hon. Margaret Lamwaka. They are from Kitgum. Please stand up. You are welcome. They are here with their teachers. (Applause) 

Thirdly, honourable members, I would want to remind the committees that have Bills which have not been completed to try and do so as quickly as possible so that they can be handled before we go for the Independence recess.

Lastly, I would like to bring you greetings from Commissioner Cecilia Ogwal who has been indisposed but she is recuperating. She is in a hospital in India but I have just talked to her and she will be able to join us at the end of next week. Please keep her in your prayers. 

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence that before the other members are given an opportunity to make their presentation, I get permission to move a motion without notice under rule 48. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Musumba. 

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a motion appreciating the way the Speaker of the Tenth Parliament handled and managed as well as guided the House at the 10th Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Second Session of the House held on Wednesday, 27 September 2017. Madam Speaker, this motion is seconded. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by some members of the Cabinet, members of the back bench and members of the Independent caucus. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, the sitting of 27 September 2017 was both historical and unique in the history of our country, Parliament and democracy. Against the background of the events of Tuesday, 26 September 2017, you ably, gallantly, firmly, navigated and steered the House in a manner that reflected your skill, experience, neutrality, fairness and dedication to the parliamentary best practice. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, your leadership was put to a test the day before yesterday and yesterday in that since the sitting of Tuesday, you demonstrated patience, tolerance and were considerate to a section of some Members of Parliament, who were not only undisciplined but also grossly violated the rules of this House. Indeed, some members behaved without parliamentary decorum when they defied you, Madam Speaker, as you called them to order and asked them to resume their seats so as to keep order and avail an opportunity for everybody to be heard in the House. 

Madam Speaker, some members went to the extent of being violent in this House while others attempted to grab the Mace, which, as everybody knows, is the symbol of the Speaker’s authority in this House. These very members abused Rules of Procedure, democratic principles and the Constitution. They desecrated Parliament, something that should be condemned in the strongest terms possible. 

This motion, therefore, Madam Speaker, is to recognise the skillful way and to salute you for the manner in which you handled matters of the House. The House stands by you and we salute you. I beg to move. (Applause)

3.19
MR JAMES NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I stand here to support the motion our colleague has brought forward. What we saw yesterday was absolutely unprecedented in the history, not only of Uganda, but Africa. I have not heard anywhere in Africa, let alone the rest of the world, where what happened yesterday and the days before has happened. 

Therefore, we feel greatly disturbed and this matter is to do with how the nation chooses who its leaders should be. It calls into question the consideration voters take into account when they are sending men and women to this very important institution. 

It seems to me, Madam Speaker, that we need to find a way of helping voters to truly look at the character of those they choose to send to this august House. For what we saw was a catalogue of characters that a nation should never associate with this House; the nation and our reputation as a House has been injured. The country is at a loss as to what next should happen. 

Finally, what we saw yesterday, disgraceful as it was, does indicate that there is something wrong in our nation. I invite the honourable members to seriously look at what that something is or else these things we saw yesterday are going to continue and we are all losers in the end. Thank you.   
  
3.21
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, first, I would like to thank hon. Isaac Musumba, for moving this motion. 

On my behalf and the on behalf of people of Usuk County, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you and also thank the people of Kamuli for having kept you here. I think it is the reason Ugandans should begin to know that the more you protect a leader the better qualities of a leader will be seen and we saw this yesterday.

Madam Speaker, I really want to call upon Ugandans who are castigating you on social media to ask themselves, what if they were the ones seated in that chair where you are, what would they do? We are sent here to legislate, represent, appropriate and carry out oversight not to fight. We must learn to respect the people we represent. Where we dissent, we must learn to appreciate that at one point a decision has to be made.

For instance, yesterday and the other day, why would we Members of Parliament - imagine how we were being portrayed today in Uganda and the world over. Would you be proud to be a Member of Parliament of Uganda with the incident of yesterday?

Therefore, Madam Speaker, thank you. You are a true leader of this country. (Applause). I would like to call upon Ugandans to stop bashing you on social media but instead appreciate the circumstances under which you steered this House. I sometimes wonder what we want as Ugandans - is this where we want our country to pass?

Therefore, honourable colleagues who are not here today, I would like to call upon you that we found this country and Parliament here and we shall leave them here. Let us stop destroying the institutions which are built. By the way, some people lost blood building these institutions; we have the UPDF in this House not for a joke but to remind us about the history of this country.

Madam Speaker, whatever they say or want to do, stand firm. I would like to call upon the people of Kamuli not to be intimidated. Stand firm, the country is behind you on whatever action you took because it was for the betterment of this country. I say all this for God and my country.

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would also like to thank hon. Musumba for bringing up this very important motion.

Early this morning, a voter from my constituency called Ssalongo hailing from Mukinga village rang me and said two things. 

First, he wanted to thank me as a Member of Parliament, for not being one of those indisciplined Members of Parliament because the public watched what happened in the House and he was happy that I was not among those who were throwing chairs and destroying property of Parliament and fighting. He was very instructive that he expects me to come to Parliament to debate. 

He also told me that I should thank the Speaker for restoring calmness in the Parliament, which was rowdy. Madam Speaker, we want to thank you for the tolerance and patience because Parliament was destructed for three sittings. While you could have taken the decision you took yesterday in the other sittings, you were calm and tolerant.

Madam Speaker, we are governed by Rules of Procedure of Parliament which we developed ourselves. I think it is our duty that we should respect the Rules of Procedure, which we developed - the NRM side, the Opposition and the Independents. It, therefore, appears very awkward that we develop our rules and then we are the first ones to defy them and the guidance from the Speaker.

I would also like to thank the members of Parliament especially from the NRM side and the Independents who remained calm despite the provocation. It is not true that we are weak and so we cannot use physical might in this House. However, we think that our job in this House is to debate and engage in an intellectual discourse so that we persuade each other to take our line but not to come here in the House and exchange fists physically. We should fight with our brains not our physical strength. I, therefore, thank the members who remained calm and did not disrupt the proceedings of Parliament.

Finally, I think because of technology, a lot of information flows through social media, therefore, when some members see what happens elsewhere maybe in other Parliaments like fighting, they think it should happen here. Some of those happenings do so in failed states. Uganda is not a failed state; it is a functioning democracy.

The public should really question the character of us, members of Parliament. Where does a Member of Parliament draw legitimacy to stop me from talking in the same House where both of us have been elected to talk? Who gives you authority to stop hon. Raphael Magyezi who was elected by the people of Igara County West in Bushenyi? Why do you stop him from bringing his proposals in the House where he was elected to speak?

Therefore, we really want to condemn the violent behaviour exhibited by our colleagues and let us try to behave. We may not agree with the proposals or ideas that come but we resolve them through an intellectual engagement of debate and finally we take a decision in this House. However, we should not resort to physical fights. It is very embarrassing and regrettable but let us hope that will not happen again in the House.

We thank you for steering the House and you have our full support. 

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Col. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. Hon. Musumba’s motion is timely. We thank you for your wisdom, guidance and patience. This was the third time of unruly Members of Parliament stopping proceedings in the House. You guided them about the Rules of Procedure, you tried to tell them to sit down but they refused.

I would like to thank you for your tactical withdrawal and for putting your foot down and making sure that there is a State and that nobody can stop the State from functioning.

Yesterday was an unprecedented situation in the history of this country. As soon as you left the Chamber, the Members did not only refuse to go out but started destroying Parliament’s property. This microphone was broken and somebody was standing here holding it. That was brought from the committee and yours was thrown off - that is a new one you can see the cable.

Those microphone stands became sticks and at first, we did not know whom they were going to fight. I stood at the door side wondering whom they were going to fight. Very soon, I saw them attacking your chair I think they wanted to take the desk that is when security came in. Madam Speaker, I watched in disbelief. I do not know whether we can really tolerate this in this House any more.

Three members of Parliament were standing on this Table and making a lot of noise. Interestingly, there are some women who were part of the fracas. If you see the footage now running around and outside this country, it is very unfortunate. This behaviour should be condemned in strong terms and the Members should be punished. 

You guided and earlier on the Rt. Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the Deputy Speaker, had also guided that in this House, we have immunity for what we say but not what we do. If you commit a crime here, you should be answerable. (Applause) It was not only disobeying the Speaker, but also destroying Government property and injuring the Police. 

I would also like to inform members that we are not short of manpower. No! If we were violent like them, we have capacity to deploy four per person because they were only 36. If we apply four, we have reserves and we can deal with them. (Laughter) 

However, the truth of the matter is that we came here as legislators and the duty of enforcement is with Sergeant-At-Arms, not us. That is why we withdrew. I would to like to thank the members of the NRM and those members of the other side who observed the rules of this House. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, when you came here, you tried to cool the House and the Leader of the Opposition came here to protest the manner in which the violent people were pushed out. She owes this House an apology. Sir Winston Churchill said, “To the supreme authority lies the credit or blame for the results”. She led the Opposition into protests in this House. They were violent three times. If you look at the footage, she was part of them. She owes this House and the nation an apology for the conduct of their members.

We need to invoke not only our rules but the law. One of our staff was hit and injured. I was observing one of the members – you see the footage; we were standing there. He threw the whole of that microphone stand and the base. He wanted to hit the security person who was restraining one of the MPs and he hit her. He threw another one and it also hit her. I understand the honourable colleague is now in hospital.

I am very convinced beyond unreasonable doubt that some members are taking drugs in this House. (Applause) There is nobody who can explain the behaviour and manner of conduct. Look at the footage. They were not fighting with the Government or the Independents: they were causing fracas here among themselves. Just get interested to see what was going on. We must test people for drugs in this House. (Applause)

We are not dealing with normal situations. Hon. Gen. Katumba Wamala was trying to restrain one of his friends – seemingly – and I was surprised the man picked the thing to hit him. Hon. Katumba was saying, “Please, cool down. Observe the rules, the cameras are on you”. The man picked to hit him. I was just amused. That anger, that violence in the Chamber here, destroying property and hitting security personnel really has to be investigated. We should be tested for alcohol and drugs when we are coming here.

Finally, I would like to associate myself with the previous speakers. We are behind you, Madam Speaker. We thank you for being firm. (Applause) We must condemn evil. We come here to fight with our brains and ideas, not fists. This is not a boxing ring. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

3.37
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Isaac Musumba for this motion. I fully associate myself with your motion. 

I pick three important characteristics, which I am learning from the Speaker about our roles as leaders. It is good that we have this kind of reflection among ourselves on what has happened.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for being patient and tolerant. I could not believe that somebody would come and attempt to grab even your microphone; that somebody would step on top of this Table; somebody would grab papers from the Clerks and tear them and starts laughing. A whole group entered the Parliament of Uganda dressed in a funny manner as if they were going for war. 

Madam Speaker, you kept on calling them to order and they refused. You restrained yourself and on Tuesday you could have taken any decision you wanted. I pick that lesson – a good leader must be tolerant and patient with members.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your firmness and strength and for teaching us a very good lesson, that kindness and humility is a source of strength. Some people may misunderstand and mistake your kindness to mean that with you they can do what they want. 

Yesterday, you put your foot down and showed that this House is a House of discipline. (Applause) We cannot allow ourselves to degenerate to a level not just of disobeying our rules but – as hon. Rwamirama said – to the level of criminality, hiding behind our immunity in Parliament. 

I think it is not a question of just suspending a member. If you get a chair and hit somebody here, you are a criminal. You are supposed to be subjected, arrested and charged. You want to kill a person inside this House!

Madam Speaker, even before you came, we saw Members of Parliament practicing and saying, “We are going to the gym. We are going to fight”. I told them that if you want to fight go and face Golola. (Laughter) This is a House of intellectual debate. Therefore, we pick a very good lesson from our Speaker, that even if you are patient and tolerant, a time comes for you as a good leader or parent to be firm and strong on your people.

Thirdly, I would like to thank you, honestly, for your neutrality and impartiality. Those who were suspended were from either side. NRMs went, the Opposition went and you simply picked somebody on his or her character. We would like to thank you for that. 
Tonight you can go home a contented person and know that the people of Uganda – through us their elected representatives – do appreciate you for your kindness and goodness yet firmness in leadership. (Applause)

With you, we now feel strong. Actually, I had decided to request that I present my motion from here but because of the decision you took, I had the strength to go down and do the needful. (Laughter) You do not want to be presenting a motion and people come and grab your papers and throat. This is not a slaughter house.

However, colleagues, we also have a responsibility to make the work of the Speaker easier; she is the third in this country and presides over an important arm of the state. If we make her work more difficult, she will regret ever being the Speaker of this Parliament. I would like to request us to make the work of the Speaker much easier. Let us also remember that respect to the Speaker is respect to the House and respect to the House is respect to the voters who brought us.

Madam Speaker, we firmly and fully support you. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Abbas Agaba, Gen. Elly Tumwine and then the minister.

3.42
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also second the motion moved by hon. Musumba, to thank you, Madam Speaker, for the character of leadership you displaced for the last two days, when we had very difficult times. Madam Speaker, we are proud of you for standing to protect the integrity, honour and decorum of the House as Parliament. We come here for intellectual discourse. Our voters sent us here to speak. 

You also emphasised it very well that in this House, we speak. We may have very strong people in this House but they did not come here to fight. We thank you, for protecting the image of this House and most importantly, for being decisive. In leadership, a bad decision is better that indecision at all.

Secondly, the measure of the calibre of a leader in anyone lies in the decisions they take during times of crisis. You have stood out honoured because you took the right decision at the time it was most needed. We would have been scared as members of Parliament. 

Actually, when our colleagues blocked any progress of the House on the first day, we kept thinking that on another day, a group of 10 people, will stand up and say no business of the House can take place. Thank you, for getting the shame off us. Thank you, for protecting us and thank you for protecting the integrity of the House so that members must know that we are here to debate.

We are Members of Parliament and colleagues. We belong to a football club and we train together with many colleagues. This morning, I asked some of our colleagues who are culprits of this that if the referee issued you a red card in a match and you refuse to exit the pitch, what would happen to you? We are footballers - let us get out of Parliament. 

In case the referee issued you a red card and you are required to exit the pitch but you refuse because you think you are very strong, definitely, somehow you will be existed from the pitch. We must understand that disobedience to lawful orders cannot be condoned.  

In support of this motion, I would like to make mention to colleagues and friends; we are people of high calibre in this society. The honour we get as honourable members is based on the way we act. 

In the recent past, I have been disappointed. Some of our colleagues acted to the cameras. Every time there was live coverage of our deliberations here, members would even do the worst acts such that other people can see them acting on the cameras. It was bad. 

I was seated there and Madam Speaker, after you suspended members, two types of people transpired that time. One of the colleagues stood up and said, “Order, Madam Speaker!” Of course, the microphones were off. I then asked him, “What point of order are you raising?” He said, “I would like to know why she did not suspend me as well.” I was amazed. The colleague told me he wanted to know why the Speaker did not suspend him –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: In half a minute, conclude. 

MR AGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In a short time, I saw the colleague on top of the Table. I led in opening that door and I exited. I could not do much.  

Madam Speaker, the moment you announced for the members to please exit, another colleague, bowed properly and went out. However, when the films started, he came back and went with untellable injuries. It was very bad. We thank you for protecting the honour of the House. I support the motion. 

3.46
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion that after the storm, there is calm. It is for this reason that we thank you, as Speaker of this House, which I have been privileged to be in for the last 31 years. 

In those years, which I am proud of, I had never experienced the Speaker being tested and stretched to the point you were. I had never experienced the patience, amidst anger and restraint, that we who are not the security forces, who are not always victims of excitements, provocations and mistakes of politicians, but have been victims of and tasked to ensure and maintain security.  

We were asked, what did you fight for? Yesterday, that question stretched my heart that the answer of what we fought for was not anywhere near at the highest level of the nation. Honourable members, who are provided for in the Constitution, to be in Parliament as the best place to discuss any matter freely and peacefully could turn it into such a chaotic place.

Madam speaker, I wondered, “How far does being called an honourable stop? Is it just being elected to this Parliament or how you conduct yourself and behave in the name of this country? 

Seeing Members of Parliament degrading and dehumanising the flag and the pride of our country, for which we shed blood in this House - we are parliamentarians – (Interruption) - Madam Speaker, give me a chance because the three minutes which we keep here deny us a share. 

The Opposition has been taking all the time so that we can listen to them; listen to everything they want to say. I am saying this side because they have been given more time and we are deprived always because we are disciplined and because we want to keep to the three minutes. We cannot express ourselves where we matter. This Parliament has reached a point where Ugandans out there are worried.

I would like to take this opportunity to assure Ugandans that the Banyankole say sometimes it is good for bad things to happen because they open our eyes. The question I wish to raise in this Parliament today is: How far does the Immunity Act provide for a Member of Parliament to break property of Parliament and threaten to kill a person or commit any crime he or she wants? How far does the immunity go? 

It is not the first time this boil has burst and Ugandans hear a boil has burst. I would like to assure Ugandans that we are going to have better peace because everything when it is in excess pours outside and overflows. Too much of everything is always bad. Security forces cannot be stretched not to do their work because some people are privileged. Some of you are asking why they had to bring other forces. The Sergeant-At-Arms’ role is security and he has freedom to call on security forces in this world to ensure that he does his or her work. (Applause)

Therefore, the question of who came in is because Parliament had stretched their immunity to criminality. This was criminal to the nation and we are saying let the young people not be excited about other things but know that the security of Uganda is in our hands. Every Ugandan, in the Constitution, is supposed to ensure security. Once chaos and war ensue, all rights, privileges and peace we have been enjoying and the rights you would like to claim are lost.

I would like to tell the Members of Parliament here that our being honourable here cannot be above the peace of the majority of the people who are farming in their gardens. Our rights cannot be above the rights of all the peaceful people in Uganda who would like to move ahead. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank every person who restrained himself or herself, starting with you. There was anger and some people wanted to go in but they did not. I spent three days asking the members who were threatening violence whether this is a do or die matter. You can ask all of them because I went to most of them. 

In this Parliament, the UPDF plays a role you do not know. We always engage anybody who wants to tear our country apart to bring him or her back. It costs us a lot. They abuse us. We cannot see, after so much sacrifice, a few people wanting to throw it away. It has been a high cost. 

Therefore, members who are here, anybody who is going away, let us bring him or her back. We need to find things that unite us more than those that divide us. How can just a single motion divide the whole country? We have dealt with more serious problems than just a single motion.

Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The Banyankole, again, say, “Otagira kyatiina tagira kyimutiina”. It means if you do not fear anything, nothing fears you. 

I have a song which I sing when I am happy. I was analysing Uganda when it was getting Independence and I wish I could continually see our beautiful - am I allowed to sing? However, it says I wish I could continually see our beautiful country of milk and honey; full of fresh water and air, fauna and flora and full of sunshine; the Pearl of Africa, not violent. Uganda is peaceful and not going backward. We are moving forward. God bless you. (Applause)

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: However, before the minister presents, in the public gallery, we have teachers and students of Stafford High School, Kitezi represented by hon. Rosemary Seninde and hon. Robert Kyagulanyi. Your Members of Parliament are not here but you are welcome. (Applause)

MS KWIYUCWINY: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for this opportunity and I also would like to thank hon. Musumba for moving this motion without notice. It is a very timely motion and it is important that we debate it since you allowed us to do so.

I would like to start from where Gen. Elly Tumwine has left off. I would like to thank you because by what you have done, you have delivered us. The last two days were tense here. Every time we are coming to Parliament, we were scared of many things that could happen. However, your decision yesterday has delivered us and today again, we are in peace. 

I would like to repeat from a different perspective a parable in Alur. In Alur, they say humility, respect and discipline made the King to call the cat to come home. I have translated it for you but in Alur you would say, “Woro odwogo kajango i paco”. If it was not humility, discipline and respect, we would not be in this House like some of us are not here because of what they portrayed which is disrespectful of you and this House.

I would like to tell Ugandans that from where we have come with democracy, confrontation will not deliver us anywhere. We would rather dialogue, discuss and when we disagree, we all know that we have disagreed but life continues. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for two things. The first one is to allow the motion to be presented and you were fair to all. You put all the three motions on the Order Paper. 

I also would like to thank you for the guidance you gave. This motion that has been presented is no longer hon. Magyezi’s issue –(Interruption)– it is the people who are at the centre of this - the guidance that we have to involve the people is very important. 

Therefore, I would call upon the people out there that it was not a decision to lift the age limit yesterday. We are going out to sit down with our people to get their views and it is their views we shall bring to this House for discussion.

I would like to thank you again for the leadership you have exhibited. We have a lesson to learn from you. In times of difficulties and trial, you have to pass through and stand the test and emerge as leaders, not as people who misguided others. I thank you.

4.01
MR JACK ODUR (NRM, Kibanda County South, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank you for guiding this House and having made that decision that all of us were waiting for.

I also rise on a point on of clarification. Among the people that were suspended, cross check with your list so that -

THE SPEAKER: It was the other hon. Jonathan Odur who sits there from the UPC.

MR JACK ODUR: Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that clarification. However - (Interjections) - yeah. I am very safe and more so very disciplined and humble and honourable, by the way.

I also associate myself –(Interjections)- yes this is a very serious matter. In the New Vision newspaper today, my name was published as among the people who were suspended for indiscipline; which, it has caused a lot of mayhem not only to my honourable colleagues but also my constituents.

Early morning, I was bombarded with so many calls; it was all over radio that I am among the people whom senior members have said would be even taking drugs. Therefore, I would like to clarify and to disassociate myself from that kind of group of honourable colleagues and I pray that my name is cleared so that I walk as an honourable Member of Parliament. (Applause)

We condemn the violence during these previous days in the highest terms possible and pray that it never happens again. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Odur. I will restate the name properly. It was Jonathan Odur who sits there.

4.03
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that bravo for the job well done.

When you became the first woman Speaker on this House, we thought that maybe you are a simple person. However, your skills yesterday were tested and we found out that you are a real lady who can head the institution.

In my observation, our colleagues who are in the Opposition have a lesson to learn that we must be accommodative and tolerant to other people’s views. This is not the first Opposition we have had in this country. When you look at our history, the Opposition was working in hostile environments like from 1981 up to 1985. Never did the leaders of the Opposition then break these chairs and microphones. Our colleagues should learn to be accommodative to each other and your opinion does not mean that it is effective or others’ opinions are wrong.

Yesterday, there was an attempted coup on this House but because of you, your experience and expertise; you made this House - because somebody else could have closed Parliament. So, because of your experience and expertise, as the saying goes, that “experience is the best teacher” you are experienced and we must give credit where it is due. With those few words, we are supporting you even in the future to come and lead this institution.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would like to clarify that the Odur who was suspended is Hon. Jonathan Odur of Erute County South in Lira and a member of the Uganda People’s Congress. Hon. Jack Odur of Kibanda is here and not suspended and is a very honourable and disciplined member. (Laughter)

4.06
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity and also to thank God very much that nobody died here. 

We were here and witnessed what took place, but I would like to thank you for being a patient mother. I saw a mother in you, a person who is concerned of what was happening in Parliament. That is why I am very happy because you know what is supposed to be exactly done. I would like to thank General - by the way generals are always people who normally use force. However, yesterday, it was our generals here who were bringing peace.

I would like to thank Gen. Katumba Wamala who is here; he was the one trying to say let us not cause chaos. General, I thank you very much and may God bless you. (Laughter)

Thirdly, I would like to say that we should support our injured staff. As a Parliament, that one should be a priority. 

The other thing I would like to say is; I would like to read the Bible without notice since this is a motion without notice. (Laughter) I am going to read only three verses briefly.

Proverbs 17:9 says, “Be kind and compassionate to one another. Forgiving each other just as Christ forgave you.” My view on this matter is that we should give a welcoming and forgiving hand to all our members. I would like to be simple today. I know how problematic it can be.

Matthew 6:14 says, “Bear with each other and forgive one another. If any of you has a grievance against someone, forgive him as the Lord has forgiven you.”

I would be specific today because this is our Parliament and those are also members. They made a mistake and we must, as a Parliament, say that you broke this rule and the other and for that matter, this is the fine or punishment. Thereafter, we should welcome them and operate as a team in Parliament because all of us belong to this Parliament and are working for the good of the people in this country. I thank you very much and may God bless you.

4.09
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all ask my colleagues who are seated here to applaud the power of a woman who is seated before us. (Applause)

When I was growing up, my late grandfather who is one of my mentors, used to tell me that you know as a young girl, you are not going to reason like your brothers. Whereas your brothers will be the heads of the family; you will be the brain of the family. I would like to say you are the brain of this Parliament. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I remember 28 years ago when I was a primary two pupil, I happened to visit this Parliament and I was seated like those pupils seated today watching us speaking here. I saw the honourable members of that time; I saw very smart ladies and admired hon. Victoria Ssekitoleko.

I remember seated up there and I know those will be the honourable members of this House in the future. (Laughter) I saw people who were in this very podium speaking and disagreeing, but using the rules and quoting the Constitution. And I was dreaming that one day I would get into that House.

Madam Speaker, the reason you are seated here today as the Speaker for the third time, is no doubt to the rest of Ugandans that you have stamina, not only as a lady or a brain of this country, but as a person capable to interpret the Constitution – as the lawyer you are – and the rules of this House.

I would like to request my honourable colleagues who are present today that it is not good to act in the heat of the moment and to reason using emotions. I know that no man is an island; it could be those who are out today, but it could also be those who are in. However, the public is watching us and today the young people who dream to become Members of Parliament one day – like some of us who are privileged to be speaking using this microphone today; doubt when we call ourselves honourable Members of Parliament. This is because of some honourable members who stood on top of the Table with their heads tied. And we claim to be honourable Members of Parliament? Yesterday I thought that this Parliament would be dissolved because of dishonourable people. One bad apple spoils the whole – (Member timed out.)        

4.13
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka County South, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion of hon. Isaac Musumba. Madam Speaker, I am a teacher by profession and one of the virtues of a good teacher is to instil discipline in his or her class.

Madam Speaker, I want to commend you for the firm stand you made to instil discipline and nurture leaders of good character in this Parliament. In you, I saw a form captain in class, class teacher and head teacher who must instil discipline in a class that he or she is leading. Madam Speaker, your wise leadership set a record that men and women in this country need to respect authority and leaders.

I have observed in the recent past, there is a declining trend of respect for leaders in this country. I would further like to commend you that the example you set yesterday was genuine enough to send a signal that as leaders in this country, we need to respect one another. (Applause) If we cannot respect one another, then we are bound to see a society that will have no respect for us. 

Madam Speaker, yesterday, I realised that your seat is very hot and it was put to a test, but you braved all the insults. (Laughter) Therefore, I cannot fail to say that you stood your grounds and exemplified the national hero in this country. Thank you so much.

4.15
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues to second the motion moved by hon. Isaac Musumba. I cannot add much to the emphasis that in this House, we come to use our brains through our mouths and we come to agree to disagree or to disagree to agree.

I was about to see a stalemate in this House and I would wonder whether Parliament would remain relevant. This is because if I could disagree with what I think are the majority and made it impossible for Parliament to proceed, then there would never be any more need for Parliament.

However, I also agree with Gen. Tumwine when he said that we need to be tested for drugs. Yesterday, when I went to the gents’ bathroom; as I was drying my hands, a group of colleagues came and someone was laughing and happy saying that the previous day he had made votes. He said this because “his voters saw him jump on the Table and throw a chair at someone.” He said his voters called and were praising him. 

I also saw a very honourable-looking Member of Parliament; quite old enough to be respectable. He joined in and said that, “For us, that is what works.” I felt sad for this House because if we can come and stage-manage very embarrassing situations here because they work for you and they do not work for me in my place, then it is unfortunate that we are in the same House.

Therefore, I thank and support you for that decision – (Member timed out.)- 

THE SPEAKER: Please use half a minute to conclude.

MR OPOLOT: Somebody else would have thought that you should have made a different decision but that decision was timely and I think that it will set the basis for business in this House from yesterday and forever. Thank you very much.

4.18
MR ISMAIL OGAMA (NRM, Lower Madi County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, I am one of those who are in support of this motion moved by hon. Musumba. Madam Speaker, I would not like to repeat some of the issues which members have already said on the Floor. My issue concerns how we will correct the image of this Parliament and those of us who have been tainted. 

From the day hon. Magyezi came up with the interest to move a Private Member’s Bill, some members in this House have been specialising in peddling lies to the public. In my constituency – and I believe in other constituencies as well –it is believed that we have been given lots of money so as to pass the motion. I thank you so much for your wise leadership and deliberations when you guided that this motion was not meant to take a final decision. Hence giving us time to go and explain to our people what has happened in the House.

Madam Speaker, I am bringing all these to your attention because I think action needs to be taken. Honourable members have taken it upon themselves not only – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please use one minute to conclude.

MR OGAMA: Not only to enjoy the privileges that exist in the House, but to go out in all platforms to confuse the public and dent the image of their colleagues.

Madam Speaker, it was not only for the last two days; even previously when your deputy was the one in charge, the circumstances here were not bearable. While the Prime Minister came here to present a position, he was booed. Members on the other side remained calm. I thank you so much that yesterday you were able to act because it had now reached a point where we felt like we would need to counter and that would be dangerous. 

Indeed, I thank my colleagues on the other side because – I know today is the day of proverbs: We have one in Lugbara which states that, “When a mosquito is passing on your private parts as a man, you do not use a hammer to hit it. Otherwise, you will kill yourself instantly.” I thank you so much. (Laughter)

4.22
MR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will not begin with a proverb because the proverb the member has brought out is sufficient. I have also been around for some time – since the Sixth Parliament; I was here in the Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth and now the Tenth Parliament.  

Madam Speaker, the Tenth Parliament goes down in history for the wrong reasons. I have never been part of a Parliament where members of this House have defied the Speaker’s ruling. We have well laid down procedures on how we can challenge the Speaker’s ruling. It is not by making noise, singing or standing on top of this Table. This Parliament is sacred and we are called “honourables” because we belong to this august House. So that is why I say the Tenth Parliament has gone down in history for the wrong reasons.

I was monitoring some of the media interactions this morning and a respectable member of our society, who has been in this august House and was also in Cabinet, made insinuations that you were ordered to send out the members yesterday. He said that you should have sent them out the other day. 

I think this person has forgotten who you are. He has forgotten that you are so patient and resilient that you have often sat in that chair for long hours guiding this House and taking decisions that have guided this country. Therefore, this perception that you have been ordered from behind should be condemned. You took your decision after making thorough research. You even wrote down the names of those members the day before. Actually, there are others who are lucky that you did not see them. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is true. 

MR KASIRIVU: Because the list should have been much longer than you had. Madam Speaker, we are faced with a lot of blackmail on social media. Messages are being sent out that “So-and-so, if you ever…” (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude. 

MR KASIRIVU: I got a message threatening me that if I ever supported this motion, I would see. But I was voted by the people of Bugangaizi West to come here and intelligently debate. And I have been waiting for the motion or whatever else is presented. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that we have made many amendments whenever Bills have come on the Floor here; there is no Bill that comes to this House and is passed without amendments. 

Madam Speaker, as situations change, we may also have to re-examine our immunity. We enjoy immunity but to what extent should this be? We had a member who stepped on this Table, got a microphone, broke it and even ran after Gen. Ali. They can cause unnecessary confusion. Some colleagues were trampled on when members were trying to retreat. So I think there are certain things we may have to re-examine to make sure that we restore the sanctity of this House and our title of honourable members. I thank you. 

4.27
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion. On Tuesday, I watched you call the House to order with calm and patience. You steered this House with a lot of patience. We watched you because we sympathised with your hot seat. 

At one point, as you were calling the House to order, we saw you pick a pen and trying to write down something. We thought that perhaps when you were calling for order, you wanted to evoke the powers of the Speaker in the rules. 

I would like to remind this House that the rules we are using are made by us. And I want to inform Ugandans that the rules we are using in Parliament were not made by anybody else but us. Every Parliament makes its own Rules of Procedure; we just passed ours a month ago because we want to instil discipline amongst ourselves. 

We really saw you constrained. Perhaps that moment you wanted to communicate but you were failed. So I do not agree with whoever is saying that the Speaker was commanded on what to do by somebody else or some other power. You were restrained from communicating at that time. 

Madam Speaker, we saw you but you adjourned this House in pain. Yesterday we watched you make a communication; we waited patiently because we saw the Chair was under a test and we wanted you to use the rules because that is what makes you the Chair to steer us. I would like to thank you. 

Roosevelt once said – and I heard you say - that a woman is like a teabag - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: One minute for you to conclude your proverb. 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Although constrained, you actually acted like a mother. Roosevelt said, “A woman is like a teabag; you never know how strong it is until you put it in hot water.” 

Lastly, allow me to say this; I would like to remind fellow Ugandans that this is not the first time an amendment has been raised on the Constitution. It was first done in 2005 but because it was in the interest of some people in this country and it was opening up political space and parties, there was no complaint. Why today? We should stop being partisan and impartial. I thank you. 

4.30
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to second the motion but first and foremost, I would like to thank God because what happened here was not friendly at all. Indeed, He remains the Mighty God; He laid His hands upon us that no one’s wife, child – that this nation should not register any person dead on the Floor. I would like to thank God for that. At least this country is in the hands of God.

Secondly, I would like to thank you for the good heart and sincere love you have for each Member of Parliament of Uganda. Yesterday, I saw some features in you; you are a person who can easily identify a problem, diagnose it and come up with a solution for it. What happened on Tuesday, as a wise person, you handled it in such a way that everyone went home well - (Member timed out.) 
THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude. 

MR KANGWAGYE: Madam Speaker, in business, there is what we call “consequentialism”. This is something that brings happiness and equality for all. What happened here – was it consequential to everybody in this House? Was it ethical to all Ugandans? We totally condemn what happened here and it should not happen again in this House if you are still the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. Thank you.

4.33
MR BONNY OKELLO (NRM, Kole County North, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support hon. Musumba’s motion. It is very normal at our age to sometimes disagree, or sometimes to want to show that you are stronger. But it was unfortunate that what happened in this House was not what I expected.

I appeal to my colleagues that our brothers from the other side have done what we never expected of them; let us have a heart to forgive. For those who have been admitted in hospital, let us take time and go and talk to them.

Yesterday, when I went home, I could not sleep. I had to drive back to a few hospitals and see how they were doing. Some of them acted out of influence because their voters had forced them – (Interjections)– I have not seen you jumping on the table. For the first time, I sat on the other side and I heard some whispering to me that why is my name not on the list of those who were suspended because the voters wanted them suspended so that they can get more votes.

Actually, one colleague told me: “I have already won half of my election because of what happened on Tuesday.” I appeal to the young voters who are always on social media that they should give us time as Members of Parliament to do our work.

The Speaker made her guidance that at an appropriate time, members will go and consult their voters. 

THE SPEAKER: Please use half a minute.

MR OKELLO: It is true that at an appropriate time, we shall get back to them and get their views. But we shall not get them on social media or phones.

Finally, I pray that this august House forgives our colleagues. Let them come back and join us so that we work for this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think, I must clarify. I suspended them for three sittings – this sitting, the one of Tuesday and the one of Wednesday. They will be back on Thursday.

4.36
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I equally rise to support this unscheduled motion. I do agree that the decision you took confirms you as a disciplinarian. It is unfortunate that we are making this submission when these people are not here. I wish they were here to listen to these observations and learn from this experience. As young parliamentarians, what happened yesterday teaches us a lot in terms of conduct in this House.

However, Madam Speaker, this is an event that built over a time. It started at a time when the Deputy Speaker was chairing and you could clearly see that there is going to be a climax. I do not know why we did not have mechanisms to mitigate this unfortunate occurrence. In my opinion – which I hope other Members will respect – we should have avoided this.

I believe there were options to avoid this; this is my view. Now that it has happened, we should find a way, as other members have submitted, to ensure that the House gets together. We all know that this was partly because of a motion that some members disagree with.

This motion shall come at a right time for us to submit our views. Some of us who may not even like it have not acted like our colleagues. We would like to, therefore, insist that they should be forgiven and let them come back to the House so that the much expressed brainpower can now be used to begin to digest this motion and see whether it is really good for this country - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Can we do two minutes? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Okay, two minutes.

4.38
MR ANGEL DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we listen carefully to the way members debate here, it is the way we pay tribute whenever we lose a dear one. Indeed, we have lost a dear one. The “dear one” I am talking about is our reputation. That is why today, you see Members paying tribute to the reputation that has always made us to be honoured; the reputation that has worked amongst us diligently even where there is no seat, you will be given a seat or where services are not okay, you will be offered better service.

Now that we have lost that reputation, I do not know what next we will be working with. This has created a lot of expectation gap, not only amongst us the members in this Parliament, but also the outsiders.

I do remember very well when I was still with the local government, the way I admired this place and the way I was dying for it; the way I waited in vain to come to this House but only to get this kind of thing; how disappointed I am? How about those outside that are still hopeful, still yearning to come to this House - (Member timed out.)

4.40
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I would like to thank hon. Isaac Musumba. Since morning, I have been wondering how I should thank the Speaker. I was contemplating whether I should go to her office but I did not know the mood.  Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the leadership that you exhibited here yesterday. Thank you very much. 

I would like to thank the staff of Parliament that really gave us support. Some were injured and we apologise for that – for our behaviour.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that for those who were supporting violence in Parliament, we are sorry for them because we still have leaders like Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga. Those who would sit in the gallery and watch our violence here in celebration, I think this country still has leadership and we shall not accept our country to go back where we came from. We stand with you, Madam Speaker, and shall always support you.

And I want to thank our colleagues, Members of Parliament – those in the Opposition and in NRM – who behaved maturely and as honourable Members of Parliament. May God bless you. Thank you very much.

4.43
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Isaac Musumba for his motion. Many times I have been telling people that you are capable. The spirit in which you handled the Parliament yesterday was a real demonstration of a true model of an African woman who is a leader in this generation. I thank you very much. 

At the same time, Madam Speaker, I was shocked and I am happy that all the senior leaders of the NRM party are in this House. I was very shocked when I saw one of the husbands of a minister carrying a chair. I was very shocked when I saw one of the husbands of a minister in our Government walking out. I know they have their freedom to do so but how do we have our secrets of Cabinet if we see a husband of a minister carrying a chair to throw? This brings question marks. The National Resistance Movement as a party - (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Hon. Macho is on the Floor.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I need your protection. All the senior leaders of the NRM are here. If a husband of a minister can carry a chair and if a husband of a minister can walk out, how are we sure of the secrets of our cabinet? (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, as a party, we must go to the drawing table. I was happy when hon. Jim Muhwezi talked here and said we shed blood – and truly we shed blood. Did we shed blood to carry the chairs and throw at each other? NRM should decide whether to move with its people or it moves with the borrowed people who will incite violence and cause shame to this government.  Thank you. You handled the House very well yesterday. Long live.

4.45
MR ALEX MUNGOMA (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is really very unfortunate that from last week the Parliament of Uganda, Kampala as our capital city and Uganda as a whole has been having serious tensions. As a Member of Parliament from Bulambuli, I looked at big, tall black men, very strong – war is looming in this House. I looked at myself as a small man and said, “I think I am misplaced because I am a small man and I cannot fight.” People elected me to come and represent them using the brain. However, I am happy.

All along, Madam Speaker, we have been mentioning women emancipation in Uganda and in my heart, to be sincere and very honest, I was not convinced. I was only convinced yesterday when I saw you shrewdly handling this House and bringing it to order and this evening we are here deliberating. Congratulations, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

This is a recommendation I am putting across. In this era of the 21st Century, these microphones which are being used as missiles – which are metallic, very strong – in fact when it lands on you, it will kill you – I will recommend that we change these microphones and they bring modern microphones, which the Opposition cannot use to kill us. (Laughter)

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to recommend that these metallic chairs here be removed if I am seconded. What is the reason? Those who are serious Members of Parliament who come on time will always get the seats. Those who are not serious and come late - (Interjections) - yes, we are building the new Chambers and they will get us as we progress. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity and I urge all the members to rally behind the Speaker to see that we uphold the image of the Parliament of Uganda, Uganda as a whole and Kampala as our capital city. “For God and my country.”

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support hon. Musumba’s motion. I would like to salute you. You are a great leader and we are proud of you, as women of Uganda. (Applause)

As leaders, we are supposed to be exemplary but when we come and, instead of using our brains to speak for our people, we choose to fight, then we have lost the direction. Many colleagues have resorted to using propaganda. You are aware that the Magyezi motion that was approved yesterday was not for us to approve the age limit. However, what is the information to the public? It is that they are going to approve the age limit today! I would like to appeal to leaders to make sure that we give our voters the right information. 

Just as we left here, I got a call from one of our colleagues, hon. Persis Namuganza, who was manhandled by some of our colleagues. She had left the Chambers and was seated outside in the corridors. Some of the colleagues who had been thrown out found her and just pounced on her, pulled her by the hair and beat her up badly. I really want to condemn such actions because we are here to deliberate on behalf of our people.

Madam Speaker, the image of Parliament today is not in good light. Before I came here, I went to Wandegeya to procure some drugs for my sister, who is unwell. When I entered Friecca Pharmacy, there was a lady who was procuring drugs. She took time. I moved forward after waiting for like 15 minutes. She was condemning the pharmacists who had given her the drugs saying, “Why do you give me drugs that prevent me from taking milk and fats.” When I stepped forward to request to be served, she said: “Violence can only be allowed in Parliament,” and yet I had not even introduced myself as a Member of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, the image of Parliament out there is not good at all. We have to liberate the image of Parliament. We are here as intellectuals and to deliberate for this country.  Madam Speaker, we make laws. It is not fair for us to come here and break our own laws. We have the rules of procedure, which say that the Speaker must be heard in silence. Why should it be us to come here and start singing and disobeying our own Speaker? (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me use the half minute to assure Ugandans that we have a real leader in the Speaker. As the Speaker, you managed this Parliament very well; we would have had deaths but because you are a great woman, I salute you. I also salute Members of Parliament who kept cool. I assure you that all of us have the capacity to engage but that is not the way to go. The way to go is to talk for this country, convince each other and move together. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Madam Speaker, first of all, I support the motion and I appreciate your ruling to suspend the undisciplined colleagues. However, what happened yesterday – after you named those who defied your ruling – needs another action. Short of that, the implications of that indiscipline are grave to many institutions. Take an example of children in schools that might come with alcohol before a teacher. Would they be touched, after we have failed to touch those who acted in a manner that is barbaric? How do you step on the chairs and Table of Parliament with your shoes? How do you pluck those microphones – the only tool we express our minds and ideas – and turn them into weapons? How do you expect teachers to discipline the children in future? How do you expect the judges to act against those who have stolen chicken and those who are violating the rights of women in homes and perhaps, those who fight in beer parties or those who fight each other? How do you expect them to act?

Madam Speaker, I strongly appreciate the ruling you made. However, it poses another challenge: After you left, we were eyewitnesses of the fight. That gross indiscipline requires another action. I witnessed a Member of Parliament using his teeth to bite a security officer or your staff. I saw him. And some of these actions we take have gross implications about –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half minute.

MS MUTUUZO: As I conclude, some of the security people who act on orders to protect us and our property, when they are caught up in hard situations, they lose their lives; they are injured and yet they are not protected. What happened to us yesterday is a good measure, for which we should take very strong decisions about our colleagues. Being honoured is worked for; it is not just acquired. We need to act in a manner that deserves the honour we wish others to express before us. I request you, Madam Speaker, to use your powers to act more than you did – not only a suspension of three sittings and they are back in honours and flying in gears; they should have more than that. I beg to request.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we congratulate you. I know you have not yet sworn-in but congratulations. She was elected as the Woman Member of Parliament for Bunyangabu District.

4.51
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion, hon. Isaac Musumba, for the brilliant motion he has tabled today. I add my voice to that of all the members that what you have said is true. This goes to everyone who is a parent that what we saw was gross misbehaviour of honourable members. These are people who are not cultured and do not behave at all.  What we saw yesterday was an iron lady, our Speaker, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, taking a precise decision and right on time, to save the entire House. We have been here for the last three days without any business. We have been besieged by only 30 people.

Rt Hon. Kadaga, I heard in Britain, there was an “Iron Lady” called Margret Thatcher; you are one. I would like to tell you, Madam Speaker, today, that it is high time we refurbished our House with modern technologies, where the microphones are fixed. I have seen some other parliament chambers where the microphones are fixed and they are not very high like what we have here to avoid such incidents.

Yesterday, it was a real war. These chairs were used as weapons. Had it not been Gen. Katumba Wamala who came in to try and carry these chairs where I was seated – so it is high time the configuration of this Parliament was done to suit the modern Chambers of the day.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request each one of us here to look at ourselves. What do you see here, Madam Speaker? We are almost of the same age, on average. (Interjection) I said, “Almost the same age.” That means that the Magyezi motion is in place. We need many more old people to come in; we are here. So, the Magyezi motion is most welcome because it is timely – (Member timed out.)

5.00
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion. 

Madam Speaker, what I saw yesterday is like what happened between Goliath and David. When Goliath saw the size of David, he despised him because he was looking at the size of his chest but David believed in his God. I am sure that is what the Speaker said when she saw what was happening on the other side. I would like to thank you for the decision you made, Madam Speaker. It was a lesson to all of us that even immunity has limits.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, when I saw somebody approaching the mace, I imagined if somebody had the guts to grab it, what would happen to the Speaker in the next five minutes. I would like to thank the Lord who saved you. 

I would also like men to realise today that even when there had not been affirmative action for women to come to Parliament as women Members of Parliament, every seat that has a woman is a real seat. This is because women are good managers wherever they are.

Thirdly, I would like to call upon my colleagues, especially the women Members of Parliament, to learn from the Speaker to be tolerant to each other. I know as women, we have different challenges in society and in our homes but let us always leave them at home so that when we are here, we should remember we have come to work. 

As I wind up, I would like to say that we should also think about beefing up the security of - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute for you to complete.

MS MUGENI: I would like to call upon Members of Parliament not take for granted what we saw yesterday. We are not safe at all, even when we think this is done. Let us think about our own security in our homes and change the roads that we have been using. We should also think about the security of the Speaker. I would like to call upon Government to give the Speaker enough security to guard her everywhere. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us go to Maracha.

5.03
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for this opportunity to deliberate on this motion, which was moved by the honourable minister. I stand to support the motion and say we are in full support of what transpired here. 

Since Tuesday, there had been a lot of tension in this House. For your information, Madam Speaker, since Tuesday I have been operating a small call centre; there were a lot of calls coming from my district and all of them were made in a desperate attempt to let me know that Parliament should not be put at stake. I received calls and tried to manage them until yesterday. I assured my people that the House would be put to order and that the Speaker was going to have total control over the situation. I assured them even before I knew what was going to happen. However, I would like to thank you sincerely because the assurances I gave them came to pass. I thank you for taking charge to make sure sanity prevailed in this House. 

Yesterday, I was among some of the few Members who stood here to witness what was happening. Indeed, there were a lot of weapons flying around. I call them weapons because they were being used for destruction. I saw microphone stands flying all over. I saw Members of Parliament trying to charge at one another. It was very unfortunate that one of the female Members of Parliament, even after being persuaded not to do so, charged from this side and tried to jump over the seats to go and attack another colleague. I said to myself “what nonsense is this!” I called it nonsense because it was too much.

We stood here, and I would like thank the –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for you to complete.

MS AYAKA: I saw some Members of Parliament trying to broker peace in the House and notable among them was the Minister of Lands. We tried to convince colleagues from the Opposition side not to do what they were doing and to calm down. I would like to say some Members heeded to our calls and laid down their tools and walked humbly out of the House. 

I would like to condemn what happened in the strongest terms. I would like to assure the House that what is circulating around, to show as if this motion is unpopular, is not true. There are Ugandans who support this motion. Let us take courage and continue with the consultation and deliver to this House the minds of the people of Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.07
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, I am here to thank God who made the Woman Member of Parliament for Kamuli District the Speaker of Parliament. (Laughter) I would like to thank you for your potential, charisma and the braveness you exhibited during yesterday’s session.

Madam Speaker, I was very well prepared to grab whoever was thinking of touching you in any way. (Laughter) I was very prepared. The way I now believe and trust in you is the way I can believe and trust in the virginity of a newly born baby girl. Yesterday, you made rulings which were backed up by all the laws in Uganda and the Opposition Members were left with no other law that could justify their consistent actions. 

I must register my disappointment in Members I highly respected. I saw Members stepping on the Table and jumping on the seats. I was disappointed in the person who was trying to convince us to vote for him as the Deputy Speaker of this Parliament because he was commanding the war yesterday. I believe God guided us to choose you as our leader in this Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I would like to pray that the Almighty God, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, be with you and us all now and forever more. (Applause)

5.09
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and I thank you so much for the decision you made yesterday. It was really timely and long overdue. 

Madam Speaker, yesterday was a day of disgrace to this country. Everybody watched in tears and wondered what was going on. On Tuesday, a Member almost provoked me but I cooled my temper. Things went berserk yesterday and chairs were scattered around but I thank the NRM Members of Parliament for keeping quiet and observing in silence.

Madam Speaker, everything has a limit. Your patience and the decision you made was really timely. For heaven’s sake, I condemn those acts of some Members. It was so dangerous. It was hooliganism and disrespect of Uganda. 

All of us, Members of Parliament, are now taken as the same. Today, I was at the Ministry of Education and Sports and when I said I am a Member of Parliament, they said I am one of those who fight in Parliament. I told them that we are not the same. The institution has lost its good image. 

I call upon Members of Parliament to support our Speaker and the Government of Uganda. I imagined, if those same people were in charge of this country, where would we be. I, therefore, support the motion and hon. Magyezi’s motion, and we must support it for the betterment of this country.

There is need for tougher measures to be taken for Members of Parliament who misbehaved the way they did. If there is a way, we would probably amend the Rules of Procedure to make it harder for Members to be arrested in the Parliament because the way they behaved was dangerous. It tainted the image of this institution and people think we are all the same.

Last evening I was being asked whether I was alive or not and I assured people that I was alive. I thank God for saving our lives. I call upon Members of Parliament to remain calm. Those Members of Parliament who misbehaved deserved more punishment than that. We should have more suspensions for them. I thank you.

5.12
MS ROBINA NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kakumiro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On Tuesday, I saw hon. Osegge remove a high heeled shoe from her feet trying to hit a colleague just there. I said to myself, “my God, we are finished!” I saw hon. Nambooze pick papers from the table of the clerks and she was tearing them like she was a commando. I saw hon. Allan Ssewanyana get a chair, heartily trying to kill a colleague, oh! It was bad.

Madam Speaker, the capacity to make decisions that God gave you is not only a character of a good leader but a leader with virtue. Yesterday, what you did has made you win a lot of trust from me. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, we are here as leaders. You have enabled me to move around the globe; there is no Parliament in the world where you find these moveable chairs. This is a death trap. I saw hon. Robert Kyagulanyi take a chair and I said “we are now finished”. It is only prayers that helped us and your capacity to lead. I did not know that you had that capacity, Madam Speaker. Now, whoever will try to touch the Rt Hon. Kadaga -(Interjections)- We are ladies, we are women and I can see women can be leaders. You are a leader, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, when I saw you writing down the names of the Members, I knew you were going to make a decision. However, I expected the Clerk to Parliament to help you. The Clerk should also now try to intelligently see what the Speaker is doing so that she can help. 

The noise was too much. I also attribute this to the upbringing of our children. When I went for a short call, I met the Member of Parliament of Kampala and she said, “sinaba kusayiininga mukiino”, meaning she had not signed up for this. However, yesterday I saw her fighting like she was in a battle field – I mean hon. Naggayi - and yet she was saying, “sinaba kusayiininga”.  Therefore, I see these Members of Parliament from Kampala playing to the cameras.

Yesterday when you told these Members to go out, I saw hon. Nambeshe from Mbale going out and the camera was not focusing on him, but he went and came back and he wanted the cameras to get him. Members were yearning for the cameras to get them. I saw hon. Amoding; she had gone out normally but because the cameras were not following her, she came back and wanted to be lifted and that is what happened.  

Honourable members, let us behave like leaders. These cameras have made our Members behaving differently - (Member timed out.)

5.17
MR DAVID MUTEBI (Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to contribute to this important motion. I would like to thank my brother who has thought it convenient to register our thanks to you for the work well done. We do not have sufficient words to register our appreciation because of the decision you made and impartiality with which you steered this House. 

What happened over the last three days was a deliberate and well calculated move to overthrow the institution of Parliament. It was not an accident, and it is very unfortunate. I am a keen follower of the history of this country and I must say that ever since Independence, there has never been a parliament in this country that has enjoyed the immunity that we have enjoyed. Therefore, it is unfortunate that the very Members who have helped to make the laws that guide this Parliament are the very ones that made a grand plan to overthrow those very laws by making derogatory remarks. 

The beginning of the confusion in this country started with such derogatory remarks and it was the cause of the 1966 crisis. We are fortunate today that we have a Parliament that has different generations. However, we also have Members who are blood thirsty because they never saw what happened. In fact, what happened over the last three days was an insult to the sons and daughters of this country who offered their precious blood yet some of them did not share the privileges we now have.

Therefore, I want to invite this country to think about the future. We can easily go back to where we came from. This goes both to Members of Parliament and the public that is following. People have been cheering but they do not know what they are cheering for. We were moving towards the overthrow of this Parliament! If we fail to do our work and come here just to enjoy music because we know how to sing, then there is no justification as to why we should continue being here and enjoying people’s money - (Member timed out.)

5.20
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I also thank my colleague for moving the motion. 

Madam Speaker, I will not thank you as a woman but as the Speaker and Member of Parliament for Kamuli District. I have known you as a woman of no nonsense because I have been here long enough to know this, by the way. However, the tolerance you showed for three days was unexpected of you, and I say this as a person who knows you. Where you got that tolerance from, I do not know. You exhibited maturity and took a decision, which you ought to have taken as Speaker of Parliament, because you saw the situation was getting out of hand. You made the right decision. 

Honourable members, I stand to condemn such hooliganism. I condemn not all the Opposition Members because there were individuals on that side whom I saw trying to cool down their fellow Members of Parliament; so, we should not say that all of them are bad. However, there were a few Members who turned out to be violent yet really when we come to Parliament, we come to exchange ideas. That is why we have the Opposition and Government sides. In this House, you either oppose or propose and that is how debate is conducted.

The Opposition have spent most of their time fighting one person - Museveni - and they forget to invest in Parliament yet they know that all laws are made here. If they fail to invest in Parliament then it is their own problem; they cannot now come here to start exchanging blows.

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask a question about this immunity: To what extent does this immunity go? Where does it stop? Supposing I now got a knife and killed a Member of Parliament in this House, am I protected by that immunity?

What happened in this House yesterday is really – I play golf and from this House yesterday, I went to the Uganda Golf Club. There is an international tournament going on and people from all countries in Africa are attending. As I stepped in, one person from South Africa asked me a question. He said, “We have known the Ugandan Parliament to be the best Parliament in the African Continent, where you exchange ideas but not blows. Have you now degenerated to such a level like us?” I tried to say “no, this is democracy”, but inside me I was humiliated and had to change my seat. All these people were watching; the cream of this country go down there.

I hear people saying that we should forgive; yes, we forgive but we do not forget. We should tell them this nonsense should not happen again. I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I also thank the Members. I saw the honourable Gen. Katumba almost receiving a hit from a chair that was thrown at him, but as an army general he still cooled them down. The honourable Lt Col Byekwaso did a beautiful job. I was just standing there as hopeless as I am - you know I am a short old man of about 60 years - but she did a beautiful job. I think we should all go for military training. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Isaac Musumba, for moving this motion and I support it. I would like to join my colleagues who have spoken before in thanking your leadership, Madam Speaker. 

Personally, this did not come as a surprise. I met you for the first time, Madam Speaker, in 1994 when you were campaigning in the Constituent Assembly to be the deputy chairperson and I saw a person of character. Later on, when I was in the Sixth Parliament, I saw strong leadership in you and I am glad that you have now demonstrated it. I would like to congratulate you and Parliament.

I further would like to congratulate all the Members on both sides who saw sanity and helped to preserve a little bit of the honour in the word, “honourable”. I read a book entitled, “The Desecration of my Kingdom” and in the last two to three days what we saw was actually the desecration of the title “honourable”. It is up to this Parliament to now regain that honour. Madam Speaker, I am glad that you are in the leadership and I am sure that we will gain it.

Colleagues on both sides have expressed some degree of fear for their personal security. I would like to reassure all colleagues listening to me and those not listening. Where you live, there must be a police post or a police station; we shall provide the maximum support in your area. If there is a personal threat, let the police and other security agencies know about those personal threats. It is our responsibility to provide security as a ministry and Government.

Do not take any threats lightly, honourable members. In the last few days, what we have seen is that men and women of high esteem could easily do unimaginable things. Therefore, let us be our own security persons first; report any security threats on ourselves. We have a whole directorate of police in this Parliament. If you need some skills on how you can sometimes take simple security measures, do not hesitate to approach the directorate for some instructions which will be helpful.

I would like to thank all the Members who remained here and gave this Parliament what is left of its credibility. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.                   

5.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for returning me from my Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) camp. When I was seated here, hon. Sarah Opendi walked in and said, “Welcome back from the IDP camp”. I was internally displaced for these few days; I had to shift from this Frontbench to the fourth row because I was told that I was a target. However, I must report that the Members in that row treated me very well. (Laughter)  Thank you very much for bringing back sanity in this House and here we are sitting freely without any fear. 

Madam Speaker, a woman is a warrior and a conqueror and that woman is you. Congratulations for bringing back sanity to this House. We had lost the little faith and confidence we had in this House. The public wondered whether this was really Parliament. However, Madam Speaker, you gave back the hope to Ugandans that we still have Parliament and the Chair of this Parliament is you. 

We would like to thank you so much for restoring confidence in the public that we still have a legislative assembly where people who are not disciplined can be suspended. I know that you had limitations because of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament but when you adjourned the House yesterday, the message that I got from the public was that when these Members come back, you should ask them to come along with their parents or guardians because what they did was very unbecoming. We need to speak to their parents and guardians to understand why they did this, because how can you raise a child with that level of indiscipline. 

Madam Speaker, when I saw hon. Robert Kyagulanyi jump over that table, I was scared and I shifted from my IDP camp here to the other corner. When I saw him with this metal swinging it and saying “Today I am going to kill you”, I said to myself, “Oh My God!” I thought the people of Koboko Municipality had sent me here not to die but to legislate and use my brains. 

I only confirmed, and I would like to say this, Madam Speaker and colleagues, that the death threats that were sent to our phones were not mere rumours. We actually got rescued by you. Personally, I received a death threat from a colleague that I would not see my 40th birthday. I am very glad that I am now 32 and yesterday I was able to count more days, which makes me 32 and a half years old. All this is because sanity came back to this House.

When I saw a colleague jump on top of this table – (Member timed out.) 

5.36
MR WILSON KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. First of all, I must thank hon. Isaac Musumba for bringing this motion. I stand here to support it. 

Madam Speaker, what happened here yesterday injured the integrity of Parliament grossly, and that should be an area of concern for all of us and the entire nation. The entire nation is very concerned as to why it happened that way. We have received calls and interfaced with very many people who are concerned whether this is a Parliament or something else. Parliament that turned into a warfront here yesterday took us through a very big test as parliamentarians of the Tenth Parliament. 

I would like to request that this House now revisits the qualifications for anybody to stand for Member of Parliament and the calibre and character of a Member of Parliament. We need to revisit that area. If we do not, we are going to be in total mess. 

I must thank the NRM Members of Parliament. As many as they were, they sat here like they were not even here. We asked ourselves what was happening, looking on as if we were in an arena or theatre. I must thank them. 

Madam Speaker, I must thank you for bringing our hope back. What you did yesterday had in fact taken some time without being done. What you did was a wonderful gesture and you did what we expected you to do. These kinds of people must be disciplined. A Member of Parliament must be accommodative, tolerant, patient, educated, wise, loving, selfless and mature enough to handle things maturely. However, what was depicted here yesterday was a total disgrace and all of us were wondering whether we would be alive or not- (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute and then I will invite the Prime Minister to wind up. 

MR KUMAMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

I also want us to interest ourselves in the propaganda that is being spread all over the country. In our places, they now know that what happened here - the granting of leave to a Member of Parliament - was tantamount to establishing life presidency. This propaganda is diversionary to the procedure of Parliament. Therefore, I would like us to come out as a Parliament and explain to the masses who are misunderstanding the whole thing because of this massive propaganda, which makes us uncomfortable as Members of Parliament. Thank you very much. 

5.36
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this is a very important motion and Government must also be on record in supporting it. On behalf of myself, the Prime Minister and the Government, I would like to thank hon. Isaac Musumba for bringing this motion. 

The importance of this motion is to put on record today and forever that one time the Tenth Parliament of Uganda appreciated the actions of their Speaker. This is going to be kept for future generations who will read it in the Hansard. Therefore, it is very important to reiterate that the time we have spent here, the whole day, is not in vain. I think we are making important history for our future. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, the decision you took clearly showed that those who were taking you for granted were wrong and so you should continue to prove them wrong by taking a firm decision as you did. This firm decision should not only end in the suspension for three sittings but the future decision should even be much harsher. This because they are also doing it now with impunity, so we need to be prepared for them. Otherwise, it is a very good decision and I think we needed it.

However, Madam Speaker, one thing has disturbed me, and you mentioned it yesterday as you were making your remarks, and that is the use of the Muslim caps. Even hon. Betty Nambooze was in a full hijab and veiled. In fact, the footage here has been shown all over the world. Somebody rang me from Italy asking me why we allowed those few Muslims to disrupt our Parliament. Even some of us here do not know whether they are Muslims or not but they were wearing the Muslim headgear. Anybody who saw somebody veiled thought that was a Muslim, which is wrong. In fact, the mistake they are making now is spoiling the Islamic faith, which is wrong and it must be stopped. 

Madam Speaker, the procedure must be amended; anybody playing with somebody’s faith must be stopped and punished. (Applause) This is very serious because –(Interruption.) 

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that it was not only the Muslim attire that was abused but as a catholic, I also got offended when some of the colleagues got rosaries and started waving them. I did not understand the implication of that. I think when we have our political issues, religion should be put aside because they are not supposed to be partisan.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, our opening prayers in this House are very important and they accommodate all of us. We are very happy about these prayers because they were well thought out and take into account everybody’s faith. Our Constitution also advocates for freedom of worship in this country. Therefore, we must tolerate each other and must not abuse and disrespect other people’s religion by misusing their symbols. This reflects a bad image outside. That amendment must be made, Madam Speaker, and I speak on behalf of many who are not here. 

Madam Speaker, a society without discipline is not a society at all. I am glad you have instilled discipline. In fact, you have always been instilling discipline. For those people who want to bring indiscipline into this House, you have put your foot down and firmly said “no”, and this must continue because we need sanity.

Madam Speaker, I would like to re-echo what my colleague said in appreciating the discipline that NRM Members displayed. We are very many and if we went amok, nobody would get out of here. We are very many and strong; some are old but still strong. (Laughter) Anyhow, I do appreciate their calmness, which gave you strength to say, “no”. I think we should continue with that. Thank you, colleagues, for that.

Therefore, I would like to say that on behalf of Government, I thank everybody who supported this motion. I would like to be put on record that our Speaker must continue; Aluta continua. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I think over 40 Members have spoken. I know we have taken time but this is about our discipline, powers, privileges, immunity and our conduct. Therefore, it is really important, and a number of issues have come out which may require review. I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do appreciate the conduct of the presiding officer.

	(Question put and agreed to.)	

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there has been this nonsensical debate that I should have suspended them on Tuesday evening. However, there was so much noise and I was not even sure whether the Hansard was capturing what I was saying. All I did was to take down the names of majorly those who were standing around here. Of course, I could not see what was happening behind. Those who said that I left them out were lucky because I could not see them. Otherwise, there was so much noise. I knew nobody would hear what I was saying and that is why I took down the names and took action yesterday. 

For the record, rule 81 says that a Member who is suspended from the service of the House shall immediately withdraw from the precincts of the House until the end of the suspension period. You must move. The rules say that where a Member who has been suspended refuses to obey the direction of the Speaker, the Speaker shall call the attention of the House to the fact that recourse to force is necessary to compel obedience and the Sergeant-at-Arms shall be called upon to eject the Member from the House. This is what I did. These are our rules.

5.45
MR FRED MUDOKOI ODUCHU (Independent, Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I rise on a matter of national importance and urgency particularly concerning the two districts of Butebo and Pallisa.

Madam Speaker, on 1 July 2017, Butebo District like other new districts became operational. It is, however, unfortunate that the Ministry of Local Government wrote to the Electoral Commission suspending the elections of the interim chairperson of Butebo District because of the contestation on Kibale County. It is very unfortunate that the last time the matter was brought to Parliament, the responsible minister was given two more weeks to bring the matter back to Parliament for a resolution but it is now two months and the minister has failed to bring the matter back here.

First of all, the two districts do not have functioning district councils because the former district speaker was from Kibale County, which is under contestation. Therefore, he cannot preside either in Pallisa or Butebo councils. Secondly, the deputy speaker was automatically from Butebo and that rules her out as speaker of Pallisa District Council. Therefore, for the last three months, many programmes have been brought to a standstill because of the absence of the district councils for both Butebo and Pallisa. 

It is very unfortunate that elections are taking place in all the new districts except for Butebo and Pallisa. We expect another woman representative from one of the districts, but nothing is taking palace.

Madam Speaker, on this matter, we have been patient enough. The people of Butebo and Pallisa have been left in suspense. I have regularly gone to Ministry of Local Government; in fact, some people even mistake me to be one of the staff of Ministry of Local Government because of my frequent visits there.

I really request the Ministry of Local Government to handle these issues with a lot of urgency because it is too much. We have failed to explain to our people on the ground because we do not have answers. When I go there, they say “next week”. Now as I talk, the issue of Butebo was supposed to be on the business to fall but it is not here.

THE SPEAKER: It is there.

MR ODUCHU: I think this was just a response by the minister to a question asked by one of the honourable members but not the handling of the issue as it is supposed to be. What is there is just a response to the question, which was asked by one of the Members. I think this is totally different.

Madam Speaker, it is my humble request that the issue of Butebo is handled with a lot of urgency so that we move normally with the projects that are coming in for the two districts of Butebo and Pallisa. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Saturday I was in Pallisa. I had gone to launch a tree-planting programme but this issue came out prominently and I had no answers. I just said we were going to handle it.

5.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Fred Oduchu for raising this very critical matter. 

It is true that the ministry advised the Electoral Commission not to conduct elections. This is because the minutes that the ministry had received were to the effect that the seven subcounties were going to constitute the new district of Butebo. However, before the district was created, Parliament had created Kibale County and as a ministry we came up with a motion to move Kibale County to Butebo but some leaders contested it. So, we felt that we should now move by building consensus.

Madam Speaker, I am under instructions from my senior colleague, who was here but because of other critical engagements he went away; he asked me to request you to allow the House to refer the matter to the committee so that they can go to the ground and establish the facts. This is because all we have as a ministry are the minutes from the subcounties of Butebo and Opwateta, the minutes from the then Pallisa District Council and the minutes from the Committee on Public Service and Local Government and they all propose that Kibale should belong to Butebo. 

Now, maybe because of individual interest, some members still insist that Kibale should go to Pallisa and yet as we speak, Pallisa is composed of 15 subcounties. We thought it should be fair that Butebo District should have seven subcounties other than having only five and letting the two subcounties join Pallisa District to make 17 subcounties.

Madam Speaker, it is my prayer that the matter goes to the committee and we resolve it there. Like he has rightly said, Pallisa District does not have a speaker or deputy speaker and therefore the council cannot sit. In the new Butebo District, it is only the civil servants who are working because the council cannot sit. As a result, we feel that we should have this matter sorted out to have the two local governments operate with both the political and technical leaderships. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

5.52
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I think this is giving away work. To me, the work to get all these demarcations done lies with the ministry. Secondly, the technical people are in the ministries of lands and local government. 

There is also indiscipline on the ground. These subcounties, parishes and whatever you have all originate from the colonial maps. These colonial maps are very clear on where the borders of these parishes pass and where they are supposed to belong. However, sometimes when the surveyors go on the ground with these maps and determine the boundaries, we politicians contest them. It should be clear that what a technocrat decides should be final. It should not be the politicians to determine because we do not have that knowledge and capacity. 

I have got a problem at Iriiri in Karamoja; part of Iriiri is in Amuria but it is a town they say belongs to Karamoja. One of the eldest men said “I know that tree; my father grew up on that tree and that is actually where we buried our grandfather”. However, the colonial map puts the tree in Amuria. 

That indiscipline of politicians must stop. We must let the technocrats do their work. Therefore, I propose that the minister should send a team with people from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and they go and sort out that matter once and for all.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is very serious. If there is no local council, there is no oversight, there is no supervision and people are just free do to anything and yet we are appropriating funds and sending money. Hon. Prime Minister, this is not good.

5.55
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, it is true that the boundaries of this country depend on what the colonial people left, as it is in the Constitution and so on. However, it is also true that no authority in this country, except this Parliament, can create a constituency. Everybody will work but the recommendation must finally be brought to this House for approval.

I think the ministry has to bring whatever must be done on the ground here, so that that county is created. She said there is a motion; this motion must be brought here to be approved. From there, the county will start to exist and become a constituency for this newly created district of Butebo and the election can go on. 

Otherwise, subcounties alone cannot form a county. It is until all of them are put together under one county, which is Butebo. We shall take off from there. I think that is the crux of the matter. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister in charge of housing, they say you are the ones who have got information in your ministry.

5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not quite certain whether the problem is about boundaries or just political interests of the players there wanting to place themselves in the different districts. If it is a question of boundaries, we can work with the Ministry of Local Government and have our surveyors on the ground go and have proper demarcations –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we created the district of Butebo but now it is the issue of which subcounties leave Pallisa to go to Butebo. Some of them are supposed to go with the new district and others are saying “no, we remain”. It is that kind of push and pull.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. The situation in Pallisa and Butebo is that in 2008, the people of Butebo County, where Kibale and Opwateta that became a county in 2015 belonged, requested for district status. However, the district status delayed until much later. 

The resolution of the district council seeking creation of Butebo District named seven subcounties that should constitute Butebo District. The current Kibale County is part of those seven subcounties. Now, we recall that there was a motion brought to this House to create districts and that motion went to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. The committee wrote a report, which was submitted to this House and approved, creating Butebo District to include the two subcounties of Kibale County because it was originally part of Butebo before it was created as a county. 

Recently, the Minister of Local Government brought a motion that altered boundaries, redefining Butebo District to constitute Butebo and Kibale counties. It was protested by the MP of Kibale County, saying they do not belong to Butebo District because the motion here was Butebo County, not Butebo and Kibale counties. 

The problem there is that we have been saying, yes, maybe the people of Kibale no longer want to be in Butebo but the process of redefining these boundaries must go back to the people and this can only be done if the councils are functional. Let the people of Kibale County go to Butebo District, where they were put, to seek an exit and seek a re-entry into Pallisa. 

It is not just about a council, because the Constitution provides that Parliament can alter boundaries and the same Constitution also provides that in so doing, Parliament shall empower the local councils. It is not about land; it is about political boundaries. Thank you, honourable minister.

THE SPEAKER: How do we help these people? We cannot disenfranchise people; they need governance.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. In that case, our role is limited but should it be needed, we are ready to give you surveyors even next week. 

However, as the honourable colleague is explaining, it appears to be more about the politics of the area, in which case I would like to agree with hon. Byabagambi that the Minister of Local Government may need to do more work within the area, call the leaders and try to see how consensus can be built. Sending a committee of Parliament will be helpful, but the challenges may still remain. I think my colleague still needs to do more work to coordinate the local leaders on the ground and see how they can build consensus and have that issue resolved.

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate hon. Baryomunsi’s contribution. The issue is not about boundaries because the boundaries for the old counties are known. Pallisa originally comprised of four counties, namely Budaka, which was given a district status; Kibuku, which I represent and is now a district; Butebo, which was also supposed to go; and when Kibale was created, some people now want to remain in Pallisa. We requested them to bring the minutes from the subcounty and the districts, they have never done it. They only say, just take a decision and make us belong there, which we cannot do.

We were advising that what we can do now is to pass our motion to constitute Butebo and then the two subcounties of Opwateta and Kibale generate minutes to the effect that they wish to belong to Pallisa and submit them to Butebo District. Butebo District will then come up with minutes confirming that they have allowed them to go, and then Pallisa District will produce minutes accepting them to go. We can then come back to Parliament for approval. It is simply that.

THE SPEAKER: Who will move that process?

MS NAMUYANGU: The local governments. 

THE SPEAKER: But some leaders should be there to direct them to convene a council meeting specifically for that. We may even have to find money.

MS NAMUYANGU: As a ministry we can, but like I stated earlier, there are personal interests. The district chairperson of Pallisa, for example, comes from Kibale. The laws clearly say that once you are a chairperson of a particular district and a new district is created and you wish to contest or remain in the district where you were serving, you have the option to either remain in the district where you were elected or resign and go and contest in the new district, which he does not want. He says he will move with his Kibale to Pallisa.

We also have women contestants. There is a lady called Achola, a sister of hon. Osegge. She is in Kibale but she wants to go to Pallisa because hon. Agnes Ameede has chosen to go to Butebo as the woman Member of Parliament. They are looking for where there is a gap for people to come and contest.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, we are getting a problem because we are trying to circumvent the law in favour of individuals. This is creating a very big problem. It is setting a big precedent. Someone comes from there and the law says you should resign and go to contest there because a district and a boundary has been created by Parliament, but you are saying, “No, I am going with my subcounty”. It is not your subcounty. It is not property for an individual. If it is like that, then let him buy the subcounty. 

Therefore, the minister should stand on her feet and give a directive. That will solve the problem. If they want to come to Pallisa, they should go through their council. I think it is very simple. Otherwise, to leave those people ungoverned and we continue sending money there will be creating a very big problem.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This issue came up about a month ago or two from the Member of Parliament of Kibale and the Member of Parliament of Pallisa was here and they exchanged words. 

Madam Speaker, it is not a simple issue and I do not think we can solve it here like this. You remember, Madam Speaker, I was the chairperson of that committee when you gave us the petition from the people of that place. That time, Kibale and Opwateta were part of Butebo and later they split into two separate counties. 

When we created Butebo District at that time, Kibale was its own county and we created Butebo District out of Butebo County. The contestation is that –(Interjections)- Permit me to give the information; I was the chairperson of that committee - (Interruption)

MR OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, I am very hesitant to raise a point of order against my colleague. However, I have the report of the parliamentary Committee on Public Service and Local Government signed by hon. Raphael Magyezi. It clearly mentions Butebo District with its headquarters at Butebo, the mother district is Pallisa, the population is 93,330 people and the seven subcounties are Butebo, Kibale, Kakoro, Kabwangasi, Opwateta, Petete and Kanginima. 

Is it in order for my honourable colleague to mislead this House yet we are trying to shape the direction of resolving this issue? I am from Pallisa and I know better. There are things I do not want to go into here because we want this issue sorted out once and for all. Is he in order? He signed this document and he knows it.

THE SPEAKER:  I do not have the report. 

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, I do not have a personal interest in that matter. I know this and my colleague knows it too. When you write a report, you refer back to the motion as it came from the ministry.  What he is reading is part of what we wrote as the motion as it came from the ministry. However, our recommendation as the committee was not that. 

My own proposal, in terms of a neutral way forward, is to go with the proposal of the minister that you send the committee – the chairperson is here - to go and talk to the people on the ground. There are issues of politics and ethnicity. I think we have to listen to the people on the ground. I would go with the proposal from the Minister of Local Government that you send the committee now to update themselves about what is on the ground and come back with a report to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is very important and it is the right of the people to have their government. I will go back and read the report and then we can decide next week on how to move. Let me read the report and see what we discussed. It is important that our people get their government. We cannot go on sending money to where no one is supervising it. The matter is deferred to next week. We shall give you a proposal. 

6.10
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national importance in regard to the issue of ambulances in the country. I raise this aware of the overwhelming need of health service delivery in the country in the hard-to-reach areas in Uganda.

Whereas tax exemption for ambulances is subject to conditions set out under the East African Customs Management Act, the Income Tax Act of Uganda gives exemptions to ambulances on import duty tax. However, it is very silent on the environmental levy and yet heavy trucks that are imported to the country to do business are exempted from environmental levy. 

The purpose of exemption of import duty tax on ambulances is to enable health service delivery in a country where health issues are still wanting. Health service delivery is still wanting from different stakeholders, including organisations and well-wishers, in trying to create an enabling environment to help the patients in the country. Therefore, an environmental tax defeats the purpose of the exemption that was sought for on ambulances irrespective of their status. 

Madam Speaker, there are different individuals, including Members of Parliament, who are trying to work hand in hand with Government to make sure these ambulances are brought in to help the people and not for business. My prayer to Parliament is that –(Interruption)

MS ALYEK: Thank you so much, hon. Amongin, for giving way. I agree with what hon. Amongin is saying. In this country, the referral system is very poor as far as health services are concerned. Not every health facility has an ambulance and we see our mothers and children whose lives could have been saved dying on the way-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a proposal she wants to bring; it is not a debate. What do you want, hon. Amongin, concerning the ambulances?

MS ALYEK: That is the information I wanted to give, that taxes should be waived for privately owned ambulances. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Alyek. I have a strong prayer that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reconsiders this issue and pronounces itself in Parliament in regards to giving full tax exemptions for ambulances  coming into the country. In this way, those organisations and individuals trying to help communities can be in a position to provide ambulances to the communities at will. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I seek clarification, Madam Speaker. As far as I know, environmental duty is imposed on all vehicles above five years from the year of manufacture and not on brand new vehicles. Therefore, I would like to know whether that environmental tax you are referring to on ambulances is imposed on new ambulances. In law, whether it is an ambulance or not, it still affects the environment.

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify that all vehicles that are imported to do business in Uganda, for example the Fuso trucks, irrespective of their date of manufacture, when imported into the country they are exempted from the environmental tax. Ambulances specifically are not exempted from environmental tax and yet this is quite a lot of money. 

Madam Speaker, I could even lay on the Table the correspondences I have personally had with Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) and the ministry in regards to a waiver of environmental tax for ambulances. The fact is that most of the ambulances that come to Uganda -(Interjection) - I beg to be protected from the ministers. 

Madam Speaker, the fact is that the ambulances that are brought by different organisations as donations or those brought in by individuals, including us, may not totally be brand new. Brand new ambulances are not taxed and they are very expensive for Members or individuals who are willing to help the community. Therefore, my prayer-

THE SPEAKER: You want a total exemption on ambulances?

MS AMONGIN: Yes, I want a total exemption of tax on ambulances to help the community in Uganda.

6.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Members of Parliament who are complementing our efforts in trying to improve on the referral system in the country. 

However, it was Parliament which came up with that decision to place the environmental levy on old cars of five years and above after the date of manufacture. The whole idea was that these cars impact negatively on our environment. We can re-examine this with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and come to this House with a report.

THE SPEAKER: We need to do it early because if we start working on the Bills for raising taxes, we might miss it.

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Amongin for bringing this issue to the House. However, I also would like to say that the timing is not right. We just started the budget process and Article 152 of the Constitution states thus:  

“(1) No tax shall be imposed except under the authority of an Act of Parliament. 
(2) Where a law enacted under clause (1) of this Article confers powers on any person or authority to waive or vary…” 

That means you have to wait for the right timing of the budget process. Maybe when the Budget Framework Paper and the Finance Bill come, you can present this matter as an amendment. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we then direct the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to take note of this issue so that when this Bill comes, we also address it.

MR ABALA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for that very important statement. The issue of ambulances is very central and useful in this country. You will see the importance when you fall sick. Yesterday, we saw it here. 

I would like to know from the Minister of Health whether we have a policy on ambulances in this country. It is from there that we can understand what is happening. As we talk now, people are dying out there and yet a Good Samaritan in the House here can buy an ambulance that is ten years old and it can help the people. Do we have an ambulance policy in Uganda? 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In order to improve the referral system in the health sector, Government came up with a decision to place ambulances at health centres IV, general hospitals and regional referral hospitals. However, the challenge we have had is that even though we have given the ambulances to the health centres III, because of the limited budget these health centres are not able to service these ambulances and even handle repairs. 

Madam Speaker, your own hospital in Kamuli has a relatively new ambulance, but the cost of repairing these ambulances is quite high. Also, the ambulances were being abused by those who are in charge of them, using them as their own transport and to do other business rather than taking patients from one facility to another. 

As a result of that, we have been to Cabinet and Cabinet has agreed that we should not establish an authority but come up with a secretariat within the ministry to have a standalone ambulance service. The idea is that we handle the issue of servicing and maintenance of ambulances separately from the facilities. 

This work is ongoing; we have already restructured the ministry and we now have a department for ambulance services. The commissioner has been recruited and is about two months old. We are moving towards the direction of having ambulances away from the health facilities. That is where we are.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we ask our finance committee to take up this issue and report to us when we are dealing with the Budget Framework Paper. The Committee on Health should then follow up what the minister has said about the newly created secretariat for managing the ambulances and they give us a report. She has now established a secretariat.

MR ABALA: It would be good if we had a policy or if we got to know whether we have a policy. The question is not about whether the ministry is giving us ambulances or not but do we have a policy? If we do not have it, what is the position?

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, we are going to come to this House with that policy on ambulances. It is work in progress and a document is already due for presentation to Cabinet. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: When it comes, we shall ask those questions.

6.23
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and the matter is about Kapchorwa-Kween-Suam Road.

You are aware that the issues concerning this road have been in this House for so many years now. In 2013 up to 2015, we had some maintenance done on the road and it at least made the road passable. However, from half of last year to the whole of this year, we have not had work done on this road.

Madam Speaker, you know this road very well. The potholes have now become big pits along the road. When it rains, the road is completely impassable.

Madam Speaker-(Interruption)-

MR BURUNDO: Thank you very much, hon. Chekwel. Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that most of the roads in the mountainous areas are in a very sorry state. I am on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and in June we were tasked to go and check on bridges, specifically Nyalit Bridge in Bukwo. We set off from here at 6.00 o’clock but we reached Nyalit Bridge at 3.00 o’clock in the morning -(Interjection)- Yes, in the morning! That proves that the road was very bad. 

We left our cars at one point and went on foot until we reached the place. We were only saved by hon. Mangusho, who managed to prepare for us some tea at 3.00 o’clock, otherwise we were almost dying. Therefore, what the colleague is saying is very true and we need the help of Government to help the people of Kween and Bukwo. That is the information I wanted to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy, do you have some information? I hope you have good information on that road.

MR BATEGEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, I led a delegation of the Committee on National Economy. There is the road from Kapchorwa through Kween, which is the next district, Bukwo and then Suam Bridge. We are in the process of approving that loan and we are about to bring the report here for presentation and consideration.

We went through Kenya, Suam up to Bukwo District headquarters. Our intention was to go through Kapchorwa up to Bukwo and then Suam. However, we were told that the drive from Bukwo through Kween to Kapchorwa takes four hours if we are lucky to get there. We were actually discouraged because we did not go through the road. 
We met officials at Bukwo District headquarters who we talked to and they requested that as we consider the upgrading of this road with African Development Bank (ADB) financing, we request Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) to do regular maintenance of the road in the meantime. The request is justified because the road is impassable. Many people from Amudat go through Kenya to come and attend Parliament here. You can imagine, they have to go through another country before they come here.

THE SPEAKER: When are you bringing the request? This House is very concerned about that road because it has been in the pipeline for long.  

MR BATEGEKA: I am sure the report will be signed. Now we are all convinced and we shall bring it anytime, probably on Tuesday next week.

THE SPEAKER: Can you bring it on Tuesday? It is really urgent.

MS CHEKWEL: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson, for that good information. He has mentioned my prayers. One of my prayers was that we have UNRA work on the road immediately. We have been in touch with their regional manager but he has always been promising, but nothing is on the ground. I even called this afternoon before I came here and they told me he has not gone on ground. Therefore, I request that the ministry instructs UNRA to go on the ground so that people can move. 

We are harvesting Irish potatoes now and they are rotting on the road. People cannot reach the hospitals. We have our hospital in Kapchorwa; we have nothing in Kween but we cannot even move up to Kapchorwa. Lives are at stake. People are just walking. The other day, I was coming back from Kween with my four-wheel drive vehicle but driving was impossible. I could not move yet I was going to attend a function; I came back and my car is in the garage right now.

It is very serious and I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, because you always support us. We would like to call upon the ministry to act immediately. My other request is that we fast track this loan request that was brought in June and we would like to –(Interruption)

MR MANGUSHO: Thank you my colleague, hon. Chekwel, for giving way. Much as the honourable member has said that they are going to bring the loan request here for approval, the issue hon. Chekwel is talking about, which is very important, is about a continuous maintenance period as we wait for that process. You know the procurement process takes long. 

Madam Speaker, when we went with the committee through Tirinyi, Mbale and then the bridges of Bulambuli, which also cuts off the whole of lower Kween and Karamoja, the UNRA people told us openly that they did not have money for fuel. Hon. Lydia Chekwel is requesting for the UNRA team in Mbale to go there, but they confessed before us and the honourable members who were there that they are in arrears on fuel. The suppliers of fuel have refused to give them more fuel and therefore, they are not going to work. 

It needs the intervention from the ministry to ensure that a firm or contractor is sent there immediately. Today, we get a lot of abuse from the people of Sebei. They say that we are working on the age limit but we have forgotten about our road. We are under threat; some of them have said that they will beat us when we go back home. Madam Speaker, we are not safe. 

The other day, we reached Nyalit because the honourable member had to push the car, which I was driving. All the other vehicles, which my colleagues where driving, could not be driven. I was the only one who was able to reach there because my colleagues had to push us.
 
THE SPEAKER: I am going to write to the minister about that.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I would like to provide further information to confirm that the rains have ravaged most parts of the country, especially for us who come from hilly and mountainous areas like Kigezi, and most of our bridges have collapsed. The Ministry of Works needs to be supported so that they are able to repair these bridges and roads. 

Due to the heavy rains, there has been a catastrophe in Rubanda District where the rains have swept off people. As of yesterday, 16 people had died and the Members of Parliament from Rubanda are there with the Minister for Disaster Preparedness burying those many people, and up to 40 people are still missing. Therefore, there is a huge tragedy. In addition to destruction of roads and bridges, we are also losing lives in our districts. I wanted to give that information that there is a huge tragedy in Rubanda. Thank you very much.     

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to write to the minister because this is really a very painful issue. It has been in the pipeline for so many years. I will write and give you copies. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR OLDER PERSONS

6.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Madam Speaker, on Sunday, 1 October 2017, Uganda will join the rest of the world in commemorating the International Day for Older Persons. This day was designated by the United Nations General Assembly under resolution 45/106 in New York. The International Day of Older Persons was observed for the first time throughout the world on 1 October 1991. For 18 years now, since 1999, Uganda has been celebrating this day. 

The observance of the day seeks to promote the understanding of older persons’ issues, mobilise support for promoting their dignity and wellbeing in social-economic, political and cultural spheres and recognise their contribution towards national development. Furthermore, on this day Government takes stock of what has been achieved during the year, challenges encountered and lays strategies to overcome them.

This year, 2017, the national celebrations for the International Day of Older Persons will be held at Saza Grounds in Kiboga Town Council in Kiboga District. 

The theme for this year’s celebrations is, “Stepping into the future: tapping the talents, contributions and participation of older persons in society”. This year’s theme emphasizes the pathways that support the utilization of the talents of the older persons and their continued active participation and contribution towards development initiatives. 

The number of older persons aged above 60 years is expected to more than double from 841 million people globally in 2013 to more than 2 billion by the year 2050. Older persons are projected to exceed the number of children below 14 years for the first time by 2050.

In Uganda, demographic trends of older persons have not been different. According to the Uganda National Housing and Population Census 2002, the population of older persons was approximately 1.1 million people and the last national population and housing census 2014 indicates that the number of older persons increased to 1,280,000 people, which translates to a 14 per cent rise. This was as a result of an improved quality of life from numerous Government interventions in health services, security, safe water provision among others.

Worth mentioning is the fact that the majority of the population is young now but this youthful population in the next 47 years will translate into older persons. The current life expectancy in Uganda has increased to 56 years from 45 years in 2002. This is a clear indication that Uganda’s welfare has improved and life expectancy will even increase with the social-economic service support that Government provides. Conscious of this fact, Government of Uganda reiterates its commitment to ensure that the needs of the older persons are factored into our National Development Plan.

The trend analysis shows that while Uganda’s population by 2040 is projected to be 61.3 million people, the number of older persons will more than double to 2.5 million people. 

Older persons have great expertise and play an important role as leaders in the political, socio-economic and cultural spheres in their advanced ages. They have great skills, make great contributions to development and play a pivotal role in the promotion of cultural values. They also cherish society norms, are disciplined, advise the young people and are custodians of vital historical information. They possess ethno-science knowledge and have the ability to diagnose and treat diseases based on experience.

Older persons provide security for property as young ones are on transit in search of employment. They remain in ancestral areas to secure family property. They also play a big role in caregiving to HIV/AIDS orphans and thus provide security, education, shelter and psychosocial support to their grandchildren. Older persons are known to be generous with their gifts and resources. They have offered land, especially to religious and educational-

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you just invite us to go to the function?               

MS MUTUUZO: Despite these contributions, Madam Speaker, older persons remain exposed to old-age related vulnerabilities. They have to look after orphans and other vulnerable children and they are increasingly lonely as the young generation rarely visit them.

Lastly, I wish like to invite the honourable members to join us at the national celebrations in Kiboga at Saza Grounds on 1 October 2017. Your invitation cards are already in your pigeonholes. The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, is expected to grace the occasion as the chief guest. I thank you.     

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I encourage everyone over 60 years to attend. The young ones should also be there so that they can see what the elders are doing. The House is adjourned to Tuesday, next week.

(The House rose at 6.41 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 2 October 2017 at 2.00 p.m.)
