PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - FIRST MEETINGTUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA5873Tuesday, 27 September, 2022I would like to refer their petition to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry so that after recess, the committee will able to report back. Let us see where we can work closely with the Executive and come up with solutions that can help our traders.Colleagues, you have done a tremendous job. As we prepare to go for recess, the Speaker is very excited. We have exceeded our targets and expectations, in terms of the Bills and other Parliamentary business. (Applause)So, the Speaker, together with the Parliamentary Commission, will be hosting all of you for a dinner tomorrow, at 6.30 p.m. at the South Wing Parking Yard.There will be no transport refund for the dinner. (Laughter) However, as you are aware, tomorrow – please, colleagues, I am communicating and you are also communicating among yourselves. This is a coup – you are already analysing what I have not finished. (Laughter)As you know, tomorrow, we shall be having a Presidential Address. So, we will start at 6.30 p.m. to ensure that we finish by 7.30 p.m. However, arrangements have been made – for those who may not make it back home on time – to telecast the Presidential Address at the dinner. We shall be happy to come and be happy with you, colleagues, and share.IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 34TH SITTING - FIRST MEETINGParliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, welcome to today’s sitting. I can see the front bench on my left is full, yet they have a smaller cabinet than the one on the right. (Applause) I do not know whether it is because they are from a caucus. - No, they are always full. (Laughter)The other day, the acting Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, raised a point of procedure, requiring that Members of the shadow cabinet always occupy the front seats so that we know them properly. For some of you, we do not know that you are shadow ministers. It is very important to know the alternative ministers so that when the minister on this side has raised an issue, we are able to call on you easily.Colleagues, today, I received a petition from Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA). They have several issues, ranging from unfair taxation regime to high interests on loans and a special fund to support them. 5874MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION [The Speaker]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRLast week – if you remember, Colleagues – the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development promised to come here and brief the House on seedlings, especially for coffee and tea. So, I expect him to come. He said he would be here by 2.00 p.m. Once we finish matters of national importance, I will amend the Order Paper to accommodate the finance minister and the Minister of Local Government to respond to Members’ issues as well as a motion by Hon. Agnes Atim, which I had directed to be put on the Order Paper but there was an oversight. I want it to be considered today. With that, Colleagues, let us go to matters of national importance. 2.17THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Matthias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you talked about the finance minister coming to address Parliament, my initial insights were that he would even be available, in your considered amendment of the Order Paper, to address the matter for which you gave express orders relating to a statement made by the Opposition on releases to entities. The month is on the horizon and part of what we wanted to be addressed is the non-payment of staff of various entities. The minister is non-committal – of course, you raised your own misgivings about Government choosing to issue press releases instead of responding to questions in Parliament. Has the minister been able to make available reasons why we should not hold him defiant of Parliament and Speaker’s instructions?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, have that as a substantive item on the Order Paper tomorrow. Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for that reminder.2.19MR GEOFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for your communication concerning KACITA’s petition. The whole country is just recovering from the COVID-19 economic crisis, during which Government, through the same minister, gave traders – majorly those in the hotel industry, health and education – a COVID-19 relief loan with an interest rate of 10 per cent. That money has not been taken by the people because banks put up very strict restrictions for the business community not to take that money. I, therefore, pray that when the finance minister comes, he should update Parliament on whether that loan has benefited our people and the capacity to which it has been absorbed by the business community. Thank you. [Member: “Information.”]THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Colleague, do not access the microphone without my permission. Also, for information, you ask the Member who is holding the Floor. Unfortunately, his time is gone – because he can only give you part of his or her time.Hon. Macho, this is one of the issues, which they raised. So, we would like the committee to go back and scrutinise - they usually do for us a very good job – and then we come and discuss the committee report, adopt the resolutions and then, task Government to ensure that the resolutions are implemented. MR NAMBESHE:  Mr Speaker, I am on the same KACITA petition – and you are the custodian of our rules. Under normal procedure, Mr Speaker, such a petition should be read in the House before its reference to the relevant committee. However, today, things have changed and that is why – but I am not challenging your ruling. (Laughter) I am only reminding you that where we go astray, correction is welcome.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nambeshe, you know the rules. Give me authority to either send that petition to the minister, or bring it on the Floor or send it to the committee. So, if it is given to a Member, he or she can read it on the Floor but this is given to the Speaker, not Hon. 5875THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022Nambeshe. That is the difference between the two Members. (Laughter) In the end, it will come here. This came to me directly and I used my authority, as per the rules, to refer it to the committee.I had allowed Hon. Okot Ogong. Colleagues, today, we have a very long Order Paper; I do not want us to take much of our time.2.21MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I am also rising on the issue of KACITA. I agree with you that this matter went straight to your office and it is now your authority to direct it to a committee that you will choose to handle that petition.However, I would like to request that if it pleases you, it should be referred to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to handle that matter because they have been handling that petition for a long time.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which committee did I refer it to? I referred it to the trade committee, honourable colleague. Thank you.2.23MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know on the Order Paper, we have a statement on Ebola but I wanted to seek your indulgence. Some institutions have been closed in areas where Ebola has been reported but we have colleagues here who are residents in those areas. (Laughter) I have known this Parliament for taking precautions, especially on a matter as serious as Ebola, yet these colleagues have been allowed to interact and socialise with us, as if there are no problems in their areas. (Laughter)So, I would like to seek your indulgence; whether they can be asked to excuse themselves for the general good of Parliament. I had wanted to raise that under Rule 59, which is a matter of privilege, but I thought, Mr Speaker, under your general authority, you can deal with it.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You see, the funny bit with this is if there is anyone I will start with, it is Hon. Ssemujju because Kasangati - Kasangati is not his area. He has survived me because I knew Kasangati.  (Laughter)  I was going to order, right away, for –(Laughter)- but I can say Wakiso District, where he is a resident.However, honourable colleagues, the other day, I asked you to exercise caution. I emphasised it on the Floor here. Now, if a case is in Kassanda or Mubende – because it is under greater Mubende – the Members should follow our guidance. What I picked from Hon. Ssemujju’s submission is that Colleagues, you need to be more cautious. Do not just go to your areas and because you are MPs, you start interacting with people, pick Ebola and bring it here. Otherwise, it is difficult for me because I do not have any proof that apart from being residents of those areas and coming from Mubende, they have been there. If I say Wakiso, most of us would go. (Laughter) So, we would not have anyone in this House. However, take what Hon. Ssemujju has raised positively; that we need to be very cautious. Hon. Teddy Nambooze? (Hon. Irene Linda rose_) Hon. Linda, what is the issue? Let me allow Hon. Linda.2.26MS IRENE LINDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Fort Portal City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to talk about the issue of the petition of KACITA; it is not only traders in Kampala who are affected. Right now, traders in Fort Portal City are demonstrating because of high taxes. So, I request that when they are handling that petition, they should also include other cities like Fort Portal, Mbarara and others because they are equally affected. Thank you. 5876MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, in my letter, I have told them to handle general issues to do with traders. Thank you. Hon. Teddy Nambooze, a maximum of two minutes. 2.27MS TEDDY NAMBOOZE (NUP, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of urgent importance, regarding 250 families at Bugayi Village, Bumoozi Ward in Mpigi Town Council, who are being forced to vacate their land in an illegal process by a team led by David Senkya, the so-called administrator of the late William Mubanda’s estate. The aforementioned victims are bibanja holders who have been on this land for a long period of time and paying rental fees. This qualifies them as lawful occupants. Regrettably, with impunity, the estate administrators have gone ahead to fence off, destroying people’s crops and denying them access to their plots. Mr Speaker, although the DPC of Mpigi engaged both parties in a harmonisation meeting on the 12th of August, all orders she issued were foiled. This matter is becoming a security threat because of growing tension between the two antagonistic parties. My prayer is that let the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development visit the locus to diagnose this matter and give an everlasting solution because as it appears, the security office has failed to yield harmony. My second prayer is that may the minister also call the party claiming ownership to avail the documents regarding ownership of this land. I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Attorney-General, you have been helping us very much on this matter and you have made very strong statements on matters of eviction. Can you help us here?2.29THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleague, what we have been doing with cases that have several persons involved in land disputes - whether it is privately-owned or Government-owned - is that we request you to give us the details so that we get involved in the case.At times, we are forced to acquire these properties because there are probably three subcounties and you can no longer remove them from the land. So, I request that you share the details of this case. I will take it up with my office and I will also follow up with the lands Ministry. That is what we are generally doing. Any case that involves more than 100 people, the Attorney-General’s Chambers gets involved. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Dr Ayume, you had two matters. Please, raise one. 2.30DR CHARLES AYUME (NRM, Koboko Municipality, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two weeks ago, there was a grenade blast in Koboko Municipality and killed a 14-year-old Jamal Aliga and injured his four siblings. I would like the Minister of Security to tell us whether this is an act of terrorism or war material left behind from previous insurgencies. Cognisant that this is a municipality, there is need for some level of compensation to the family that lost one child and had four children injured. Mr Speaker, that speaks into the 16 schools that I counted this year, where there have been strikes that led to loss of property and loss of life within the West Nile Region. I would also like the Ministry of Education and Sports to come up with a statement but most importantly, investigate these strikes that have plagued the West Nile Region this year. Thank you.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5877THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You got a way of bringing up two issues when I told you one; but you are forgiven. Chief Whip, I know you can handle even issues of grenades.2.31THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP  (Mr Denis Obua): Mr Speaker, I believe the issue raised by the honourable member should go to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. My office undertakes to write and also inform the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Education and Sports. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The one of education is here – Hon. Muyingo. MR OBUA: Since the honourable minister is here, my office undertakes to handle the one with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. If you give him time next week, the minister can make a statement on the Floor.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, say something on continuous strikes in West Nile schools.2.32THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr John Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have taken note of what the honourable member has presented. I am going to investigate and report back. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. On reporting back, we shall work it out with the Clerk depending on the recess period we shall have. 2.33DR PATRICK ISINGOMA  (Independent, Hoima East Division, Hoima City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance. This is to do with the payment of salaries and wages of staff in district local governments. Districts and city governments are stuck; they are unable to process salaries of civil servants because of the failure of the finance ministry and the Ministry of Public Service to release money catering for the enhanced salaries of science teachers and medical workers. Mr Speaker, you and I know that by this time, ordinarily, all civil servants should have been paid salaries but that is not so for the district local governments. My prayer is for the public service and finance ministries - these two should rise up to the occasion and sort out this problem as quickly as possible before we end up in a very embarrassing situation. (A Member rose_)Thank you. Information from my friend here. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not on matters of national importance.MR ISINGOMA-MWESIGWA: Okay, sit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is your colleague ordering you to sit, not me. 2.34THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Grace Mugasa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also want to thank our MP of Hoima City for this question. Indeed, all of us are aware of this issue and we are rising up to the occasion, as you said, to expedite the process of paying salaries across the local governments. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister. When are they receiving money? Just tell us because you have said that, indeed, you have managed to move fast.MS MUGASA: Mr Speaker –(Interjections) – yes, that is how the Member clarified. I have told you and the Members that we are expediting the process. We, as the Ministry of Public Service already submitted our request. We are now waiting for funds from the finance ministry.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, the finance minister is coming; I will ask him to update us on that. Hon. Ssasaga, I have your issue of Uganda National Examination Board UNEB withholding examination materials. 5878MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION2.36MR ISAIAS SSASAGA  (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I posed it to the Prime Minister who talked of getting back to the education minister but since he is around, maybe he can clarify.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, raise it properly so that he can clarify. MR SSASAGA:  Mr Speaker, UNEB is withholding examination materials for several schools for both UCE and UACE over clearance by the schools to SESEMAT and UNSA; yet, the candidates cleared all their registration fees to UNEB. If UNEB has any misunderstanding with those other bodies, it should not attach the examination materials nor results of the schools. Therefore, I would like the ministry to update us on the status of the understanding between the education ministry, UNEB, SESEMAT and UNSA. Secondly, UNEB should refrain from attaching results of schools based on their understanding with SESEMAT and UNSA because those are voluntary contributions from schools to those bodies and they are not legally binding. Thank you. 2.38THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr John Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week, UNEB started conducting national O-Level examinations. I am happy to inform you that we started with Oral French and the exercise went on very well. Every candidate who had been registered to do French did it. I thank God for that. About withholding examination materials, as I said, all those who had registered for French did it. However, I am going to follow up on this matter of withholding materials. I want to agree with my colleague and make sure that UNEB concentrates on its mandate and leaves others to conduct their business as mandated by law. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you - clarification is to the Minister and he has not allowed you.2.39MR TARSIS RWABURINDORE (NRM, Ibanda Municipality, Ibanda):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. In the recent weeks in Ibanda District, we have had torrential rains; storms affecting many of our areas, especially the hilly areas, which border Buhweju. Houses have been razed, gardens swept, animals and banana plantations washed away.The rains have also swept our roads and bridges. In town –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your prayers, honourable member, because your time is about to end.MR RWABURINDORE: In Bufunda, in the middle of the town, the rain has swept off a road and cut it off. We have ditches up – (Interjections)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us listen to the honourable member. MR RWABURINDORE:  Up to eight feet. My prayers are:1. We request for relief food and items. 2. If you can ask the Prime Minister’s Office, we can also get some – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I told you time would be done but thank you for representing your people. Government - 2.41THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the honourable member for raising this. We are waiting for the letter written by the Chief Administrative Officer on behalf of the district disaster committee. We COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5879THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022apologise for what happened. We are ready; just send your request and the office will get in touch with you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, the finance minister has come; we can handle his statement.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT UPDATE ON GOVERNMENT’S FINANCING OF COFFEE, TEA SEEDLINGS AND OTHER PLANTING MATERIALSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as you come, later, you will also clarify to us when you will release money for the payment of salaries for districts and cities. Otherwise, the Minister of Public Service said he has already submitted to you.2.42THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLAN-NING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOP-MENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Most obliged. Mr Speaker, this is a statement about the planned distribution of verified coffee and tea seedlings on the deferred payments. That state -ment is already uploaded on your machines.  (Laughter) Don’t you know machines?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we upload on a system and the system is run on machines.MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, thank you for the correction. Last week, I promised to return to this House on the issue of the supply of coffee and tea seedlings in view of the petitions from the various stakeholders seeking intervention to avert the risk of losses to nursery operators and farmers missing out on the second planting season on account of the lack of seedlings to plant. Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, until Financial Year 2021/2022, Government policy has been for Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) and the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) to procure seedlings from certified coffee and tea nursery operators. However, Government, effective this Financial Year 2022/2023, decided to transfer funding previously budgeted for procurement of seedlings from UCDA and NAADS to the Parish Development Model. This policy change did not provide for any transition to address the already produced seedlings by certified nursery operators to supply to the farmers. Consequently, there are mature coffee and tea seedlings the certified nursery operators have in stock that will be unsuitable for planting, if not planted during the current season. Colleagues, the total value of the mature seedlings of coffee and tea available for planting in the September/November period is estimated at Shs 93.3 billion.Government has decided to allow the nursery operators to supply the farmers on the requisition by the leadership of the parish SACCOs. This leadership will be charged with the responsibility of ensuring there is no air supply or inflated claims. There is a table, which shows the estimated value of the available tea and coffee seedlings. Tea is Shs 53 billion and coffee is Shs 39 billion.  The total is a 93 billion. Mr Speaker, this will be a one-off intervention to evacuate the mature coffee and tea seedlings. Payment for the off-takes will be settled by Government in two financial years, that is, Financial Year 2023/2024, and 2024/2025. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Colleagues, you remember when the minister said he did not have that money, we gave a proposal since we had a petition from the nursery bed operators who said “Allow us to supply, then you can pay within three years.” So, this is in line with the prayers that were in the petition. What is very important is ensuring that this does not stop here.  Honourable minister, right 5880MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONaway, direct NAADS and UCDA to start the supply process. Otherwise, rain is not waiting for us. Honourable Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, would you like to say something? 2.48THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, from the ministers’ statement, it is the parish SACCOs not NAADS or UCDA. It is important to understand that . (Interjections)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in short, you wanted to technically knock us out and indirectly deny us the seedlings. This was a shortcut of denying us seedlings because these SACCOs are not yet constituted. That is why you have not yet released the money for the Parish Development Model. The rain will not wait for you to constitute the SACCOs. Can the Attorney-General first help me on this?2.49THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let us not half-represent. The identification of the beneficiaries will be at that level; the procurement is at a different level.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you be specific about the level?  MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, we have two challenges. We cannot procure seedlings, which are not going to be off-taken.  Government does not have the ability at this point to determine the need. Therefore, the need is to be determined. (Interjections)  Let me finish.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, better listen, and then, I will give you a chance to rebuttal his submission. Do not allow yourself to be confused. If he is trying to confuse you, do not allow it. If you allow yourself to be confused, it is your problem. MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The determination of the demand is being referred to the SACCOs. (Interjections)  Honourable members, let us first listen to each other. There is a certain demand for seedlings, which is unknown at this point.Mr Speaker, you could guide us – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable At-torney-General –(Members rose_) Colleagues, I am going to give you a chance. Let me first put this to the Attorney-General – from my ex-perience in the constituency. Attorney-General, I was in my constituency the other Monday, meeting coffee farmers, after being told by the President that we must mobilise our people to go into cash crops, to liberate our economy. The UCDA wrote, through Operation Wealth Creation, to all Community Development Officers (CDOs) at subcounty level that everyone who wants coffee seedlings should register. Now, in my constituency, they did not only do that. They said: “Registration is not enough. You go and dig holes. Operation Wealth Creation is going to come and count the holes you have dug. If you have dug 20 holes, you will be given 20 seedlings even if you had asked for 100 seedlings.” That has been done. The holes have been ready for over two months. What we need are seedlings. (Applause)We submitted everything to the district to rely. Now, you are saying: “We appreciate that, but we do not want to go that way. What we need is for a parish SACCO to be the one to go and identify.” However, the SACCOs are not in place. That is the clarification we need; who is going to identify the farmers who are ready to receive the seedlings? MS AGNES ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the minister talking about procedural issues to do with [The Deputy Speaker]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5881THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022coffee and I wonder whether we are proceeding right, discussing an item in the budget that was appropriated by this House. When you start talking about the two financial years - we appropriated money for coffee seedlings to a tune of Shs 30 billion. Is the proposal you are bringing now for another financial year or this financial year? Mr Speaker, the issue of parish SACCOs has nothing to do with coffee. What we are talking about now is that the holes are ready, the coffee seedlings have overgrown and money has been appropriated for coffee. Are we really proceeding right to allow the minister to come with stories to this House all the time? I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, we are proceeding well because we are telling the minister to explain. Honourable minister, would you like to first make a clarification? (Hon. Oshabe rose_) Hon. Oshabe, before you come, please, allow the minister.  MR MATIA KASAIJA:  I am glad the honourable member there has clarified. There is money in the budget but that money is not sufficient to cover what we have in stock. Therefore –[Members: “Order.”]- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, you make my work difficult. Honourable minister, please, continue.MR MATIA KASAIJA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. What we are talking about is a balance: there is money in the budget but that money is not sufficient to cover all the cost of the seedlings in the nurseries. That is why we are saying that, that amount will be paid in the next two financials years.2.56MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Mr Speaker, in the minister’s statement, he said that when they were designing the PDM, there was no transition plan.They have no transition plan from the previous institutions that had been managing seedlings. These are our institutions – UCDA and NAADS are Government institutions, which still exist. The minister should tell us what is wrong with these institutions to the extent that he is going to recommend associations, which do not exist at the moment. Mr Speaker, UCDA in Kassanda, has structures for identifying coffee farmers and they have just taken us through a process. In my constituency, they identified 300,000 holes already dug by the farmers. The UCDA has the record. Now, the minister is here, telling us to start another process when we are talking about planting this season – and this season means today, tomorrow and next week –(Interruption) MR ENOS ASIIMWE:  Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague and the House that at the start of the season, in May, UCDA called for applications and farmers put in their requests for the seedlings. These records are with UCDA. The moment you talk about identifying those who want or demand, you are getting it wrong because the demand has already been identified and UCDA has the records. All that we are waiting for are the seedlings. Apparently, you have accepted to supply seedlings on credit, which is very good. I would rather we pick the records that are with UCDA and have the seedlings supplied on time because we only have about four weeks left for the rains to stop. MS OSHABE: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to urge the finance minister - the process you are talking about is already done by UCDA. Kindly, accept to work with UCDA and we get the coffee seedlings for our farmers. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What we are saying is very simple. You are referring the matter to SACCO leadership when I do not have SACCOs in my area. It is as if you are working with rainmakers for the rains to wait for us.5882MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONWe do not have SACCOs. If the SACCOs were ready, honourable minister, you would have already given them money for the PDM. The reason you have not released money for the PDM is because the SACCOs are not ready. So, how are they going to help us procure seedlings?3.00MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the Clerk read the item on the Order Paper, he talked about seedlings – which are coffee and tea seedlings as well as other seeds. The minister’s statement has been limited to coffee and tea, not aware that we are coming from areas that badly need other seeds as per the requests that we made here the other day.Secondly, as far as tea and coffee are concerned, the needs assessment was already done. The numbers were raised; we want the honourable minister to add on the aspect of other seeds that we are waiting for in the rest of the country other than areas where some of us do not grow tea. (Interruption) Information, Hon. Solomon. MR SILWANY: Mr Speaker-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, please, take your seat. Hon. Bwanika? 3.01DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The PDM SACCOs are made up of 39 per cent of the households in Uganda. These people are characterised by having no land - they are landless. We cannot send the work of identifying coffee farmers to the PDM SACCO. Hon. Kasaija, why do you want to kill coffee and tea in this country? First of all, you know that the SACCOs are not even there. Secondly, these are 39 per cent of the farmers. Do you want the 39 per cent to decide for the 61 per cent? The work of identifying the farmers has already been done by the UCDA. Leave them to do their work; they have identified the farmers and they have the nursery proprietors. Let them give us the seedlings so that we continue. Rains are getting over. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, Hon. Mwijukye, and then the agriculture minister. It seems he wants to say something.3.02MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You do not have to be extra-intelligent to see the problem. You started with the finance minister, then the agriculture minister came in, then the Attorney-General who made the situation worse. (Laughter) Of course, I cannot accuse your Government of incompetence but even simple things, you cannot explain. Mr Speaker, the finance minister is aware that this Parliament took a decision and stopped you from financing Munyonyo, which is a private entity. You have just written to the Auditor-General requesting for permission to give Munyonyo money, yet, Parliament did not approve it. Coffee, which is the mainstay of our population - you are saying the money is not sufficient. Really, I do not know whether you are sabotaging Government or are already tired and in retirement. You give a private person money to construct a hotel - one person; yet, you have farmers without seedlings and the rain is about to stop. You have the courage to come to Parliament and tell us that the money is not sufficient. (Applause) Sincerely, Hon. Matia Kasaija –(Member timed out.)3.04MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last week, when the minister said he was consulting, I asked him, “Who are you consulting?” because I had talked to NAADs and they said he has not talked to them. I had talked to UCDA and he had not talked to them either. Even with the agriculture minister - (Interruption)[The Deputy Speaker]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5883THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order?MR KASAIJA:  Is the Member of Parliament from Buhweju in order to tell lies that I, Matia Kasaija Rwabyamuhito –(Laughter)– have not talked to NAADS? I was with NAADS and UCDA yesterday. What are you talking about? Is he in order? (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwijukye and Hon. Kasaija, your issues are beyond here. (Laughter) Colleagues, it is not good to call each other liars and it goes on the record of Parliament. That is not an honourable way of doing things. You can doubt what he said - whether it was true or not - but you cannot say it is a lie and it goes on record. I know you are good friends.MR MWIJUKYE: Of course, we are. I am only disappointed with him. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development knows that his role is limited to availability of money and committing Government to pay but the role of implementing and distribution is for the agriculture ministry with agencies like UCDA and NAADS. What is happening now is that the finance ministry wants to go into distribution. They want to decide the modalities, which are limited to agriculture. That is why the agriculture minister is saying, “If they are talking about SACCOs, then it is not us.” Secondly, Mr Speaker, I speak for Buhweju. The agriculture minister did a verification report about how many seedlings we have and how many farmers want them; they have a report. They wrote to finance ministry and he has a copy. One wonders why he wants to begin afresh, at the end of a process. I really do not want to go that way. Mr Speaker, as I conclude –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Silwany and Hon. Omara? Let us conclude.3.07MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I thank you and the minister. In my constituency and in Busoga, UCDA came and visited the farmers; farmers borrowed money to hire labour to dig holes. Farmers got loans with the expectation that they were going to get the seedlings immediately. They borrowed money to procure manure and to dig holes. What do we tell these farmers? The interest rate on the loans keeps rising and the farmers are stranded. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Hon. Omara?3.08MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the finance minister for accepting that Parliament appropriated money for coffee and tea seedlings. There are institutions that are responsible for distributing those items. What I would want to see is the money being given to those entities to deal with the seedlings, which are now available. If the money is not sufficient, the agriculture minister can come back here for more money for us to give under a supplementary budget. What is important – I support this; in Lango we have started growing coffee but not as much. As an economist, the coffee sector is now giving us to the tune of Shs 900 million every financial year because it is the backbone of our economy. The Committee on Budget advised Parliament that this money should be appropriated for coffee and tea, although the Executive has said, “No.” I think they are not being supportive. Let them exercise their role and make sure the money is released to UCDA and NAADS, to handle coffee and tea seedlings. That is what we need. I submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rwampara County representative - 5884MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION3.09MR AMOS KIBWIKA (NRM, Rwampara County, Rwampara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank colleagues for very good submissions and the person behind having coffee, tea and other crops that are a backbone of this economy. Mr Speaker, you are aware that pitting has already been done, and that is the process that helps us to have a good ending; having ready pits at the beginning but also having quality seedlings. I have heard submissions that are intending to negate the intervention of NAADS and UCDA. Who is going to control the quality of the seedlings we are getting? If that is not done and they are picked by the so-called SACCOs, we are going to fail the process from the beginning. It is important, therefore, that we let UCDA and NAADS remain in quality control.3.11MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Those of us from the north have been encouraged to enter into the perennial crops. Now the finance minister is letting us down. Even when he read the National Budget Speech, he never mentioned the PDM. He is now talking about SACCOs. Honestly, UCDA is the most competent body to deal with coffee seedlings and other crops. The UCDA has already put plans - they even appointed agents all over the districts to supervise the planting of this coffee; this is also true of Koboko. Now, what is this SACCO going to do? Who in particular do we go to, to verify this? SACCOs are anonymous in the villages.Please, my appeal to the minister is that you should not disappoint us who are trying to respond to the President’s appeal to grow perennial crops. Give it back to UCDA so that they supervise these processes properly. Thank you.  MR ODUR:  Mr Speaker, the point of procedure I am raising relates to the statement the minister brought to us, in which statement he says that they sat down and decided to move the funding, which touches on the constitutionality of Article 156 - Appropriation.When Parliament budgets, it processes a Bill under a specific heading, indicating what Parliament appropriates money to, be it UCDA or another entity. Are we right to entertain a statement that overthrows the powers of this Parliament, by moving a vote appropriated by Parliament to something that is alien to this House? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you want to respond to that?MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, let us cut the long story short; there is money in the budget. It should have come up in the statement. That will be taken care of. I was with UCDA and NAADS yesterday. I am talking about those extra seedlings because the money you appropriated is about Shs 35 billion but the seedlings are worth Shs 93 billion. There is a difference of Shs 60 billion. To cut the long story short, we shall release the money to UCDA and NAADS as per the budget. However, for the extra seedlings, I beg Parliament to listen to us; they should go through the process, which I am telling you now.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, if you had started that way, we would not have had any problem, because there is no way Parliament can tell you to go and procure seedlings, which they did not appropriate for. We are talking about money we appropriated because - let us be clear, Colleagues. For the money we appropriated, when are we starting to receive the seedlings? Let that be the question. Just allow me to finish – (Mr Ssewungu rose_)  Hon. Ssewungu, there is no way a minister can stand up and you say that the minister is not going to tell you the truth. He is the minister; MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5885THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022you approved him. He will tell the truth. That is indiscipline. Please, give your colleague the benefit of doubt.MR MATIA KASAIJA:  Hon. Ssewungu, you should learn to respect people.(Laughter) I am an old man; I do not know how many years younger you are -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kasaija, stop quarrelling. ( Laughter) MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, for the time I have been here, I have been very careful and sometimes, I keep quiet when things are going on. The practice in this country on seedlings has been thus: whenever we pass the budget, those in charge of Operation Wealth Creation, go out and allow people to provide seedlings to farmers before the money is paid. That has been the practice. What is happening now is that people have already dug holes, but there are no seedlings provided. Actually, Nalweyo Seed Company has been providing beans, maize and other seedlings before payment is made.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your point of order?MR SSEWUNGU: Is it in order for the honourable minister, who is fond of giving misleading information, to come before this House and hide under extra seedlings?  We have not seen those, which were budgeted for and the farmers who provide seedlings are paid almost every two years.Seedlings should have been given out by now. The farmers who have provided these seedlings will be demanding money from UCDA. Why are you giving misleading information? - and you were in Church last Sunday. (Laughter) Can you go for penance instead of attacking the person of Hon. Ssewungu, who is giving good information after being allowed by the Speaker? Apologise before this House.Let the farmers get their seedlings because payments always come after that. Thank you. (Interjections)  So, is he in order? (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, it was not in order for you to make your submission, conclude and sit down, and then you allow Hon. Mwijukye to mislead you to come back on the Floor and raise another question. (Laughter)Colleagues, when you put it on the Hansard that someone made a misleading statement and it goes on the record of the Hansard, then it means we are a House, which can be misled, and we are not even able to challenge those misleading us. It means it is still standing on the record of the House, and yet, we never subjected a Member to any process or debated and concluded that he misled the House. So, Hon. Ssewungu, first clarify that. You can say the statements are not satisfactory but when you say, “He is misleading the House”, that would be wrong.MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, it is on record. We know that Hon. Matia Kasaija always says that the economy is “swii”. (Laughter) Secondly, he is aware of the practice. Even if you go to UCDA –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, do not bring statements, which were made in the media and formalise them on this Floor.MR SSEWUNGU: Even right now, Mr Speaker, he has not released funds - Coffee seedlings can be given out before funds are released. He knows that they always pay these people after almost two years when they are still demanding. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, what I am telling you is simple; it is not you to declare submissions of this House as misleading. Can you change the language?MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, that is why I avoided the word “lying” and used the word “misleading” because it is more polite. (Laughter) Indeed, the word “misleading” is very accommodative. However, in the interest 5886MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONof Hon. Matia Kasaija not getting “pressure” from here, I withdraw the statement that he is misleading. Otherwise, he is not telling us what we need. (Mr Sseggona rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, is it on the same? [Mr Lubega-Sseggona: “No”] Honourable colleagues, if you are misled, do not judge the whole House to have been misled. If you do not understand a colleague and you are misled, that is your problem, not a problem of the whole House. Honourable members, let us be cautious of the language we use. I try to be flexible but sometimes, you push us into a corner. The minister was still on the Floor. (Mr Mpuuga rose_) Leader of the Opposition, I will allow you. Let us finish this matter.MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said, let us cut the long story short. The money in the budget is going to be released. (Interjections)  I need to check with the Treasury. (Laughter) Just hold on because I do not want to tell you “tomorrow”.  Please, I do not release the cash. I can come back tomorrow to tell you when exactly - or allow me to get out and consult with my Permanent Secretary. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, colleagues have told you the practise and you know it. What we need are seedlings. You will pay these people later. So, can we say that tomorrow, you will write to the agriculture minister, authorising him to start the process of procuring seedlings? Period.MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, there are now two segments. There is a segment where we have the money in the budget –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We appropriated and we are on that one. MR MATIA KASAIJA: That is what I was talking about and somebody here asked “When are you going to release the money?” We are going to release it as soon as possible but I cannot say it is tomorrow because I have to check the Treasury, as I said.Colleagues, let us understand each other. For the rest, we shall supply them in accordance with what we are proposing and pay them in two financial years.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Agriculture minister, when are you procuring seedlings? The minister has said money is available.MR TUMWEBAZE: Let this issue not divide us. First of all, we have all won one step. The finance ministry has committed to allowing nursery operators to supply. That is step number one and Mr Speaker, you have been passionate about that. Even if there is no money to release tomorrow or even later, as long as the finance minister and the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury write to allow responsible institutions to commit and supply, the supply will go on. (Applause) The rest of the details on how agriculture and finance will monitor - you see, at one point, the finance minister is saying even when seedlings were being distributed by NAADs and OWC, there were complaints on seedlings coming late. There were complaints about poultry. Why the Executive wants the farmers, through their SACCOs, to participate is because of a control measure; do not mind about it. Let the supplier be authorised. We shall work out a mechanism with the finance ministry and PDM, which is on the ground, and we shall verify. (Interjections)  Please, just be patient.  We shall verify who has been supplied such that you do not come back here to say there was “air” supply. Even UCDA wants help from the districts and farmer SACCOs. The Treasury is tight; the economy is tight. Every penny spent must be accounted for. Mr Speaker, I stand here to say that we should not harass Hon. Kasaija. Let us stand with him. He has accepted to authorise the money. Allow us to give orders to certify the nursery operators but allow the mechanism of verification to be an administrative function of the ministries.[Mr Ssewungu]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5887THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, we shall not finish this matter. What we have captured is very simple; first is the money which we appropriated.  Honourable minister, we cannot push you on money we never appropriated. Next time, avoid that because you are trapping us. You want us to make a resolution without going through the due process of appropriation. That is your administrative matter, which you can handle. We are limiting ourselves to money, which we appropriated. All we are saying is simple: the rains are not waiting for us and that is why you are seeing all this pressure. Colleagues, we still have around two or three weeks of rain. So, what we need, honourable minister, is for you to authorise the responsible entities, in line with money, which was appropriated. Limit yourself to the money that was appropriated and then, we start planting. That is very simple. You can verify and make payments the way you have been doing but please, inform farmers. If you do not want to go on with that business in future, then you will inform people that next time you start doing nursery beds, Government will not be able to buy your seedlings. We do not want to go into the administrative issues but the arguments here have taken us in. Leader of Opposition - 3.28THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason this debate raged on this long is because probably, Hon. Kasaija, a veteran and fairly decent man, got this House on the wrong side. First of all, if the finance ministry desired to amend the Appropriation Bill, they would come with a Bill to amend. He is aware there was no release in quarter one. Out of the Shs 30 billion for coffee, Shs 12 billion for tea and Shs 9 billion for oil seeds, nothing was released. So, what he did not tell the House is who asked for the extra he was referring to, before the original money was released. I can only ask of this House to take this vigilance you are exhibiting today seriously. That is what makes you a House of Parliament. I am very sure the finance minister probably did not bear in mind the fact that the House was alert.The reason I was insisting on speaking is to again ask the finance ministry to assure you and the House that tomorrow, he will bring that statement demanded on releases because that is where we have very serious issues. Our insistence on this statement is not in vain and the House can now see why we have been insistent on a statement of releases for this financial year. Finance, if you want to change appropriation, this is the House of Parliament. Please, move formally. You cannot catch us sleeping. If you want to change the way Government planned, please, come here formally and make a case. We all know you are struggling with cash but you cannot succeed in short-changing the House of Parliament that made this budget. (Applause) We can work with you to agree on what is workable in the circumstances. Quarter two is on the horizon - barely a few days away – and you are saying people are demanding for extra. Who is asking for extra? We must know that person who is demanding extra in these hard times.Therefore, we ask of you to move decently. I have known my brother, the agriculture minister for being smart. I do not know who bewitched you today to allow – (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you want to say we have a bewitched Member in the House? (Laughter)MR MPUUGA: To attempt to come and take us for a ride. However, the fact of the matter is that Government must move as per the plan. Unless finance will have to come and say that Government long collapsed, please, stick to the budget. We shall not demand for more. 5888MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONThe demands of our people are legitimate. The suppliers of these seedlings are known to receiving their payments late. Of course, Government is known for being a serial debtor. That is acceptable. However, can we do this together, honourable minister? We shall give you support. Before, you come to the House for a supplementary, let us deal with this and then, we shall move forward in the next financial year. However, do not bring a supplementary for consumption: bring it for productive sectors. Thank you. 3.31MR MEDARD SSEGGONA  (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I kept quiet as I saw the debate raising voices. Mr Speaker, I have spoken in this Parliament before and I would encourage you - for the time you preside over this House - for Parliament to be seen to be an institution builder. We have spoken against proliferation of institutions in this country. Now, we can see the price. One, you have NAADS whose mandate has been expanded beyond the statutory lines that it was created for. The NAADS is intended to provide technical advisory services. We took it into distribution of seedlings.We created another in an ad hoc manner - Operation Wealth Creation. What it is doing is not defined by law. We brought this thing called the PDM and we asked a question: “Where is the legal framework for PDM?” It is not there, not even a policy framework. Now, you can see how we are running a disjointed Government by looking at each other in competition and fighting. You can see how the agriculture minister comes here and tells you a story; the finance minister is telling you a different story. My big brother, the Attorney-General, comes to guide and you see the reaction.Maybe going forward, after this rainy season - because it is leaving us - we need to come back here and look at the institutions we created consciously and those that we might have created subconsciously or even unconsciously, to harmonise operations of Government. Finally - and this is where I felt for my big brother, again, the finance minister –(Interjections)-  Someone is telling me - no, he is not a jajja. We are colleagues in this institution. When we give you our money, your duty, first of all, is to disburse. Then, you come back and tell us, “your demands are more than what you appropriated.” However, you are telling us to speak in the future and say you are looking at Shs 90 billion. Finally, as the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government), one of the areas we are looking at, which is causing a lot of concern, is domestic arrears. You engage these people, fail to pay them and you cripple the economy. (Interruption) MR SSEMUJJU:  Thank you, Hon. Medard. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give to Hon. Medard Sseggona is that the President took 600 Soldiers to Makerere - I think some of them are here - to train in seed distribution. Now, instead of distributing seeds, they are in Parliament, just listening. (Laughter) MR SSEGGONA: Information received.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, have you concluded?MR SSEGGONA: On this one, I concluded, Mr Speaker. I just wanted us to sit down and re-organise our Government.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. (Ms Kasule Lumumba rose_) Hon. Lumumba, do you have an issue? Do you want to respond to Hon. Ssemujju? MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I just want to inform Hon. Sseggona that Hon. Raphael Magyezi, the Minister of Local Government, laid on the Table here the PDM policy. Thank you.[Mr Mpuuga]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5889THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, we had another issue, which I had promised that I would pass on to you for a quick answer. This is on enhanced salaries for science teachers and civil servants in cities and districts. When are you releasing the money? The public service minister said they have already written to you and they are just waiting for you to give them the money and they implement.MR MATIA KASAIJA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. When our cash flow permits, I shall release the money. (Interjections)  I cannot add more than that. Definitely, we know the obligations and we will fulfil them but at what time is what I am not sure about because of the cash flow.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us allow the minister to go and consult on this matter. Tomorrow, honourable minister, we need your response to the issues raised by the Leader of the Opposition. It will be a substantive item on the Order Paper in regard to finance and releases. The time we gave has already expired. I have directed the Clerk to make it a substantive item. Next item. (Mr Oshabe rose_) Colleagues, shall we finish if we continue like this? Hon. Nsamba, is it a procedural matter?3.38MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have the opportunity that the agriculture minister is in the House. I have an experience with my farmers and they say Government borrowed money from them, promising inputs through the Agriculture Cluster Development Programme but it did not give them inputs. After sitting with their money – in fact, the person told me: “After making the profits on our money, they are not going to give us inputs; they are returning the money.” The agriculture minister is here. He is aware that the Agriculture Cluster Development Programme that was rolled out in 57 districts is about to close. However, some farmers have not received the inputs they paid for. Secondly, there was a project where rural farm organisations were supported to do post-harvesting. Up to now, when the project is about to close, those farmers are stuck. They do not have money and they are stuck with projects that cannot produce, yet they invested their little money. The agriculture minister should help us understand whether they are going to give farmers the inputs they paid for. Secondly, what are the farmers, who are stuck with those projects, going to do with them if they are not linked to financial institutions for credit?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have a quick answer or do we give you time?MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I would not wish to give you off-cuff remarks. Of course, I know the whole story but I would request - because I have much respect for this House that I belong to. I request that I bring a written statement with all the facts about that project, and I will even tell you the challenges, which we have been trying to resolve.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please do, honourable minister. We shall give you space on the Order Paper.MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you. MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and sorry for this interjection. On Wednesday, 21 September 2022, Uganda in general, and the Judiciary in particular celebrated and commemorated the day of the late Chief Justice Benedict Kiwanuka. I thank the President of Uganda for having accepted the invitation. The President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Museveni, attended as Chief Guest, which I saw as a very good gesture 5890MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONin the presence of the Attorney-General, who is the head of the Bar. In his remarks, the President mentioned that the Executive he leads will continue to disobey court orders as long as they feel they are not good. I expected the Attorney-General as the Chief Legal Advisor and head of the Bar to allay our fears - Ben Kiwanuka died because there was an Executive that believed in defying court orders. I had expected the Attorney-General to guide and to inform Parliament of the steps he is taking in advising the President to avoid making such - I do not want to say “scandalous statements”, because he is the President. However, I want to say “statements that scare the nation”.Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) across the country, District Internal Security Officers (DISOs) and District Police Commanders (DPCs) had started a crude culture of defying court orders; they have now been re-energised. May we hear from the Attorney-General, whether we are continuing to construct a monumental tyrant by the speeches that he makes?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now this is beyond procedure but since it is a very critical matter, and we have our able Attorney-General here, he can respond and then, we move forward.4.43THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I did attend - I was there. My learned friend knows that my mandate under Article 119 does not include writing speeches .  (Laugh-ter) However, I can also confirm for the record, that the President did not make the statements that are attributed to him in the press. If you take those statements out of context, you get a problem. The President was talking about the need for us to have a long and concerted conversation about what our understanding, as a society, of justice is. He raised a question, for example, if you get an order to evict three sub-counties, is that our understanding of justice? Isn’t that what causes the confusion between the judicial system and the RDCs? He did not say to anyone not to follow a court orders. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I think what the Member wanted is to be reassured; that is reassuring. In addition, colleagues, beyond that, these two Arms of Government that were talking to each other. I hope they can carry on the dialogue, whichever fora they use to always dialogue. MS KABASHARIRA:  Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me the chance. Some time back, when this Parliament had just started, Gen. Muhoozi entered this House dressed in a manner that was not Parliamentary. Another time, Gen. Kahinda Otafiire came and he was also ordered - actually, someone said that he was wearing curtain material. We have a dress code in this Parliament, detailing how the gentlemen and ladies dress. Is the agriculture minister, my friend Hon. Frank Tumwebaze –(Interjections)-  No, it is not a curtain. Is he dressed properly, according to our dress code?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Do you want to say that from the farm he came straight here? (Laughter) MS KABASHARIRA:  Yes, he is dressed like a farmer.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I think there is a very thin line between African wear and most of the clothes you usually put on. I think – maybe, I will consult the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to see how we can define that very thin line. The way Hon. Frank Tumwebaze is dressed, to me, is African wear, which is very smart and decent.  Next item.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL DAY OF OLDER PERSONSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. [Mr Sseggona]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5891THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022MR SSEMUJJU: Procedure – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have a maximum of 10 minutes. I do not know what has happened today. There is a procedural issue they have raised and you know, with procedure, I am usually stuck. MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I am sorry. The issue I am raising may look like it is reopening a concluded matter - the one of seedlings. We appropriated money for PDM - and I say this because I sit on the Committee on Budget; it is also money appropriated by Parliament. If I understood - and I am sorry if I did not - the minister said the money appropriated under NAADS - specifically that one, we could release. The one appropriated under PDM for the same function, he said it could be released at leisure; that is how I understood him.  He said, “If you want this one released, we shall release but the extra one under PDM through SACCOs, which money was appropriated by this Parliament, we can release when we are -” So, that is the procedural issue I am raising for this Parliament not to be misled that the money for PDM was not appropriated by this institution and that it can be released when the minister wishes.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, if I got the minister well, he said, on seedlings, money, which we appropriated - the Shs 30 billion - he will release. However, he found that the demand is Shs 93 billion. So, there is an extra Shs 60 billion, which he would need. Now, because we have not yet appropriated that money, that is the money he was saying they want to allow people to supply seedlings after being verified by the Parish Development Model SACCOs and then, he can pay later. Honourable minister, I hope I got you well. Yes. In addition, under the PDM, we never appropriated money for seedlings. It is you, the borrower, who knows what to use the money for; you might not buy seedlings. We never said this is money for seedlings under the PDM. - No colleagues, do not take me back to this debate. Therefore, Hon. Ssemujju, I think that is very clear. We were very cautious because if we allow the minister, then we even lose the moral credibility of coming to verify that money because he would be saying, “you are the ones who put me on pressure to go and commit Government beyond what you appropriated”. So, we want to be safe by remaining within what we appropriated. 3.50THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GEN-DER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOP-MENT (ELDERLY  AFFAIRS) (Mr Dominic Gidudu): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me an opportunity to brief you on the International Day for older persons, which is on 1 October 2022.The theme is; “Resilience of older persons to cope with the modern world”. The venue will be in Nebbi District, West Nile, northern region. As you realise, because of COVID-19, we have had our celebrations in State House. However, it is now rotational; last time, it was in the eastern region, now, it is in the north. The guest of honour will be His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, Hon. Ssewungu wants your eyes to keep glued to the statement. However, I told him to summarise. I do not want us to take a lot of time on this.MR SSEWUNGU:  Mr Speaker, this is a very short statement, because already there is an irregularity here. It is for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I see the minister calling himself: “Hon. Dominic Gidudu Mafabi, Minister of State for Elderly Affairs”, we do not have such a ministry in Uganda. 5892MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONSo, all these are irregularities. However, if you read the statement as it was uploaded, we can raise issues. He is reading off-cuff and he is taking us to other interesting things.I see he is not elderly as well. He can go to his document and then, we raise our issues.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, please, let him do the necessary. MR GIDUDU:  Mr Speaker, the statement is lengthy and I learnt summary at school.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just read the statement quickly.MR GIDUDU: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to brief the honourable members about the forthcoming commemoration of the International Day for Older Persons.The purpose of this statement is to provide information to Parliament regarding this year’s International Day for Older Persons. (Interruption) MR BASALIRWA: Mr Speaker, I have in possession a document on International Day of Older Persons. What the minister is reading, incidentally does not appear on the documents that we have on the intranet. Is it procedurally right for the minister to read a document that we do not have in full?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Basalirwa, can’t you forgive an older person? (Laughter)I did not call for a response.MR BASALIRWA: Mr Speaker, I have forgiven him and that is why I am alerting him that we do not have it.  MR GIDUDU: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is my friend. Let him allow me to proceed.   THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, you are causing me trouble; you are talking about Hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s Member of Parliament. (Laughter)MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I think my neighbour is out of order because I have a copy of that statement. There is no way I would have got this copy without the system. So, I am asking you, since you are younger than me, take the trouble to search through your system and get the statement. Mr Speaker, I have a copy. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, you can share with your son. MR GIDUDU: Mr Speaker, permit me to summarise the message. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please, summarise; we have taken your time. You had 10 minutes and you are left with only five.MR GIDUDU: The guest of honour is His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Mr Speaker, we invite you together with all the Members of Parliament. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I think we have had enough. We are turning our Parliament into something else. Honourable minister, please, take your seat. Colleagues, we have had enough for sure. Now, look at the time we have spent rotating and look at the Order Paper we have. The statement is uploaded before we come to this House because we want you to read it. We will not read by listening. No, I wake up at 4.00 a.m. and I start reading to prepare for this House. Whenever I am going for Plenary, I rise by 4.00 a.m. to read. Now, if you want to come and read by listening to what they are presenting here, you are going to be in trouble. Honourable minister, please, summarise. I will allow a debate for 20 minutes. If you did not read the statement, which was uploaded on the system, it will be your problem.[Mr Ssewungu]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5893THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022MR GIDUDU:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I invite you together with the Members of Parliament to come to Nebbi in West Nile northern region, at the venue of this occasion. We also invite all our leaders at the district level in the northern region. We invite all the Members of Parliament from the northern region, more so from West Nile. Mr Speaker, I would like to let you know that this Parliament has five Older Persons. I must thank Parliament for welcoming these Members and making them feel at home. Behind me are two ladies. I would also like to let you to know that as a new department in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, we have achieved a lot. Parliament has appropriated a good budget for our national council. Parliament has also given us a special grant for Older Persons. Parliament has given us 10 per cent through the PDM to Older Persons specifically, which is Shs 500 billion out of Shs 5 trillion.  This is going to keep the Older Persons busy in whatever they are doing to participate in the economy. Saturday is 1 October and it is a weekend. All of you have no excuse for not joining us. We are going to have the oldest of the old men in the country. You will have an opportunity to interact with them and to know that life expectancy in Uganda has increased; it is now 64 years and above. Before I conclude, I also want to let you know that the SAGE Fund is still on. Development partners withdrew but Government is still retaining this Fund; Shs 25,000 per month. It is not how much you get but rather what you do with the money you get. The elders are very happy with this. Finally, I look forward to seeing all of you in Nebbi; West Nile, northern region. I submit and beg to lay the paper on the Table. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Colleagues, I am allowing 20 minutes for debate, starting with the shadow minister. Two minutes each. 4.00MS FORTUNATE NANTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we commemorate the International Day of Older Persons, I would like the state minister to clarify on the sustainability of the SAGE Programme. Under the National Budget Framework Paper 2022/2023, SAGE was indicated under the unfunded priorities. We have arrears amounting to over Shs 36 billion. The finance ministry released Shs 14.4 billion, leaving a gap of Shs 21.6 billion. The statement by the minister indicates that SAGE has been allocated Shs 120.7 billion. Yet, this amount was not indicated in the Budget Framework Paper. I would like to seek clarity from the minister: where has this money come from? Should we term it as a cash bonanza? How is it going to be allocated since Parliament did not allocate it for SAGE, especially for clearing the arrears - because it is under unfunded priorities?Secondly, the elderly have an issue of national IDs, which is a very big challenge. Over 11,000 elderly did not receive national IDs. Many of those who had, lost them, yet the Ministry of Internal Affairs indicated that replacing a national ID costs Shs 250,000. Honestly speaking, the elderly cannot afford this money. Should we task Government to come up with other mechanisms of identification so that they can access this money through other mechanisms? (Applause) Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development -  4.02THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the state minister -5894MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know what the frontbench did to Hon. Ssewungu. Today, he is very charged towards them. Who needs to repent; is it Hon. Ssewungu, or them? (Laughter) MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, I thank the state minister for the statement. When the Constitution says the age of Older Persons starts at 60 years, then, what is the eligibility age for SAGE? Two, on the special grant for the Older Persons, money is beginning to be released but where are the guidelines and the policy? This Government normally starts implementing programmes without policies. Where is the framework? Three, I had already charged the finance minister with producing the National Social Protection Strategy. I would like to know when the finance ministry and the gender ministry will lay here the National Social Protection Strategy for Uganda. Lastly, can we consider the business case on financing social protection? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Member for Terego - 4.04MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of West Nile, I thank the gender ministry for choosing Nebbi as the venue for celebrations. I also request that one of the national celebrations be held in Terego, as the youngest district in this country.  I would like to state that the elders in Terego said they will be happy to see that the age for SAGE is reduced to 60 because they retire at 60. So, why do we again wait for more than 10 years to get SAGE? I would like to get this answer from the minister. Thank you very much.  4.05MR MOSES OGWAL (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister made a statement and categorically mentioned that the elders are currently happy with the Shs 25,000. I would like to mention that the elders in Dokolo are not happy with Shs 25,000. They should consider increasing it. Thank you.4.05MS JOY WAAKO (NRM, Older Persons Representative, Female):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we do not have a motion; it is a statement we are debating. MS WAAKO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I am referring to the statement the honourable minister has just made. I would also like to add my voice; this is the day we meet different Older Persons from all corners of Uganda. So, I encourage everyone here to come, attend and see the usefulness of Older Persons and the activities, which will be taking place on that day. Thank you. 4.06MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker – (Interjections)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, let us first allow colleagues to speak; let us give them a chance.MS ATYANG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the minister for the statement to commemorate the day of the elderly. I would like to inform the minister that when the elderly were paid, majority in Moroto District missed this payment. Of course, that has been frequent. There is a lot of disappearance of the names of the Older Persons from the system, making them miss their money, yet they need it. MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5895THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022Honourable minister, I urge the ministry to improve the Older Persons data storage system to minimise the loss of their names so that they are able to get their money promptly. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Stella. Hon. Paparu -4.08MS LILLIAN PAPARU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement. I want to add to what my colleague has said about the amount of money. This money is received at the subcounty headquarters by the Older Persons but some of the subcounties are big; an elderly person from a far parish ends up using this money on transportation. At times, the communication is very poor. These people are called to go for this money - they move using boda boda and bounce. Sometimes, they do not even get this money. I request the minister to decentralise the disbursement of this money at parish level. Also, they should be able to communicate so that they do not have to – in fact, at times, they spend more than Shs 25,000 to get this money. That is in addition to requesting that the age is lowered. Thank you. 4.09MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I would like to request that you sensitise our old people. As they get older, once they hear such a big debate on the radio, it is like a birthday for them; it will prolong even their life. This is one of the things – we are three days away. Even as Members of Parliament, we have just known today that they are going to celebrate the International Day of Older Persons. We need to use radios, TVs, newspapers to send messages. Secondly, in northern Uganda, for example, in Otuke District, very few elderly people are benefitting from this Government programme. Some of them are just dying before they receive this money. For example, my grandmother did not know when she was born. She made a mistake and reduced her age. On the ID, she is 55, yet she is 89 years old. (Laughter)  She is not benefiting. Honourable minister, how can we rectify such issues for all these people to get their IDs afresh? The first IDs were a mistake for these people. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, it is always good to look young and officially be young on record. (Laughter) However, what Hon. Acon raised is a very big matter in your constituencies. Many people were just given age. What is surprising is that the old ones were given young ages and the young ones were given old ages.You meet a good-looking lady and they say she is 85 years. So, it is an issue, honourable minister, that you need to look at seriously.4.11MR PHILIPHS LOKWANG (NRM, Napore West County Kaabong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. Some of us were 59 years by the time they were considering the SAGE programme. I do not know whether they update them every year to enable the elderly qualify for the grant. Secondly, some of these elders do not have national IDs because the machine rejected their thumbprints. So, I do not know whether those elderly were considered. Someone should simply estimate and include them in the programme. Thank you very much.4.12MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Definitely, I would wish to appreciate the statement, which has been made by the minister. It does not matter that it does not have 5896MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONthe detailed content we would have wanted. I appreciate that this is the first time we are receiving information regarding the elderly but there are many gaps we need to address. First of all, the way the young people are behaving in the House means there is some kind of negative attitude towards the elderly. That is one aspect we need to address; the attitude of the young people towards the elderly. Secondly, the minimum health care package, which is allowed by Government, cannot cater for the unique health problems that the elderly suffer; arthritis, diabetes, hypertension etcetera. All these cannot be addressed by the minimum health care package. Thirdly, the elderly are being exploited because they generally suffer from dementia; the children and grandchildren take advantage of them. They misuse their land and they are normally evicted. Many of us, particularly in the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association, have watched some of the videos showing how old women are being dragged out of their land. So, we need special care for the elderly and to be mindful of the fact that dementia can attack any of us. For example, I may look at Hon. Okot Ogong but time comes when I cannot remember his Christian name. That does not mean that I do not know him. You need to address these issues.Right now, even for me to walk on the stairs – Parliament, itself, is also abusing the rights of the elderly. If one day I fell down, Mr Speaker, you would have a very serious problem because I need to walk and also exercise my knees -(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, we have lifts. Also, in the new Chambers, we are addressing all those issues.4.15MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Nganda Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I am moving a motion that debate closes – under rule 59 because We have the National Budget Framework Paper through which we debate issues of policy. That is why colleagues, instead of speaking about the function, are speaking about policy. What will they say when we are discussing policy issues under the gender ministry?I am, therefore, moving, Mr Speaker – and they know that in the rules, you just vote; it does not call for a debate. I am moving that debate closes.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that we close this debate.(Question put and agreed to.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I have seen that Hon. Ssemujju is very uncomfortable on the issues of the elderly because he respects the elders very much. (Laughter) However, I had promised Hon. Rwemulikya that I would allow him to raise a matter of national importance but I forgot and skipped his name. I do not want a Member to come to my office three times and I fail to give him space. So, Hon. Rwemulikya, raise your issue and we move to the next item.4.16MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (Indepen-dent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. A year ago, on the 15th of September, I came to this same Floor of Parliament to raise a matter of urgent nation -al importance over flood victims in Ntoroko District. The floods affected Kanara subcounty, Kanara Town Council and Butungama. On 3 October, 2021, we hosted the Prime Minister and a number of ministers; the team appreciated the situation on the ground.The Prime Minister made a number of pledges;1. Reconstruction of Rwangara Health Centre III, which has since been kicked off by UPDF Engineering Brigade – and we are very grateful.[Ms Ogwal]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5897THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 20222. Purchase of land, relocation and resettlement of the flood victims as well as continuous supply of food and non-food items. My prayers; i) The Office of the Prime Minister should come and update this House – and the people of Ntoroko want to know – on how far they have gone with the progress of acquiring land and relocating these flood victims.ii) We need urgent supply of tarpaulins because these people are living in shelters; it is a rainy season. They are living in an appalling situation. I submit. Thank you.4.19THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since it is stated clearly in the statement of the Member that the Prime Minister’s team visited and undertakings were made; that some of the undertakings are already in progress, I undertake to brief the Prime Minister about the pending undertakings. The Prime Minister will definitely get back, either to the Member or to Parliament. If it pleases the honourable member, I can, before close of business today, move with him to the Prime Minister. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Honourable colleagues, on the update on combating the Ebola outbreak in the country, I talked to the Minister of Health today and we agreed that she comes with a comprehensive statement tomorrow because, today, they had meetings in Mubende. I wanted us to have real updated information. So, tomorrow, as we handle the Organ Transplant Bill, she will also make this statement. MS NABAGABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I was in Kassanda District yesterday and interacted with some of the communities that were affected. We were sensitising them and what we realised is that when we were having interactions with the district health officer, we realised that:1. The Ministry of Health team has not yet been to Kassanda yet, we have one death that has been recorded.2. People are extremely unaware of what Ebola is - the symptoms and preventive measures. Also, the District Health Officer told us that there are no isolation units; so they all do not know what to do and yet, today, I learned that the Ministry of Health is in Mubende, but they have not yet heeded to the call I made here for them to take interventions to the nearby districts. Our people have started getting affected but I still do not see why the Ministry of Health has failed to prioritise Kassanda. So, tomorrow, I hope that that report will be able to capture this information. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I requested Members of Parliament to stop going to affected areas. You are going to cause us trouble in this House. If you want to go to your people, go and remain with them. Do not bring Ebola to this House. And this is serious. Any MP from the affected areas; if I get to know that you have been to those areas of recent, going on the frontline, I am going to stop you from accessing the precincts of Parliament, otherwise, you are going to cause trouble here. (A member rose_) Please, honourable member, do not access the microphone. Please. Minister of Health and health officials, there are well-laid down mechanisms and safety procedures they follow. Now, if we go and 5898MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONstart reaching out to our constituents - I know we must show our people that we care – and, indeed, we care - but colleagues, we are going to cause a problem to our colleagues. I request colleagues from affected areas, please. Otherwise, the minister will be informed of other issues. I think we shall quarantine MPs from that area if they continue, as proposed by Hon. Ssemujju. Next item. LAYING OF PAPERSTHE ANNUAL BUDGET PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/20224.22THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Annual Budget Performance Report for Financial Year 2021/2022. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju is asking for copies. Thank you, honourable minister. This report is referred to the Committee on Budget for consideration, in accordance with Rule 173 of the Rules of Procedure and Section 18 of the Public Finance Management Act. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2021 HEALTH SECTORTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, the chairperson, Committee on Public Accounts presented the report last week and now, debate opens for one hour. Hon. Sam Opio, Hon. Teira, Hon. Olanya, Hon. Katusabe; I will pick the four who are standing. Two minutes each.4.24MR SAM OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the committee report. However, one of the issues that has been raised is about the nonfunctional medical equipment in Government health facilities. Just last week, as the health committee, we visited Mulago. The MRI and CT scan are not functioning. The same details are in this report and we have seen the same issue in different health facilities in this country. About 47 per cent of the equipment in the health facilities are not functioning. Government has the money to buy brand new vehicles, maintain and fill them but they cannot get the money to maintain one MRI equipment, which is the only one that is available in Mulago and Government health facilities.Government has the money to buy a spare tyre to replace one in a Government vehicle but cannot buy a bulb to replace one in an X-ray machine that has malfunctioned. Mr Speaker, I propose that moving forward, any appropriation for medical equipment must be accompanied by appropriate provisions for maintenance of those particular equipment. Short of that, the approvals should not be provided. I beg to submit. 4.25MR JOHN TEIRA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report on health highlighted several omissions and commissions by different public servants. It has been a tradition that quite often, these reports highlight many flaws by many public officials but we always stop at highlighting them without any punitive action being taken.It is becoming a habit that when people commit certain violations within the public service, there is no punitive action taken against them, and so they have become very complacent. I wish to invite this House to take a strong stand on the several officers who are implicated [The Deputy Speaker]STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT5899THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022as having omitted to do certain things that they were obliged to do under the law, which caused serious implications, as highlighted in the report - health officers, technical officers from different sectors. Until we start acting and indicating that when you do something wrong, you take responsibility - that is when this business will stop.Very many reports highlight inabilities, flaws, omissions and commissions and no action is taken. Until then, that is when we shall have a stop to this. Thank you.4.27MR NELSON OKELLO (UPC, Maruzi North County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I draw your attention to page 17 of the report, as I take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report. Page 17 talks about the implementation of quantified outputs; that is the implementation of works approved.The performance of most entities visited by the committee was very poor. For example, in Kawempe and Lira Regional Referral Hospitals, less than half of the approved outputs were implemented because this is attributed to the releases of funds. Sometimes, the finance ministry does not comply with the releases; funds are released and contractors are not paid. Secondly, this is also attributed to the element of absorption capacity. In Lira Regional Referral Hospital, for instance, only two activities were carried out and Shs 2.3 billion was taken back to the Consolidated Fund.  (Member timed out.)4.29DR GEORGE BHOKA (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I want to address myself to two issues. The first is the issue of return of money intended to recruit healthcare workers in these hospitals. Every year, and specifically in this report, a lot of money intended to recruit specialists and other healthcare workers was returned. It is noted that this has been a result of the delays in the initiation and execution of the recruitment process by the Health Service Commission and accounting officers in these hospitals. It is my prayer that moving forward, the processes for recruitment and placement of these specialists are expedited to ensure the specialists are available for our citizens to receive services. Second is the issue of recurrent stock out of blood and blood products. These are lifesaving. We are losing a number of children and mothers, especially women in labour because of the shortage of blood. One of the hospitals that recurrently has been reporting shortage is Jinja Regional Referral Hospital which does not have a blood bank. As we move towards appropriation in the Financial Year 2023/2024, Jinja Regional Referral Hospital must get the first call in ensuring we have a blood transfusion service in Jinja. I beg to submit. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, let us limit ourselves to issues of accountability raised in the report. Issues of policy are those you cannot go to in this report. The chairperson of the committee also limited himself to accountability. Okay. 4.31MR GILBERT OLANYA  (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to appreciate the Chairperson, PAC (Central Government) for the good report.We need to monitor well the money we normally allocate to these regional and national hospitals. The services being rendered in these hospitals are quite alarming. Many patients who normally travel from my constituency to Mulago, after being admitted, only access a bed. The medical officer only comes to prescribe drugs, which are bought outside the hospital. Yet, we normally appropriate and give huge amounts of money to Mulago Hospital. Another case in point is that in the whole of northern Uganda, we do not have CT scans. When our people are to access CT scans, they 5900MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONmust travel to Kampala and sometimes in private clinics, which are very expensive.Whenever we appropriate funds, we need to make sure medical services are key. Health is everything. Let our people be healthy; let money be followed up. For a country to be rated among the best countries, they normally look at medical services. In Uganda, medical services have become very expensive – (Member timed out.)4.34MS CHRISTINE KAAYA  (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Based on the accountability request, the reports on the performance of some of the machines - for example, ambulances and scans – are sometimes misleading because they are not considered in the details of the reports. I thought that probably if the hospital gives accountability of the rate of wear and tear of an ambulance, that is enough for us to advocate for either a new one or not. I will give an example of Kiboga Hospital. We have already shown that the ambulance we have should be written off. However, we see other hospitals coming up with their requests for brand new vehicles and they are given.The same applies to these other machines. Money spent on repairs and maintenance of the scans and our ambulances is very high compared to the purchase of new items. Therefore, I would request the committee to look at the rate of wear and tear reports for all these medical machines to ensure that we account properly and help our country save money other than spending a lot on repairs and maintenance. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I want to go this side. I will first pick those who have not spoken today. 4.35MR PETER OKEYOH  (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want also to thank the chairman for the report. The committee report clearly indicates the question of irregular deductions on the salaries of the staff workers. This has been the root cause of absenteeism in most Government institutions. It is my humble appeal that administrators look at this. It demoralises the staff and even causes corruption. If somebody does not get his or her salary, what should they resort to? They end up misappropriating.Secondly, the committee also talks about ambulances. This House appropriated money and water ambulances were procured. To-date, these have not been given to Island districts. This House has been prevailing on the minister but it is not helping. It is my humble appeal that as we consider this report on health, the question of water ambulances for Bukooli Islands, Namayingo and – (Member timed out.) 4.36MR PAUL ASABA  (NRM, Kyaka North County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the PAC committee for the report. I want to mention a matter about the item for which we allocate funds. You find that there are items, which get minor damages. For example, in Mulago, there are heaps of beds packed in some corners and some times, the faults are just small things, which need minor repairs. As a result, Government money is wasted. Such beds can be repaired. For example, in Kyegegwa District Hospital, there are no beds. These beds could easily be repaired and taken there. They are still in good condition but they are put to waste just like that. Government simply buys new beds and ignores old ones. I wish the committee could also look into that matter. Thank you.4.38MS JENNIFER DRIWARU (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last month, I took a round move within Maracha District, walking from one health facility to another. What I discovered was that some of these were upgraded from Health Centre II to III. [Mr Oulanya] STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT5901THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022However, what disturbed me was whether the upgrade was really in line with the population. Medicine is brought in today and after two or three days, the drugs are finished. Important drugs are not available in health centres, especially health centres III and IV . Most patients have to buy prescribed drugs elsewhere. Secondly –(Member timed out.)4.39MR ACROBERT KIIZA  (Independent, Bughendera County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I draw your attention to page 78. The issue of failure to supply medicines in Government hospitals is like committing suicide. Mr Speaker, Government is seen to be functional only when there are drugs in hospitals. According to the report, 600 kits were not supplied. This is really a sign of corruption. We have always talked about corruption in this country but companies have continued to get contracts. Therefore, it is high time we began blacklisting companies that do shoddy work. (Member timed out.)4.40MS SHARON LAKER (NRM, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is on the issue of ambulances. In most of the health centres, hospitals or referral hospitals, ambulances are parked and yet, they just have minor mechanical issues. I visited Anaka General Hospital and the in-charge told us that they had issues with tyres. Once these ambulances are stationed for a long time, they tend to get mechanical problems. We all have cars and we know what it means when they are parked for a period of time. (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just conclude.MS BALMOYI: I think we are wasting a lot of taxpayers’ money. Mr Speaker, it would be good if these ambulances are stationed in most of the highways so that in case of an accident, they are able to pick up our people. Otherwise, most times, we lose people because the rescue team does not come in time. I beg to submit. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, the MPs representing the elderly request that you mobilise the elderly people in your constituencies, especially those from West Nile and transport them for the celebrations. This is a request from your colleagues. 4.42DR CHARLES AYUME (NRM, Koboko Municipality, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would have expected this report to highlight the non-completion of Mulago National Referral Hospital by the ROKO Construction Limited, which is once again in the spotlight. The non-functionality of equipment that my colleague was raising is because most of the structures are not complete, and the rooms need air conditioning for some of these high-tech equipment to function. I think the operations of ROKO Construction Limited once again should be looked into. In addition to that, the health sector’s equipment is evolving every two years because it is becoming more specialised. I would love to find out whether it is in order for Government to go for outright purchase, or go for what we call equipment placement with a manufacturer.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Member for Moroto Municipality and then Hon. Oseku - 4.43MR FRANCIS ADOME (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I want to thank the committee for producing an elaborate report. However, there are some gaps in the reports about Moroto or Karamoja in general. 5902MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONWe have been constantly reporting inadequacies in terms of our facilities, especially the mortuary. Mr Speaker, in the whole of Karamoja region, there is no functional mortuary. When someone dies in Moroto or Kotido, they have to transport the body to Mbale for treatment, and then back to Karamoja for burial. The Ministry of Health should address this issue because it is very urgent. Otherwise, this has been going on for quite some time. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Francis, the committee was dealing with issues of accountability. The Auditor-General never raised any issue on a stolen body or organs in Karamoja. Let us stick to the issues of accountability raised in the Auditor-General’s report, and that is what the committee processed. However, that was a very good issue although it was not about accountability.4.44MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The concern I have on the report is about the supply of drugs. Mbale Regional Referral Hospital serves about three regions, that is, Sebei, Elgon, Bugisu and Bukedi. However, in the report, from Shs 1.5 billion allocated for the supply of drugs, they only supplied drugs worth Shs 197 million. Mr Speaker, those of us who come from the east know that Mbale Regional Referral Hospital is overstretched. The volume of the people going there is too high. Patients sleep on the verandas and there is too much demand for drugs. Like one of the Members –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable member. MR OSEKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is my prayer that a mechanism is put in place to ensure that the supply of drugs by the National Medical Stores is expedited such that every end of month, an audit is done to ensure that the quarter of the drugs for that time is supplied in order to save lives. Otherwise, we are losing many people down there. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Member for Arua and then the Member for Terego - You have heard that I am calling those who have not spoken; I am trying to conclude. 4.46MS LILLIAN PAPARU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. The committee mentioned that there were delays in remitting Pay As You Earn (PAYE) and other statutory obligations. I would like to know from the committee whether they went further to find out if these entities are being penalised for not remitting. Otherwise, it is a practice in this country; even in local governments where statutory obligations are not remitted on time -  Therefore, may I know from the committee whether they followed this up to see if URA penalises these entities? That is the only way they will learn.Mr Speaker, I know the committee was only narrowing to the – (Member timed out.)4.47MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE (Independent, Isingiro West County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is on page 25 regarding unauthorised loan deductions.  This is very dangerous to the workers. If you want a loan, you authorise your employer to make deductions from your salary. Assuming there is connivance between the loan giver and the people paying you? You might end up losing money. The other issue is on budget financing. As we have seen in the report, there is a lot of money these referral hospitals are getting, which is not declared to the Permanent Secretary of the finance ministry. It is not even brought to Parliament for appropriation. This can be a way of –(Member timed out.)[Mr Adome]STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT5903THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 20224.48MR GEOFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. On page 79, there are two fundamental issues; non-functional medical equipment yet, every quarter, the ministry and eventually, all the hospitals receive money. The staff have complained that money for equipment is suspected to have been swindled. The committee should interest itself more on the issue of medical equipment maintenance money. Secondly, there is Shs 411,558,130 both spent on water bills and domestic arrears, yet the hospital had a pump that could be repaired at even less than Shs 30 million. I think you clearly see that there is fraud detected. Why would we spend Shs 411 million –(Member timed out.)4.49MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very. Mr Speaker, my concern is about the Uganda Cancer Institute, whereby they are saying National Planning Authority (NPA) has delayed certifying their strategic work plan.I think that is betrayal by our own institutions. We all know the challenges that the cancer institute is facing. When it takes this long and the Auditor-General raises a red flag that NPA is the one that delayed certifying their strategic plan -  I appeal to the finance minister  -my big brother, Hon. Henry Musasizi – to, kindly, prevail over NPA to ensure that it helps us in sorting out this challenge. The other one is to do with Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, where we are being told of the capacity to handle cases, especially when it was –(Member timed out.) 4.50MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the noble duty they have done for this country. If the committee could do this noble duty up to the grassroot level, we would be very grateful. We have very many challenges that our health centres are facing. I was a member of a hospital board one time and there were a lot of challenges but they were not helped. There are many issues of theft of hospital property at health centres but the district does not show concern. They raise these matters and sometimes, they do not know where to raise them. So, if they could do this up to the grassroot level, we would be very grateful. We appreciate their work and wish them to continue with these activities. This is going to improve service delivery. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are giving them more power and mandate. (Laughter)4.51MR NABOTH NAMANYA (FDC, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report presented on the Floor. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, do you want me to close the debate? (Laughter)MR NAMANYA: Mr Speaker, I think the issue is on strategic planning. I implore the finance minister - because we have seen, in the report, that Shs 2.1 billion was not absorbed by Mubende. Finance tends to release money at the 11th hour. When entities try to follow the procurement procedures, they end up finishing the financial year without absorbing the money. I implore the finance ministry to send the money in time so that the entities can expedite the process of utilising the money at the right time. I thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.4.53MS MARY NAKATO (Independent, Woman Representative, Buyende): Mr Speaker, I just want to push this to your desk. There is something that is being detected in health facilities, specifically, regional referrals. 5904MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONWe are all aware that nothing can be done without water and clear specified sanitation in health facilities. I was in Mulago National Referral Hospital with my father yesterday. The hygiene in Mulago and other regional hospitals is horrible. I would like you to call upon the directors and the concerned people – because when you ask them, they keep on saying “finance.” I would like to ask: who really audits the Ministry of Health before we run to the finance ministry? I think the finance ministry is releasing a lot of money to Ministry of Health and –(Member timed out.)4.54MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My fundamental problem is the very expensive machines and machinery that we have in our hospitals, lying – procured either through taxpayers’ money or grants – yet the cost of repairing them and putting them back to effective use would be something as small as Shs 500,000. This House is not there to just talk – because one of the things with talking is that the more you talk, the less people remember what you talked. Mr Speaker, I was just wondering whether there is no –(Member timed out.)MR KATUSABE: Provision that your office can be – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, you do not allocate yourself more time. 4.55DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are addressing matters of health and I know that each and every body is disappointed, to a very large extent, with health matters. So, this report was done and it looked at very many gaps in accountability. I am looking at mis-stated liabilities in Mulago. They are paying Umeme but they go on to pay in excess of Shs 800 million. They are paying another utility bill and they pay in excess of Shs 1.4 billion. This is mis-stated liabilities. Mr Speaker, a lot of money is being lost through these gaps that the report has identified and we should give commensurate punishments. Parliament has been known to talk, but –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As a shadow minister, I give you an opportunity to conclude.DR BATUWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. So, more than going for forensic audits – we know that last year, at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, we moved in this Parliament that a forensic audit be done on the COVID-19 funds. Up to now, a report has not been presented. We cannot walk the same path this time round with people who have over-paid liabilities. Mr Speaker, we should amend certain areas and go straight away to Court and people get prosecuted. I believe that through that, we shall drive some fear in the heads of some accounting officers. I beg to move.4.57MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about the delays in accessing the payroll by newly recruited staff and delays for those that have left service. We cannot get good service from Government when the payroll is not well managed. I think the public service should take this seriously and ensure that officers in public service are paid on time. The other thing is the issue of domestic arrears. Mr Speaker, accounting officers are fond of [Ms Nakato]STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT5905THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022committing Government beyond what they have. We are very aware that in procurement, you cannot commit Government without confirming availability of funds. Accounting officers who commit Government beyond the capacities of their budgets should be held accountable for their actions. The last one is the issue of expired drugs and stock-outs. We are here talking about stock-outs but the other side is delay – (Member timed out.)4.58MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am going to allow all of you, colleagues. MR KIWANUKA: My issue is on the China-Uganda Friendship Hospital. I thank the committee and the chairperson for the report save that some two issues were not captured. During the fight against COVID-19, there was a scandal in that hospital; medicines were imported in the names of a private company. That issue has not reported in China-Uganda Friendship Hospital. Secondly, they went ahead and registered a private company. All that money is in the name of “Doctors Without Borders” where that money – (Member timed out.)4.59MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two issues to raise but this is not really to critic the report of PAC. I would want the House to take serious note of the fact that every year, the COSASE report is brought to us and certain issues keep recurring. Firstly, domestic arrears - Many of our colleagues have raised this issue, which cripples not only the institutions that are owed money but even individuals who are owed pension and other expenses. The second issue, Mr Speaker, I cannot believe that there are hospitals, which are operating without boards. That means we are not following corporate governance. Who is then accountable for all the expenditures in the hospital? I am asking the finance ministry to lay on Table, domestic arrears sector by sector, so that when we are budgeting, we should provide –(Member timed out.)5.00MS ANNA ADEKE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee notes on page 20, that there has been a release of funds over and above what the entities have required. For me, that is a red flag, which we need to note because coming from the last financial year, over Shs 2 trillion remained unaccounted for, and if we cannot seal these loopholes through which money goes missing and is unaccounted for, then we really need to raise questions. The committee has already told us – and we need to understand from the finance ministry; why are there releases over and above what the entities ask for? This is irregular and it is a red flag, which we should all be concerned about. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is an honourable colleague I have seen for the first time. [Honourable Members: “Hon. Frank Kabuye.] The problem has been mine. Today, he has removed the mask.5.01MR FRANK KABUYE (NUP, Kassanda County South, Kassanda):  Thank you-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will allow him all the time to make his maiden speech, on my side. (Laughter)MR KABUYE: Mr Speaker, according to the committee report, many health facilities in Uganda are dysfunctional; machinery is not used or put to its full operational capacity. 5906MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONThe committee is also suggesting construction of more facilities. However, it would be better if we looked at enabling these facilities to work and operate at full capacity before considering construction of new facilities. I also request the Minister of Health to come up with a list of all the inventory in these facilities such that next time, when we are doing an audit, we can look through that list to make better planning. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. Hon. Malende - No, she stood up several times. That is a problem of you colleagues thinking standing up many times is when I will pick you. Sometimes you stand up, then you sit - I have identified you and I will call you when you are seated comfortably. (Applause)5.03MS SHAMIM MALENDE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. My recommendation is that this Parliament should come up with a way of implementation of committee recommendations. Otherwise we will be seen by the public as a barking dog that does not bite. I beg to submit.5.04MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My first question goes to the public service minister. In the report, we see delay in remittance and in accessing the payroll. I thought the Integrated Financial Management System had solved all these problems; what happened? Secondly, to the committee - we have seen the accounting officers faulting many times and we do not have their names. How do we follow them up? Sometimes, they change; how do we follow them and make sure this money is recovered? Mr Speaker, a lot of money is going to waste and if we only keep on giving a report; talking about it and we do not recover this money in order to deter others from doing the same, then we shall not be solving the problem.Finally, Mr Speaker, the –(Member timed out.)5.05MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report talks about hospitals that are understaffed and they say that consultants are not attracted to apply. What have we done about this? If year after year, they do not apply, do we let it stay like that and leave people unattended to?We have also seen that the Uganda Cancer Institute made a plan and submitted it to National Planning Authority, which has not done anything; yet, drugs are being burnt when others are crying. Is there planning in this country?Finally, we have seen that Butabika Hospital is congested. We have seen patients coming out of that hospital in worse conditions than when they were admitted. Does Butabika have more problems that we need to study? People go there with alcohol challenges and they come –(Member timed out.)5.06MR MOSES OKOT (FDC, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, I fully associate myself with this report but there are two issues I wish to add. With all the anomalies that the report indicates, there is a high likelihood of cases that are ending in Court mostly because of this. I have handled many; a case in point is wrongful scaling of salaries and deductions. At the end of the day, Government is losing money because of the –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As a shadow deputy speaker, more time to conclude. (Laughter) MR OKOT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The report indicated the multiple perennial strikes conducted by intern doctors as a result of maltreatment and misappropriation [Mr Kabuye]STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT5907THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022of funds from some hospital facilities. It is, therefore, my humble appeal to the persons in authority that punitive measures – when I say punitive, it should be in a measure that is commensurate to deterring individuals who act in such directions. Thank you, Mr Speaker.5.08DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My input is on the equipment. We should have a national equipment data bank so that we can guide deployment. Some facilities are over-equipped, yet there are others where people lack. For instance, in the Greater Masaka, 10 districts do not have a CT scan and people have to go to Kampala. It is sad hearing that some hospitals have equipment that are not being used. Mr Speaker, I pray that our Committee on Health tasks the Ministry of Health to provide data for this equipment. In addition to that, when we are procuring - because we do not have a national data, we end up procuring the same equipment, especially from projects. This eventually misguides the resources.I pray that we get an inventory to guide medical equipment in this country.5.09MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NRM, Nakawa Division East, Kampala City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stay close to Butabika Hospital, which is the only specialised referral mental health hospital we have in the country. When I visited, I learnt that they had over 1000 patients although the design was for 550. Kireka Ward, which was designed for about 60 patients, is now housing over 200, which is too much. Many times, patients defecate on each other and this is terrible. We need to address the issue of creating space for this hospital. Thank you.5.10MR GEOFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia):  Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the time you have given us today to discuss the issues of health of this country. I am the chairman of Mental Health Forum in Parliament. We have visited this hospital many times and we have taken note of land grabbing. Parliament needs to pronounce itself on this matter, to protect that land. Secondly, the staff of Butabika need motivation. Government has given salary increment to all scientists but they could have forgotten this section of scientists.Lastly, back home in Busia, the Ministry of Health closed Sofia Market and decided to set up a regional lab testing centre. Up to now, the construction has not started.  (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, you are the chairman of the Mental Health Forum. I do not doubt you. Please, conclude. (Laughter) MR MACHO: Mr permission-(Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now you are calling me Mr permission. (Laughter)MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, with your permission, we request the Ministry of Health to help our people of Busia to complete the facility they started because who knows in future - it might turn into a health centre III and help other people who have mental problems. COVID-19 has made almost all of us mentally ill. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope Ebola will not worsen the situation.5.12MR JULIUS TUSIIME (Independent, Rwampara East County, Rwampara): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity.MR TUSIIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I would like to talk about the remittance of statutory 5908MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONobligations such as PAYE. When shall these accounting officers be held responsible for the losses they cause to Government? We are aware that this is a statutory obligation, which they all know; I would assume that it is even a connivance within those agencies not to remit these statutory obligations.I would also like to call upon the Committee on Health to pay attention to the use of drug stock-outs. Whereas we recognise that there was an increment in allocation and we know often times - (Member timed out.)5.13MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I did a round this side and finished. I picked whoever stood up this side, apart from Hon. Mbabazi, I remember.MR MUZAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 37, the issue of stock-outs and expired drugs, puzzles me. We have expired drugs with all costs involved in destroying those drugs, yet hospitals do not have drugs. We are talking about referral hospitals but the conditions in health centres are not good.This House has done a good job through its committees, especially accountability committees; we make good recommendations but we do not have  -(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I can see that we are going into policy related issues, yet we are going to have a debate on a motion about mental health and psychiatric care.I am going to close the debate so that I start with the colleagues I had not picked, when that motions comes. I had picked Hon. Nancy. 5.15MS NANCY ACORA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the report. One, on the issues of the hospital equipment, which is grounded, I would like the Ministry of Health to take into consideration budgeting to recruit technicians at all the district hospitals to do repairs. Secondly, on the issues of the drug stock-outs and expired drugs, Government, through Ministry of Health should put into consideration issues of demand-driven supply side that every region that has particular diseases, will always be taken care of according to what is necessary there. For example, in my district, the basic problem that we have is malaria and sometimes, when you go to the health facilities, for almost a month, you do not find anti-malarials.  (Member time out.)5.16MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA (NUP, Bu-komansimbi South County, Bukomansim-bi):  Thank you, very Mr Speaker. I have seen two critical issues on pages 60 and 104, where our health facilities have no land titles. These include; Arua Hospital, Mbale, Kitovu and Fort portal blood banks.I request you, Mr Speaker, to task the Ministry of Health to go across the country and bring a report on the status of all health facilities, so that we get to know whether we have land titles or not. As patients, we are in fear; land owners may throw us out the hospital.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable, if you could remember in the first session of this Parliament, the committee did that report. The minister presented the report here and the Committee on Health also went to the field. A comprehensive report on the status of our health centres was debated here. Therefore, if you want any record, refer to the Hansard; you will find it there. Honourable chairperson, you have two minutes, then we will conclude. We have another motion, which is also on health. I will start with colleagues I have not been able-STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT[Mr Tusiime]5909THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022DR BAYIGGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. While many of the Members of Parliament were debating, they wondered what is going to happen to this report, which was loaded with a lot of facts related to embezzlement and suspicious criminality. We expected that apart from the Auditor-General, we would see representatives of the Inspector General of Government, officers from the Criminal Investigations Directorate or an assurance by  Government that the recommendation on the investigation and prosecution of criminality would be done. Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that you give guidance?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, these reports are handled as per the law. Reports of accountability committees are a requirement, under section 53 of the Public Finance Management Act, where the minister comes and presents a treasury memorandum, which entails actions taken by Government in implementing recommendations of Parliament, which would include arrest, prostitution, refund of money and all that. What is very important is for us to ensure that the finance minister presents the treasury memorandum at the time given to him. Otherwise, the finance minister cannot come here now and commit that he is going to do A, B, C, D, yet the law is very clear on what should be done. Honourable member, we are not debating in vain.Also, when that Treasury Memorandum is tabled on the Floor, it goes back to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) to see whether the action taken is in line with the recommendations that were proposed and adopted by the House. I hope that satisfies the honourable colleague. 5.20THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOV -ERNMENT) (Mr Medard Sseggona): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleagues who have contributed to the debate in a man-ner that is enriching. Secondly, I also want to thank, again, members of the committee that worked day and night to highlight the issues that have been pointed out. I want to draw the attention of my colleagues to the provisions of Rule 174(2) and (5) of the Rules of Procedure, in terms of the mandate of the Public Accounts Committee. Secondly, to also make reference to the existence of other policy committees in this House and finally, and of course, going back to Article 163 of our Constitution, our mandate is to examine the report of the Auditor-General.Finally, on this, the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) does not carry out an investigation on criminality but rather, on accountability. What we do in the committee or committees of Parliament is that we make both general and specific recommendations to the organs of the State that are required to undertake certain actions in line with the law. There are certain matters, which have been highlighted and we take note. Mr Speaker, you will also appreciate that this is actually the maiden report of this committee –(Applause)- on the Auditor-General’s report, in respect to the financial accountabilities. We have been very specific on matters that were under our scrutiny. For matters we felt we were not competent to handle, we referred them for a forensic audit. For example, this investigation or scrutiny was not a value-for-money audit. So, where we felt it was necessary to make reference to value-for-money or a forensic audit, we made those specific references. And I am happy you have guided well, especially when it came to the last one; on how far do go. Surely, when we make these recommendations and they come here, they become your recommendations, if you adopt them. Government is required, under the Public Finance Management Act, to undertake further action and report back to us through the treasury memorandum.Let me be specific on those that required the committee - for example, Hon. Ayume, the 5910MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONChairperson of the Committee on Health had expected us to come up with recommendations and observations on the non-completion of Mulago National Referral Hospital. Actually, when you look at the report, we make observations and how the non-completion or failure to complete Mulago National Referral Hospital Complex affected the other services, for example, the performance of the machines and we made specific recommendations, which can be picked up.In general, colleagues were thankful to the committee and we are grateful for that appreciation. Hon. Santa Alum, we take note of the specific accounting officers whose names you expected us to mention. I think in future, we could do that, but the Executive, which is supposed to implement this, is aware of those people because they are appointed them. We already tabled minutes, which indicate those names because they are known. As to what the Executive does with our reports, the law already makes a dictation on what ought to be done.With those few clarifications, Mr Speaker, permit me to move the motion, therefore, that this House be pleased to adopt the Report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the Report of the Auditor-General for the Financial Year 2020/2021 on the health sector. I beg to move. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairperson, you have moved the motion but I wanted to put the question clearly since it is a report of a committee. Colleagues, I now put the question that the Report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the Report of the Auditor-General for the Financial Year 2020/2021 for the health sector, be adopted by this House. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finance minister, please, comply with the law, in terms of tabling the Treasury Memorandum.5.26THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the chairperson and the committee members, for the good report presented. Pursuant to Section 53 of the Public Finance Management Act, we will provide the Treasury Memorandum to Parliament accordingly. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, we are done with this matter. Honourable chairperson, I congratulate you upon presenting an excellent report –(Applause)– moreover, a maiden one. I also thank colleagues for working closely. I have seen a habit of Members not signing reports and so, I want to report it to the whips. One of the Members even asked the chairperson a question. When I checked on the list, I realised that the Member submitted and asked the chairperson to explain - I do not need to mention the names. I do not know whether that Member attended meetings - because he could have asked this question to the chairperson. I do not want to mention the name. However, colleagues, you have to be very cautious. If you are a member, but you do not sign the minority or even the main report, where do you belong? So, whips, take interest in these reports and see why your Members do not sign them. Otherwise, it is you, the whips who deploy Members to the committees and so, they should explain to you, why they do not sign reports. That is one of the signs of Members not attending committee meetings. Procedure?MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my able chairperson for the STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT[Mr Sseggona]5911THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022report. The procedural issue I am raising regards, generally, reports from accountability committees. Every year, the Executive tables, before this Parliament, a list of accounting officers and we are supposed to approve them. When you read reports of accountability committees, you notice they raise queries on accounting officers. Unfortunately, the follow-up on those queries has not been very effective. I would think, procedurally, that maybe one of the committees of Parliament could be designated to look into the concerns of the accountability committees, relating to the queries these committees raise about accounting officers. This is because while the reports highlight some of the challenges, the follow-up on the reports does not seem to come out, especially on the issues of performance, yet we approve them here. Therefore, I do not know whether it would be procedurally right for the House to consider having a committee of Parliament to follow up on the queries relating to accounting officers. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, this is an issue that we shall look into. These are assignments we usually give to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to guide the house on. However, let us first look at it, as leaders of this institution. Honourable colleagues, sectoral committees are the ones that should even take keen interest in this. For example, this is a report about the health sector. Chairperson of the Committee on Health, when processing the ministerial policy statement for this sector, you should be guided by this report because it is raising salient issues. That is why we talk to the Chairperson of on Public Accounts (PAC) and other accountability committees. We said that PAC (Central Government) and maybe COSASE, should be allowed to report in a phased manner - sector by sector – where you come and report on health, education, unlike the other time when we could wait for a consolidated report and we would spend a whole financial year without presenting a full report here, and that is why we had backlog. However, when you do it, sector by sector, it even becomes easy for us to debate, follow up and for action to be taken. MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO PRIORITISE AND IMPROVE MENTAL HEALTH AND PSYCHIATRIC CARE IN UGANDATHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As Hon. Aisha Kabanda comes, for item No. 6, I need to first read and digest it, as the presiding officer. I will allow it on the Order Paper tomorrow. Because we have a time limitation, under the rules, as to when we should tackle it, I want to read through it tonight so that I am able to flow with you when it is being presented on the Floor. I do not want you to ambush me, especially after Hon. Macho declared that we are all at the tipping point of running berserk. (Laughter) 5.32MS AISHA KABANDA  (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to prioritise and improve mental health and psychiatric care in Uganda, moved under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.The motion reads: “WHEREAS  the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (1995), under objective XXVII (iii) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, enjoins the State to take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population; AWARE THAT Parliament enacted the Mental Health Act, 2018 to provide for, among others, the care and treatment of persons with mental illness, the provision of mental health services to community level, the referral and admission procedures for persons suffering from mental illness and the protection of rights of people with mental health conditions;5912MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONFURTHER AWARE THAT mental health services are offered at different levels of health facilities, including health centres II to IV , general hospitals, regional referral hospitals and national referral hospitals;NOTING THAT the Ministry of Health and the Uganda Counselling Association have reported that 14 million Ugandans suffer from mental illness with a majority suffering from depression and anxiety disorders;FURTHER NOTING THAT, according to statistics from the World Health Organisation, Uganda is ranked among the top six countries in Africa in rates of depressive disorders, with 4.6 per cent of the population suffering from depression, while 2.9 per cent of the population live with anxiety disorders;CONCERNED THAT mental health and psychiatric care in Uganda face a number of challenges, including inadequate funding, low levels of employment of mental health professionals in health facilities, numbers of supporting professionals, especially counsellors, psychologists and social workers, coupled with the lack of other mental health facilities to supplement Butabika Hospital;FURTHER CONCERNED that the outbreak of the COVID-19 Pandemic and the resultant effects on the social and economic wellbeing of Ugandans has increased incidents of mental illness, including depression, anxiety, suicidal thoughts and alcohol and substance abuse, thereby increasing the need for mental health and psychiatric care in Uganda;ALSO AWARE  THAT causes of mental illness, as a medical condition, are cross-cutting emanating from families, workplaces, education centres and conflict zones, among others, thus calling for attention that goes to the core of the wellbeing of societies;RECOGNISING THAT the lack of appropriate and inadequate mental health and psychiatric care has given rise to the proliferation of unprofessional mental health and psychiatric care providers in the names of pastors, sheikhs, priests and traditional healers, who not only sometimes apply harmful practices in the treatment and care of persons with mental illness, but also misdiagnose, delay or prevent patients from obtaining appropriate medical care thereby accelerating the medical conditions of these patients;COGNIZANT THAT unless Government prioritises and improves access to mental health and psychiatric care in Uganda, the treatment, care and livelihoods of persons suffering from mental illness will be adversely and irreversibly affected;NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parlia-ment that Government is urged to –(a) Increase funding to mental health and psychiatric care services in Uganda;(b) Prioritise and improve access to mental health and psychiatric care in Uganda by;i) Mainstreaming mental health care in all Government programme areas in budget-ing and implementation;ii) Employing more mental health and psy-chiatric professionals in health facilities; andiii) Enhancing the mechanisms for monitor -ing and supervising mental health and psychiatric care services.(c) Integrate mental health care at different levels at the district health services, in-cluding at the health facility and commu-nity levels; and(d) Return mental health facilities that were converted into COVID-19 treatment units to their original use.” I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Macho, Hon. Bwanika, Hon. Sseggona, Hon. Okeyoh, Hon. Andrew Oulanyah, Hon. Faith, [Ms Kabanda]5913THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022Stella, Hon. Atima, Hon. Koyekyenga, Hoima; okay, it is seconded by all people who are normal. (Laughter) Honourable member, you have just two minutes to speak to your motion so that we can allow a few colleagues.MS AISHA KABANDA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have noted that the population of Uganda that is mentally disturbed - according to health reports - is big. Despite the country’s vulnerability to mental illness, Uganda has only 42 psychiatrists to attend to 42 million people. And also what is regrettable is that the result of this mental disorder has not only affected adults; it has also affected children. In some cases, we have had what is actually called infanticide, where you find mothers killing their new-born babies. There is no mother who can kill their new-born baby when they are in their right mind. We have also seen situations where children have actually committed suicide. There is a two-week old case in Namasuba, where a 13-year-old Derrick committed suicide. He was told to wash utensils but after he finished, he went and committed suicide. The mother said that the young boy had severally indicated signs of wanting to commit suicide, but she did not know how to handle the situation. The gist of this motion, Mr Speaker, is to request Government to integrate mental health care in various sectors, so that it is attended to in education. Statistics show that 15 to 19-year adolescents are more affected, yet these are the people we find in schools. Unfortunately, their mental disorders are not detected in time. If we detect these mental problems in time and attend to them, we will probably address the suicide cases that are reported to be increasing annually. We are here to ask Government to mainstream mental health services in all sectors of Government. Most important to note is the fact that mental health services receive only one per cent of the budget of health. The money they get is too little to attend to mental health issues. As we speak, people that have mental illnesses actually do not have drugs. For the last two weeks, I have been receiving calls from my constituency with people telling me that they went to health centres but that there is no medicine. They are actually worried that their cases are going to deteriorate. Sooner or later, they will all be taken to Butabika or be on the street; it is a serious problem. The budget for the health sector alone is not enough. We need to look at it as a multi-sectoral problem, addressing it in the health, gender and other sectors. I pray that colleagues will join us to support this motion. I thank you.5.42MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, I am very proud and blessed to second this very important motion that talks about the forgotten people.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This time you sound very sober.MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, I sound very humble today because of the situation that I witnessed over the weekend. Last Sunday, when I was leaving Busia, I passed a place called Mbiko and I saw people beating up a woman on the roadside. I stopped the vehicle in the middle of the road and asked them why they were beating her. Good enough, since people know Macho of Busia, they said, “That is Macho of Busia.” I told them to stop beating the lady; I asked them why they were beating her. They said she had taken their chapatti without paying for it.When I asked the lady why she did so, she said she and her children had gone three days without eating. She was taking the chapatti to give to the children but people thought she had a mental illness. That is why I humbly but 5914MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONstrongly want to second this motion so that Uganda can address mental health issues. To mainstream it, I request that we begin by giving the ministry enough staff. As I speak, the mental health unit at the ministry has only two staff, Dr Hafsa and Dr Kenneth, looking after almost 14 million people who are suffering from mental health illness. I pray and request that the Ministry of Health upgrades this unit to a department. This is because as a result of COVID-19, almost everybody now is affected by some mental health issues, although we are not walking naked. That is why you find some people talking to themselves while moving on the road. Therefore, I pray that mental health services be mainstreamed in all our health units. This should begin by training health staff in the areas of intervention and how to counsel people because most people are going to hospitals because of the challenges like poverty, which is a very big problem. Mr Speaker, we further request that since we have challenges of drugs and drug substances in schools as of now, the ministry should consider employing counsellors in schools to counsel our children. This will help us to have a generation of tomorrow that is humble, counselled well and knows how to move. Mr Speaker, right now, mental health drugs in Uganda are the most expensive and inaccessible. We, therefore, request Government that these drugs should be given to people free. This will help to reduce many challenges that our people are facing. Mr Speaker, I second this motion because I believe we have left it to the development partners; we only hear of GIZ, World Health Organisation and UNICEF, and majorly with children yet mental health is a very big challenge to the children in this country, which is causing retarded education. Therefore, as a country, we should increase our budget because this will help us a lot. We have a new programme; the Parish Development Model, which has come to solve issues of poverty but I believe we should not only deploy financial officers; we should also deploy people who will counsel others on how to use this money. People have problems of depression due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and they do not see hope at all. Therefore, for this programme to succeed, we should deploy mental health focal officers in the districts to help work together with the Parish Development Model managers to guide our people.I request that Government and Parliament work collectively to mainstream mental health services in this country so that the country can stabilise like other countries in areas of depression and anxiety. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Macho has been given special time because he is the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum on Mental Health, so, he is in charge of us. 5.46MS MELSA A V AKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to speak to the motion for the resolution of Parliament urging Government to prioritise and improve mental health and psychiatric care in Uganda. Mr Speaker and colleagues, the 2018 report of the sectoral Committee on Health pointed out a treatment gap of 85 per cent, meaning only 15 per cent receive mental healthcare services. Mental health is underfunded at only one per cent of the 3.35 per cent of the funds allocated to mental, neurological and substance-use disorders. And among other predisposing factors, are low levels of employment for mental health professionals, few numbers of supportive professionals like psychologists, counsellors and social workers. The others are the few health facilities to supplement Butabika Hospital and the inadequate awareness about medical mental health issues. The resultant effects, as well stated by the mover, included [Mr Macho]5915THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022depression, anxiety, suicidal thoughts, alcohol and substance abuse, among the population.Such a person tends to seek mental health and psychiatric care from unprofessional care providers, including traditional healers, resulting into misdiagnosis, delays or preventing mental illness patients from obtaining appropriate medical care.Mr Speaker, having noted the burden of mental illness, Uganda’s ranking in Africa, the majority population affected by predisposing factors and the resultant effects of mental illness on the population of Uganda, I, therefore, recommend that the Parliament of Uganda honours the motion as it is. I beg to submit. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us hear from the Hon. Dr Lulume Bayigga.5.49DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the mover and seconder of this motion because it is very important.Mental diseases such as anxiety, depression, mania or hypomania, which are usually undiagnosed, panic attacks, alcoholism - in all its ranges - substance abuse, schizophrenia, autism, hyperactive children and so on, are very prevalent in this country yet we do not have the capacity to enumerate them all.And we have been having a challenge –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we do not want to have a doctor’s session and you know, these are mental issues. Those are the words some of them speak without even – (Laughter) DR LULUME: Mr Speaker, this was brought to the attention of Members so that, if on their prescription forms, a diagnosis has been made, they should take note of such kind of diagnosis. We need to look for the cause(s) of this epidemic of mental illness that has come to Uganda. An insinuation has been made about Covid-19, which afflicted the population recently. However, we also need to examine the state of affairs in this country, especially poverty, loans, and the inability of our people to fend for themselves - taking their children to school, visiting a doctor, and so on, which leave very many people undiagnosed, and when they get –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 5.51DR NOAH MUSA (Independent, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. First of all, I want to thank the mover and the seconders of this very important motion. Mental health services in the country, I think in all parts of the country, are only accessed at regional referral hospitals. If you go to the districts and health facilities in our sub counties, you realise that we entirely do not have mental health services. Actually, it can be considered one of the neglected diseases in the country. This is because of the limited number of experts in the field and the inadequate funding to the health sector, especially for procuring medicines for mental health. I, therefore, want to support this motion and propose that the ministry or the country invests in training health experts. We need to fund the health sector so that they can deploy the staff and procure medicines. We also need to have public health interventions to address –(Member timed out.)5.52DR NICHOLAS KAMARA (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to second and support the motion, and I thank the mover and seconder.I have two points to make. First, mental illness is real: oftentimes, I have heard people say, “somebody committed suicide. How can you commit suicide? I cannot commit suicide.” No, committing suicide is just a disease; anyone can commit suicide.5916MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONThe moment we start understanding mental illness from that angle, then we start stigmatising; we start using words like mad, going berserk, and wires going off, which stigmatise people suffering from mental health. Secondly, we must talk about the causes. Of course, you have been talking about hospital-based care, but what causes this? (Member timed out.)5.53MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Yes, I am a medic but I know that mental health is caused by poverty, ignorance and disease.And really, in my district, Kumi, many men are committing suicide yet the population does not know what is causing the increasing number of these suicide cases. I really want to support the motion – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could it be women? (Laughter)MS CHRISTINE APOLOT: No, Mr Speaker. I am aware that in some facilities, they are psychiatric staff but at what level do we have these psychiatric staff. Anyhow, even if they are there, do they do counselling? And in facilities, where there are counsellors, are they doing – (Member timed out.)5.55COL DR VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion on mental health as presented. As the military, of course, most of our personnel suffer post-stress trauma from the so much work we do and so, they obviously expect me to talk about that although it is known that we have a way of handling that. After heavy loads of work, people go through a lot of stress while fighting to defend the country. And as a military institution in Uganda, we cater for that by having specialists. Additionally, I am going to speak quite a bit about the preventive measures. One of our colleagues, the Hon. Dr Kamara, talked about the causes and preventive measures. I think most times, here in Uganda or maybe in our practices –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, conclude.COL DR NEKESA: I would like to raise the importance of prevention. Most of the cases of mental stresses or illnesses are substance abuse and alcohol, and these are preventable. What has happened to our management abilities at family, schools, and society levels, to control the abuse of substances and alcohol use, which is part of our culture? We do not care much until we get the effects and then the costs are so high. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. 5.56MS OLIVER KOYEKYENGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the mover and seconder of the motion, as I add my voice.In Uganda, we have not been paying attention to this matter. And according to World Health Organisation, Uganda is among the top six countries, in Africa, with mental health illnesses.The Hon. Dr Bayigga talked about all those illnesses but it is quite unfortunate that we have only 42 psychiatrists to take care of the 14 million Ugandans. That is not believable and it cannot happen – (Member timed out.)5.57THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Busingye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issues of inaccessibility and affordability have been handled. I want to draw your attention to the rising number of dementia cases. Each day, it is not a surprise to reach your mother and find she cannot even remember your name. We even have issues with big personalities. I urge Government - much as we support this [Dr Kamara]5917THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022motion, dementia is also a very serious issue –(Interjections) – go away.  I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I think you are enjoying your evening because when you start talking about “takeaways” while debating mental health issues, then the reader of the Hansard – (Laughter) – yes, Member for Kapchorwa?5.59MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the mover and the seconders of the motion. I know that mental cases in Uganda are many yet it is one of the sectors that has been neglected for long. When I look around, walk or drive, I always meet people who are mentally sick, but nobody cares about them. They instead run away from them. So, I want to thank Government for constructing Butabika National Referral Mental Hospital, which is now handling many of the mental cases in Uganda. I also want to say that while Butabika National Referral Mental Hospital is passing out psychiatric nurses, year in year out, when you go to our hospitals – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, we are looking at this as a matter where on which can easily submit and move on, but the day you get a mental health patient in your home, you will know how difficult it is; the things they do are difficult. This is not someone whom you can take abroad, even if you have the money. Sometimes you might call for the services of people like Hon. Basalirwa – who said Hon. Basalirwa is a witch doctor? He used to be a counselor at Makerere University. Let us hear from Hon. Ariko, and thereafter, Hon. Achia.6.00MR HERBERT ARIKO (NRM, Soroti East Division, Soroti City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion. Particularly, I would like to take the House to the angle where probably we might not pick up; it is the issue of human resource for health. Whereas we talk about the lack of medical personnel to handle psychiatric cases at our various health facilities, currently, in Uganda, we have only two qualified mental health or psychiatric nursing examiners, and both have retired from active service. So, how shall we look at the aspect of preparing the human resource for health, when those that are responsible for training and fomenting mental healthcare trainers are not available? We must ensure that our institutions are able to train and channel out psychiatric professionals that will be posted to our various health facilities. I thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Remigio Achia and then the Member for Lyantonde. Colleagues, if you have spoken today, whether on procedure, order or information, please first sit. I want to pick those who have not spoken but if you have also come very late, remain seated because I know you - like Hon. Siraji has been with us since 2:00 p.m. 6.02MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nabilatuk): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to move an amendment to the prayers in the motion to require that a comprehensive assessment on the mental health status in this country and the study of the human health capacity, be done by the Ministry of Health and at a later date, bring a comprehensive report to this House. The report should also talk about the infrastructure available for mental healthcare services in this country. Hon. Kabanda, would you allow this motion to be amended? Otherwise, I realise that a few statistics have been thrown around. If it is true, the two experts in the country have retired - we said there are 14 million people with mental illnesses but we have talked about 42 doctors, so, what are the numbers? This is a very serious issue. As the Speaker indicated, it may not be easy even to take a mental health patient out of the country. 5918MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONTherefore, let us have a detailed analysis of the status of mental health infrastructure in our country so that we can come back to this House, examine the matter and see where the gaps are, the costs and what Parliament can do to address this matter. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Member for Lyantonde.MR ACHIA: I moved an amendment; is it seconded?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the amendment seconded? Chairperson, is that okay?MS AISHA KABANDA: Mr Speaker, the amendment is welcome. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the amendment seconded?  Okay, it is seconded by Hon. Sseggona, Hon. Kayondo, Hon. Rwemulikya, Hon. Nyakikongoro, Hon. Stella, Hon. Obigah Rose and Hon. Kugonza; okay, it is seconded by the whole House. I now put the question that we adopt the amendment. (Question put and agreed to.)(Amendment, adopted.)6.04MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support this motion.Mr Speaker, due to the lack of medical staff to deal with mental cases, some NGOs or business people have started putting up herbs to take care of some of these people but also exploiting Ugandans. For example, when you take your person, they charge you between Shs 200,000 and Shs 300,000 per day, yet there are few Ugandans who can afford such. If Government looks into this, then most Ugandans will be taken care of, other than leaving these people in hands of NGOs or business people. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 6.05DR ABRAHAM ISAMAT (NRM, Kapir County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are potential cases, even in Parliament, who could be suffering from mental illness. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to give us information on the potential cases? Go on, honourable member.DR ISAMAT: The matter we are discussing is a serious one. I am an animal psychologist, a veterinarian by training. We look at the behavior of a person, the reactions and responses of people to particular issues and you can straightaway tell that this one is a candidate. (Laughter) The issue we are discussing is affecting all of us.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are behaving in a manner that is doubtful. (Laughter)DR ISAMAT: The issue we are discussing actually affects all of us. I strongly support the motion and pray that there should be a lot of investment, as far as human resource development is concerned, especially for psychiatrists. There are several factors that cause mental illness. I thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I feared that the honourable colleague would conclude by saying that after analysing the behavior, some of us behave worse than animals, which he studied deeply – (Laughter) – but luckily enough, he remained in the area of human beings. Yes, Hon. Kyobe – Hon. Oseku, you have already spoken today.6.07MR LUKE KYOBE (NRM, Luuka North County, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On this issue of mental health, we are aware that after COVID-19, cases of mental health have increased. Therefore, I urge Government to look at the causes. For example, it could be because of loss of employment and high prices, which have accelerated everywhere.[Mr Achia]5919THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022People are talking about husbands or men taking their lives basically because of the high standards of living. The costs of basic things have gone high. There are high demands from women - (Laughter) – yes, so, we need to look at the causes other than the effects. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, these are serious issues. I think men need support. I have seen one of the telecoms companies running an advert saying: “Send money to your boyfriend and you win a car.” (Laughter) By the time we run adverts of that nature, it means men are doing badly; we need affirmative action. (Laughter)6.09MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County Budaka, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion. Colleagues, you are aware that mental health issues are a reality. If you went to some of our villages, you would realise that there is a clique of young men who have gone to waste, and if this matter is not handled adequately, we are destined for a big problem as a country. Mr Speaker, I implore the House to discuss this motion with a lot of soberness and all the seriousness it deserves.Mr Speaker, mental health cases are increasing. You have talked about what it takes to treat a person with mental illness in a family. It is very expensive – it depletes all of the resources. I urge Government – (Member time out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.6.10MR JOHN LEMATIA (NRM, Ayivu Division West, Arua City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. We are all victims of mental health. It is only the degree of madness, which differs. Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter in the societies where we come from. Because of the dynamics in societies, the number of people affected by this illness is increasing on a daily basis. We have talked about technical people dealing with this disease but the problem is not the absence of those technical people; it is the perception. Once one runs mad -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what degree of madness are you at?MR JOHN LEMATIA: Mr Speaker, it also varies from time to time. (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, we have enjoyed enough. Let us now be serious. Yes, Hon. Atima.MR JOHN LEMATIA: Mr Speaker, let me conclude. We need to do a lot of community awareness for them to appreciate that this mental health issue is real. We need a lot of sensitisation. We need to do - (Member timed out.)6.12MR JACKSON ATIMA (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. Looking at this number – 14 million Ugandans suffering from mental illness, out of about 46 million Ugandans – this is so perturbing. Parliament and the Government of Uganda, need to prioritise and support this cause. Looking at the recommendation of the committee, where they said that the facilities that were being used for mental health were transferred during the COVID-19 pandemic, Arua being an example - as I speak, people suspected to be suffering from mental illness are taken to prison – (Member timed out.)6.13MR ANDREW OULANYAH (NRM, Omoro County, Omoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and thank those who moved amendments thereafter. When you look at the statistics, they are worrying because 14 million people being the 5920MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONknown cases, is perturbing; there are others who have not been confirmed. My point is that without funds, all this cannot be achieved because we should institutionalise the support that is offered to mental health patients. If I go to a hospital, I should also be able to check my mental capabilities, not just checking for malaria and other issues. Can we have the mental aspect checked as well? That would also help us to manage stigma. This is because when one is known to have a mental issue, there is that stigma associated with it. It will take a bit of time, but it still comes down to the issue of funds. When the request for funds comes, can we, as Parliament, commit to supporting the Ministry of Health so that they are able to do that? Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think one day we should run a test for us to see how we are doing. (Laughter) 6.14MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of mental illness is serious. When we were moving around prisons, it was one of the concerns that were raised by prison officers, and there is no attention that is paid to the psychiatric department to intervene yet one is incarcerated in prison, they may have various challenges. Since we are all potential prisoners, we should make sure that, at least, that sector is supported. Mr Speaker, people were saying that men commit suicide, but 52 per cent of that 14 million are actually women. When you see men chopping, killing and battering women, do not think that they are normal; there is some kind of mental illness, except that we do not have people to run to. Usually, women are helped because they share out their disturbances and depressions - (Member timed out.)6.15MR SOWEDI KITANYWA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I also would like to join the rest of my colleagues in supporting the motion. I want to talk about drug abuse, especially among the youth. There is a correlation between drug abuse and mental health. In our rural areas -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, we only record what is on record. You know the case we are handling; do not over react.MR KITANYWA: Mr Speaker, among the youth, for example, we have a drug called Marijuana. Unfortunately, Marijuana – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, conclude; we interfered with your submission.MR KITANYWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Unfortunately, Marijuana, as a drug, has become a lucrative business along roads. You find vehicles loaded with lots of Marijuana and there is nothing happening to them. I pray that the implementers of the law, especially the law concerning narcotic drugs, put a lot of emphasis on the sale of marijuana in the country.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.6.17MS FAITH KUNIHIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The 10th of October 2022 will be a day for the World Mental Health Day, internationally and on 14 October 2022, my district will celebrate World Mental Health Day. The report that I recently received from my district indicates that 7,000 people that have been able to come to hospitals are suffering from mental health illnesses. So, out of the 14 million people in Uganda, 7,000 are found in my district. These people are not able to access the nearest mental healthcare services – [Hon. Macho: “Point of order, Mr Speaker!”][Mr Oulanyah]5921THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Basalirwa, when did you reach that side? Hon. Macho, I have not allowed you. Honourable member, please conclude.MS FAITH KUNIHIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I had indicated, 7,000 out of the 14 million people are in my district but the main hospital in the region does not have any mental health support staff or any help. As we have noticed, the report indicates that the majority of these 7,000 are female. We believe that one of the reasons women are suffering from mental health illnesses relates to gender-based violence in families. So, as we address the issue of mental health, we need to go back again and address the issue of gender-based violence at household level. 6.19MR GEOFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Over the weekend, I lost a cousin, at the age of 31, as a result of suicide and he was a medical practitioner. West Nile has a very big problem of youths abusing substances. There was a social media recording, where a young man, after eating mairungi, was telling a person questioning him that this is used as a family planning method; that after eating mairungi, they will not be able to look at women. If you look at the rate at which young men are stripping themselves naked and moving on the streets of Yumbe and Arua, you notice that it is a big problem. I appeal to Members to support the motion so that we can improve the situation. Thank you. 6.20MS JULIET BASHIISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice to second and support this motion. I urge recruitment agencies to be very careful. A few weeks ago, I got a phone call - I was here - from the Officer in Charge (OC) of Ndeeba Police Station. I was invited to the station to meet someone who was a criminal but I was surprised to realise the person was only having mental case. The man was staying with me; he is I think addicted to smashing glasses everywhere, whether they are for vehicles or not. He did it to me and I handed him over to relatives in Nakaseke.However, when I went there, I found out that this man works for a security agency and when one time was given a gun and told to guard vehicles – I think it was a car parking - he smashed all car screens. So, when I got to Ndeeba Police Station, I told them that the guy was not a criminal; it is a mental case. That is when they handed him over to the medical personnel.I would like to remind some of you - if you can remember what happened in Kiboga. There was this district engineer, Eng. Gordon; he was my friend. This engineer was killed by a mob because - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable member.MS BASHIISHA: Because he tried to open a car that was not his but he thought that was his car. I think he had been mentally sick since he left the university. So, as we recruit people, we should maybe subject them to some mental tests, especially security officers. Subject them to mental tests so that you do not hand over a gun to someone not maybe mentally stable. Thank you. 6.21MR PAUL ASABA (NRM, Kyaka North County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support this motion. All has been said about the causes of mental illness and the rest but I want us, as Parliament, to interest ourselves in – I want to give an example of a person who has been sick for almost three to four years in Butabika Hospital; for all those years. And after healing, this person is maybe supposed to go back home. First of all, socially, the community may reject him. They may think this person still has a mental problem. 5922MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONSecondly, this person may financially have nowhere to begin from. Therefore, I support the point that this sector be given enough money so that such people can be rehabilitated for them to fit into society after healing.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, if you recall, there was some video making rounds on social media, of a gentleman who attacked Hon. Kasaija when he was presenting something at the Uganda Media Centre, and the man was saying that he is a professor. He is called Vincent Nuwagaba; he is my brother. He is from my area and a PhD student at Makerere University. He is actually one of the best brains we have ever had in our area and in this country, but he has a mental problem. So, sometimes, it is about how we treat them in communities. He was diagnosed with bipolar problem, whereupon when he is very happy, it becomes a problem but also when he is disappointed so much, it becomes a problem. However, what support do we get? You just go to Butabika and even if you take him there, he has a way of getting out because knows every corner of Butabika. He will go with a uniform and disappear. Recently, as a group, we paid for his treatment at KIU Hospital but the issue is, it is very expensive to treat a mental health patient in this country; it is very expensive because it is not for him alone. Of course, it also goes back to the issue of consumer protection and I hope, the Attorney-General, our Bill is about to come here - these several drinks – recently, I saw a drink called “Bajaj”. It means if you take such a drink, you will be charged like a Bajaj. (Laughter) You will meet someone who is charged like a Bajaj, knocking everyone. So, we need to address issues of consumer protection.I want to confess that in our family, we have had an addict. We managed to take him abroad but he was deported. He even managed to get alcohol in Arab countries. So, it is beyond someone just running mad. Anyway, as I told you and without going into details, the day you get a mental case in your family, is when you will know what Hon. Aisha Kabanda, Hon. Macho and other colleagues are talking about. Parliament should use this opportunity - this can be one of the signature interventions we have made. Liaising closely with Government, we bring it to the attention of Government that this is a very serious case and we start funding it. I wish the Chairperson of the Committee on Health was here but colleagues are here. Hon. Remegio Achia, I will not wait for what you raised to fall under Rule 221 of our Rules of Procedure, on action reports. No! It needs to stand out so that the Minister of Health can come here and give us a statement on the status of mental health infrastructural support and we identify the money in the budget. Can we trace it? We will have helped very many people and seen a way of providing mental health medication and support to the health centres - at least at the health centre IV level. We also need the spiritual intervention of Hon. Jacob Karubanga after; he is a pastor.6.27MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  There is a challenge with the treatment of accident victims. We have very many of them, especially when they knock their heads. For example, my follower, up to now, he has a mental problem. When he starts talking, he speaks nonstop. This is because of the treatment, which we could not finish - poor me - Shs 64 million yet they needed more money - was too much. There are very many of such accident victims who are not properly treated. If we can give attention to accident victims, we would do a lot in curbing down on mental illnesses.Second is the patriarchal society. Women have more challenges with mental illness because they go through depression. Men go out but women remain with the children. When there is any hardship, it is the women who bear it head on –(Member timed out.)[Mr Asaba]5923THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 20226.29MR JACOB KARUBANGA  (NRM, Kibanda South County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to join colleagues in supporting the motion. The burden of mental health cannot be overemphasised. By the way, all of us are potential candidates. Therefore, I want to urge colleagues that we join hands in appropriating as much money as possible for this cause, but also join those who have proposed that the ministry carries out thorough research and present a holistic proposal for this intervention. Thank you. 6.29MR SAMUEL OKWIR (NRM, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my sister, Aisha and Hon. Macho for this motion. They say that statistics do not lie. It is on record that 35 per cent of Ugandans have issues of mental health and 15 per cent need attention. I lost a brother in 2020. He had this issue. We could not support him enough though we tried all we could. Right now, I have a cousin who is a clinical officer. He cannot work now. He has lost all his directions. So, when we are discussing issues of mental health, it is true that some of us are really touched and whatever intervention –(Member timed out.)6.30MR BENJAMIN KAMUKAMA  (NRM, Ruhaama East County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this chance. Fourteen million people translates to 31 per cent of the population of Uganda. When you break that down further, you realise that out of every three people you meet, one is sick. Actually, when I am seated with two other people, I start suspecting myself because this is a real problem. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, there must be causes, but one of the challenges is that even people who are sick do not want to accept that they are, and they do not know. There is stress that we suffer every day that causes most of these problems. We have people who have retired from their jobs and wait for ages without accessing their retirement benefits. This becomes a driving force to one becoming mad –(Member timed out.) 6.31MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to also add my voice to thank the mover of the motion. This is a serious matter for us to learn that many people are mentally disturbed. There are people you find moving on the road, but of course, speaking to themselves. Others make a lot of gestures and you wonder, what is happening.I want to share my experience on what is happening. There are families with people who are mentally disturbed, who have of course, caused sharp differences between family members because they attribute this to witchcraft. Secondly, Uganda Police Force has a very big problem. Whatever happens and there is a person who is mentally disturbed - there is one, who came to Kalongo Trading Centre where I stay and terrorised the entire town until he came to my home. When he got there –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, pastor. MR MUTEBI: When he came to my home, I did not remain with glasses in my windows. So, I had to call the police to get and take him to Butabika Hospital, but they had to ask for fuel. Therefore, police also needs to be considered because whatever happens, affects them on this particular day, they said they had no quarter release for fuel. Thank you.6.33MAJ. JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF REPRESENTATIVE): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to support the motion and appreciate the presenters. Mental health is a very big issue. One of the major causes is unemployment. If you look around - we have 5924MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONread stories in newspapers and on television youth committing suicide by jumping off flats. In homes, we have friends or relatives who are mentally challenged. In schools, we have the same.I would like to appeal to Government to at least also plan to recruit psychosocial staff and psychiatric nurses in schools. Young people tend to have a crush on their colleagues and end up with hysteria, which we call “convulsion disorder” in medical language. In the same vein, substance abuse is practiced in schools. So, early identification – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, conclude.MAJ ALANYO: Such matters can easily be handled by psychosocial staff and nurses. I beg to submit. 6.35MR SIRAJE EZAMA  (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the mover of the motion. This issue of mental health problem is a big one and very critical. In my area, cases of mental health are much associated with drug abuse. They begin from small cases and develop to large ones. Therefore, it will be appropriate if services are taken nearer to the people so that when such people are identified, they are immediately reported and treated. By leaving them uncontrolled means that they become very big and handling them might be a problem. That is my submission. Thank you.6.35MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This debate needed a full day because of its importance. Currently in Uganda, the number of accidents on our roads is increasing, day and a night. I am tempted to think we must do some quick research. Isn’t this connected to mental health? There could be a challenge.A driver will see another coming from the front but they will keep firing like they have a problem. Don’t we need to investigate this? Mr Speaker, I think that is something of interest. Of course, we need to talk about happiness levels in the country. In some countries, they now have ministers for happiness. When people are not happy, they can get mentally disturbed. We must invest in making people happy –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Silas, conclude. MR AOGON: When we do not observe the human rights of the citizens, people get mentally disturbed and so, we must observe the human rights of our citizens. Giving people equal opportunities, is another contributing factor. When somebody misses out on some opportunity today and tomorrow, and realise that they will never be considered, they get mentally disturbed. There is also the issue of social security. When a person loses a job, a marriage, or money, they get mentally disturbed. Mr Speaker, we need a full week to debate mental health –(Member timed out.)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you normal? (Laughter)  Now, from requesting for a day to a week. If I added you another minute, you would ask for a whole year.  Colleagues, we still have two items. You know, I want to sort your issues before we go into recess. Tomorrow, we have a long day with Bills. We have to handle the issue of the agriculture bank, and then the Minister of Local Government will respond to your issues. 6.37MR ERIC MUSANA (Independent, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like colleagues have said, I stand to [Ms Alanyo]5925THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022support this important motion. There is a very important matter where Government would interest itself and this is largely environmental. There are many issues that are happening in this country, but Government has not taken interest in them. We are discussing mental health but most of the things that are affecting our population and ourselves, come from the environment and Government has the capacity to tame them. Colleagues have mentioned many things to do with the economy, social services, provision of amenities - (Member timed out.) 6.39MR FRED KAYONDO (DP, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I totally agree with the motion. However, the motion is only talking about the treatment side of the story yet we should also be looking at the prophylaxis side of this matter. Mr Speaker, there is a factor that is crosscutting, from MPs to the voters and that is, debts and loans. Loans are pushing our people into mental illness. The moment Government neglected the financial sector and handed it over to the greedy sharks who are extorting huge interests from people - Mr Speaker, voters no longer –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Gilbert Olanya has been here since we began. 6.40MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you. Mr Speaker, Government needs to start identifying factors that are causing mental health illness. Different people have different problems, and majorly, people with problems are most likely to have mental problems. In Northern Uganda, for example, we had a war for long. In areas that were most affected by the war, very many people have mental problems because either their children or parents were killed, or nasty things happened in that particular area. Therefore, we can curb this by counseling and setting up a department that will keep on identifying area by area –(Member timed out.) 6.41MR CHARLES TEBANDEKE (NUP, Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I looked at the statistics as presented by the mover of the motion, 14 million out of the 45 million Ugandans, gives us 31 per cent of mental cases. When you look at the medical personnel; the 42 medical personnel we have are only at a ratio of 1:350,000. Mr Speaker, the only recognised health centre handling mental cases is Butabika National Referral Mental Hospital. All over Uganda, whenever a mental case is identified, it is referred to Butabika National Referral Mental Hospital. Therefore, there is a need to improve on that. Likewise, the attention on the so-called incurable –(Member timed out.)6.42MR TOM EKUDO (FDC, Gweri County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One, we need to ascertain the root causes of mental health. Even for us here, some leaders ask for something to smoke first, before they can talk. Even in this House, someone may have a matter of national importance and you have granted him or her a chance to speak, but you see them trying to –(Laughter)- one day, I wondered what the problem was, only to realise it was a mental case. It is about the degree of mental illness we have.Mr Speaker, we needed to do a lot of –(Member timed out.)6.43MS VERONICA NANYONDO (NUP, Woman Representative, Bukamansibi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the mover of the motion and the Members for the submissions. As Parliament, I think we should empower the village health teams, through sensitisation, so 5926MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONthat they can help us to identify the victims before their situation get worse. Village health teams live with these people before the doctors come to find them. I pray that Parliament interests itself in empowering the village health teams. For example, Mr Speaker, the people around the woman who killed her two children knew about her situation but because they did not know what to do, they – (Member timed out.)6.44MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I only want the frontbench to explain why public institutions that are training mental health service providers are very expensive. Even for those students that are admitted on a Government sponsorship, the demands are so exorbitant that the children of the poor can hardly afford them. This is a complete misunderstanding of what Government sponsorship is about. What are you planning to do about it? Somebody is admitted on a Government sponsorship in a public institution to undertake this mental-related course, but paying exorbitantly and actually, are failing to meet those expenses.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me first have Hon. Margaret Lamwaka and Hon. Adriko. (Members rose_) Colleagues, you had spoken. I will give you chance on the other issues we have.6.45MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (Independent, Chua East County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have looked at the health facilities we have - I say this because my mother has been suffering from depression since 2007 up to date and it is quite expensive. She cannot get medication. I wish we can have a psychiatry doctor or nurse at every health centre III.  In my area, one cannot get a psychiatric nurse at Namokora Health centre IV . As I talk, I also have a son of a mad woman that I picked when he was just seven days old. The boy is now –(Member timed out.)MR YOV AN ADRIKO (NRM, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this motion. It is true that we, the current leaders, are in problems over mental illness. For example, in Arua District, which shares a border with DRC, there is a lot of opium smoking, particularly in Vurra Constituency. Last week, a man aged 60 had sex with a three-year-old boy. The cause of all this could be opium smoking. Murder cases have also increased maybe because of opium smoking. Therefore, I appeal to this Government, particularly Parliament, to come up with serious action because in West Nile, we have problems. As we speak, murder cases are increasing. Thank you, Mr Speaker.6.48MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to remind Members that Uganda enacted the Mental Health Act in 2019, which repealed the Mental Treatment Act. I remember that on 27 April this year, Hon. Sarah Opendi raised a concern over the operationalisation of this Act. One of the items that were cited was the operationalisation of the advisory board to set standards and monitor the implementation of the Act. However, to date, nothing has been put in place as far as the operationalisation of the advisory board is concerned. Mr Speaker, we see a lot of negative attitude towards this course. Even in the family - I had a relative who had opted to go for psychiatric nursing and people were like: “How much will you be paid? That one is not even a well-paying profession. You would rather go for gynaecology or paediatrics.” So, probably, within our recommendations, we could come up with a resolution to increase pay to interest our people in this course. [Ms Nanyondo]5927THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022Also, the negative attitude is experienced in the way we relate with this disease. Few people would opt for formal health care when they cite a mental illness. They would first look for “African chemistry” and/or pastors. So, that negative attitude of not first thinking of formal health treatment, is also challenging us. Further, the sequential recovery in Butabika is not there. They are going for –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, conclude.MS KAAYA: Thank you. They are going for extremists, who, sometimes, are tied with ropes. And the moment the ropes are off, they even call you: “Yours is at least okay. Please, take him.” My father has been sick since 1997 and I have been treating him. So, I have serious experience. Anyway, we do not have those other recovery options that “maybe wait here and you receive this counselling.” So, we are calling on the rehabilitation centres to trickle the services down from the national up to the lower levels. Let us have these nurses, at least, at health centres III. Otherwise, for somebody from Kiboga - our ambulance is ever the police cabin. It is not these normal ambulances yet our people need to be treated with dignity. Not that every time someone has to go to Butabika, they have to be on a police patrol pick-up. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, we have debated enough. Chairperson, you don’t need to respond to these issues. You have had tremendous support. I have another colleague, whom I want. Please, just one minute.MS AISHA KABANDA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make this statement. First, I would like to thank colleagues for overwhelmingly supporting this motion. However, to show the seriousness of this matter, statistics show that Uganda is No.1 in Africa in alcohol consumption and we are No.8 in the whole world. So, that shows that either alcohol consumption is responsible for these mental issues or is a precursor to another future problem. The earlier we act, the better for us. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, we have had an extensive debate. I now want to put the question that the Motion for Resolution of Parliament urging Government to prioritise and improve mental health and psychiatric care in Uganda, be adopted with amendments.(Question put and agreed to.)Report, adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable member. You have raised a very important issue. Minister, we need a statement, which I have asked for, plus the action-taken report on this resolution, as per Rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure within three months but the statement is needed within one month. After recess, we need this statement so that we can continue with this debate. The Committee on Health is hereby directed to take up these issues seriously and ensure that when we are considering the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Health, indeed, these issues are addressed. MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO ESTABLISH A NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL BANKTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, we shall make this brief.5928MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION6.53DR AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am here to move a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament urging Government to establish a national agriculture bank, moved under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The motion reads: “WHEREAS Objective XI(ii) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy of the 1995 Constitution of Uganda obligates the State to stimulate agricultural development by the enactment of enabling legislation;AWARE THAT the agriculture sector is the backbone of Uganda’ s economy, accounting for approximately 24 per cent of the country’ s Gross Domestic Product, 43 per cent of the country’ s exports and employs 70 per cent of the population;CONCERNED that financing by farmers and agri-business micro, small and medium-size enterprises remains a challenge, mainly due to market price fluctuations, low market access for agricultural produce and the lack of collaterals, given that the agricultural sector is significantly informal;FURTHER CONCERNED that farmers’ cooperatives and agri-businesses in Uganda lack a centralised bank, which can facilitate access to affordable short, medium and long-term financing to boost productivity and investment in agricultural activities, both on small and large scale, and also a bank that can effectively support Government’ s initiative to shape and implement policies on agricultural credit financing;COGNISANT that Parliament has, on several occasions, through committee reports and parliamentary debates, emphasised to Government the need for a bank that can lead capacity-building strategies and programmes aimed at strengthening the agricultural value chain financing and ultimately developing the agriculture sector;RECOGNISING that Government has in the past provided mechanisms through which farmers and agri-businesses could access agricultural credit finance services such as agricultural credit facility in Bank of Uganda working in partnership with various commercial banks; Uganda Development Bank Limited, Microfinance Support Centre and Pride Microfinance, among others, with the aim of facilitating the provision of short, medium and long-term financing to projects engaged in agriculture and agro-processing, focusing mainly on commercialisation and value addition;AWARE THAT despite Government’ s interventions to provide agricultural credit finance services, farmers’ cooperatives and agro-businesses continue to grapple with the challenge of accessing agricultural credit financial services to upgrade and increase productivity since the credit financing services offered to the various sectors in the agricultural sector are usually unaffordable and generally inaccessible due to the stringent conditions attached to them; FURTHER AWARE that the continued absence of affordable agricultural credit finance services by farmers and agribusinesses defeats the objective of Sustainable Development Goal No.2, which aims at promoting sustainable agriculture; COGNISANT THAT a bank that is solely for provision of financial services for agricultural development is an engine for the promotion and transformation of the agricultural sector from subsistence to commercialised modern farming and ultimately facilitates economic growth, food security and reduction in poverty; NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that Parliament urges Government to establish a National Agricultural Bank.” I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by Hon. Alioni, Hon. Tebandeke, Hon. Nulu Byamukama, Hon. [Mr Tusiime]5929THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022Remigio Achia, Hon. Bagonza, Hon. Silas Aogon, Hon. Hajjat Watongola – sorry I was thinking of the Rt Hon. Wetang’ula in Kenya.Honourable member, would you like to speak to your motion? DR APEA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your support. The issue of the national agricultural bank is not a new thing. Our mighty NRM party manifesto for 2021-2026 requests or directs or had planned to establish a National Agricultural Bank. Our Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development Strategic Plan of 2017-2021 - which has ended when it has actually not done this - has also recommended a specific sector bank.Mr Speaker, our UN principle of leaving no one behind really makes this motion applicable, in terms of not leaving our farmers behind in the money economy. Our farmers are informal. This motion would help if Government adopts it to formalise micro-farmers to be competitive in the capital space with the understanding that this would not only increase their purchasing power, but also give them an opportunity to engage in the money economy. Mr Speaker, as you are aware, labour is a major factor of production but this labour moves where it is paid. The trend of rural-urban migration we are seeing now is because we have made our agriculture very unproductive. Therefore, formalising or establishing a bank where farmers can access financing and fund their farming activities would retain our young people, and provide jobs and income for not only the households but for our young people. Mr Speaker, an agricultural bank is a foundation of many economies that we see lending most of these listed countries, for example, China, Japan, and the United States of America. Most of these economies have specifically put in place agricultural banks to improve their agricultural system. In Africa, we have seen countries like Kenya, Nigeria and Egypt where there are agriculture-specific banks that support their agricultural economy. Mr Speaker, the issue of a national agricultural bank is wide-spread knowledge not only to our farmers but also to our financial sector where in this country we do not have any specific bank for agriculture business. There are only banks that will run and say, “We are going to give farmers money,” but at the end of it, because of the nature of farming, our farmers’ interest rates for these loans are not considered because they are regarded as very risky ventures. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Remigio Achia? Seconders you have a maximum of three minutes and then I open the debate.7.02MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nabilatuk): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In 2010, I was one of the people who were picked to write the NRM Manifesto and I am very happy that today the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is one of the active people who has strongly -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you switch on, honourable member? The microphone is off. MR ACHIA: Thank you. Members, we must acknowledge the shortcomings of the Structural Adjustment Programmes. In the 1990s, our country was convinced that it was bad business to be involved in rural banking. Uganda’s Cooperative Bank was closed when it was profitable and the results are there. We were forced to sell Uganda Commercial Bank when it was profitable. Today, we recognise the role of Government to actively participate in addressing the question of the large majority of the people of Uganda. The whole thinking behind the Parish Development Model, Entandikwa , the Youth Livelihood Programme – we have been moving around the issues, but exactly what do we want to do? We want to empower our people to have access to cheap credit. Any country which does not have the power muscle of amassing resources for its people, is actually running around the corner.5930MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONToday, Uganda Development Bank and many other banks are not actually focusing on rural people. Stanbic Bank, formerly Uganda Commercial Bank, which we sold now controls 43 per cent of our deposits. And do you know it is owned by other people, not Ugandans. We must find within our Government – and nobody should tell us we cannot do it – we must find capacity - since we are putting billions of shillings in PDM, we now have pillar three in PDM called financial inclusion. We have NDP III, which is talking about agro-based industrialisation. It is time we reformed. Again, how we are providing credit to rural people? This time round, we know that our people – we have been told by the World Bank that our poor people are not bankable. Today, through the rural SACCOs, we know that our people are bankable; they can mobilise resources to pay loans, and moreover at high-interest rates. If we provide cheap loans accessible at affordable rates - at the Central Bank rates - we must now mobilise our people to access credit at the terms that show that this Government is determined to provide loans to the people of Uganda. What is it to talk about agro-industrialisation if we cannot give financing, which is available within our Government? We are putting many billions of shillings in PDM and Youth Livelihood Programme; we have so much money that if we mobilise and organise, the role of an agricultural development bank is long overdue. Members, justifications of the stories that Government cannot do business are all over. There is the Microfinance Support Centre; it is doing banking and it is owned by Government – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, conclude because your time is up. Switch on the microphone so that you are on record. MR ACHIA: In my conclusion, Mr Speaker, I urge my colleagues to put aside the scarecrow stories of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank and put in place a bank, in this country that we are going to run; that will be profitable; and that will fight poverty. We need a bank that will be the bedrock of rural mobilisation and will build the culture of saving, and will be the entry point where our people can access affordable credit.In conclusion, the so-called poor Ugandans are bankable; they can make deposits, can access credit, they can pay for it and we can create a profitable rural agricultural development bank. Thank you.7.07DR EMELY KUGONZA (NRM, Buyanja East County, Kibaale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think for the movers and seconders, the qualification was a PhD. This means the brains we have in this House are sufficient. (Laughter)DR KUGONZA: Yes, I support the motion moved by my colleague. In this country, we do not have poor people; we have poorly organised and un-resourced people. The national agriculture bank can break this cycle and we have prosperous people. In this country, the banking centre is foreign-owned, commercial and certainly, the farmers, who are a majority of the population, are not part of the priority. This leaves a very huge gap, well knowing that agriculture in this country contributes 24 per cent to GDP, 43 per cent of the export earnings and employs about 70 per cent of the population. On why the banking sector is not supporting agriculture, my colleagues have already mentioned that they take these people as high risky because of the vagaries of weather associated with agriculture. They lack collateral, they suffer price fluctuations, and they operate in small units and are also difficult to manage because of their numbers. But all this is wishful thinking because these people are not here to support the local people but STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT[Mr Achia]5931THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022themselves. They are looking at supporting themselves. When you look at the idea of starting an agricultural bank, you realise that that bank will be able to secure the independence and sovereignty of this country, economically. That is why we want to look at - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Switch on the microphone, honourable; you are off record.DR KUGONZA: Thank you. The smallholder farmers have got the potential of turning around this economy because they are operating in a sector where our country has got a highly competitive advantage. An agricultural bank will boost access to the badly-needed credit. Everybody knows the importance of money in turning around businesses. So, the establishment of a national agriculture bank will be a game changer in our cry, as a country, to achieve socio-economic transformation, across the board. Now, none of them will definitely boost access to production and productivity, as people will be able to access the long-term credit. In the market today, the farmers are given - because they need the capital, they go to the banks, which give them short-term credit yet agriculture itself by nature is long-term. So, we need a bank that understands the farmer and a bank that is able to walk the journey of developing the farmer so that at the end of the day, the farmer can also be part of the money economy in this country. Establishing the agricultural bank will save Government from spending money annually - because every year we appropriated money, through all these schemes - the Parish Development Model which has just come on board because we do not have a vehicle where we can permanently keep our money for the farmers to access it. So, by having a bank and looking at what we have been able to put out there, even what is budgeted now is good enough for us to start our bank in operation.So, I urge colleagues to implore Government to support the establishment of an agricultural bank that we needed yesterday if we are to develop this country to the level that we want it to be. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, colleagues. I now open up the debate. On issues of agriculture, people like Hon. Kayemba Solo seem to be uncomfortable. Colleagues, we will not take much time on this. Let me start with the Shadow Minister for Agriculture.7.12DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion urging Government to start a national agricultural bank. In the agriculture sector, the lack of agricultural credit financing is one of the big challenges. We need affordable credit for the farmers and for the entire value chain if we are going to foster agriculture as a driver for our economy.We need a bank that clearly understands the dynamics of agriculture and considers these dynamics while they are formulating lending products so that farmers can access this affordable credit. Affordable credit is very critical for us to provide financing and funding to agro-industrialisation, right from production to the highest level of the value chain. Therefore, I stand to support and ask Government that this must be a priority - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, Shadow Minister, 5932MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONDR BWANIKA: Thank you. This programme, for us to put in place a national agriculture bank, must be a priority for Government but we need a policy - and I am happy that the Minister of Agriculture is here - which is very important to support this national agriculture bank. I hope we will see that policy soon to help the farmers to access financing. I thank you, so much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, remember we are limited by Article 93 of the Constitution in whatever we are doing. We cannot pass resolutions where we are saying, “You must do this” no, this is the proposal to Government and so, we only urge Government to take this seriously because it is in good faith. And as MPs, we want to support it. Otherwise, we cannot pass a resolution moved by a private Member that has a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund. Now, I would like to know MPs who are farmers. You know Bakiga are known for digging. You people of Arua - I do not know. Colleagues, I am going to allow you one minute. We have a serious farmer in Hon. Alioni, one of the biggest cassava farmers in the country. 7.16MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from a cooperative background. Outside this Parliament, I am engaged with Bugisu Cooperative Union where I am a board member with over 1,000 households of farmers. The biggest challenge with the farmers always is the failure to access crop financing, and the only way to access it, of course, is through an agricultural bank. We had a Cooperative Bank, which was thriving very well in this country. We keep wondering why the NRM Government, when they came to power, had their own intentions of destroying the cooperative bank. That was the only way farmers could access credit, get those loans, have farming inputs and thrive in agriculture. So if they have –  (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, conclude.MR SSASAGA: If they have come up with a second thought of reviving the cooperative bank – actually, Mr Speaker, I ask them to revive the cooperative bank instead of creating a new bank because the cooperative bank had shareholders. There was capital for the farmers and Ugandans in this country – (Interjection)  - no, they did not die. What was closed was the Cooperative Bank Limited. Uganda Cooperative Bank has never been closed. Some mafias created another company in 1986, which they called “The Uganda Cooperative Bank Limited” whose assets they froze and in the process, they attached the property for Uganda Cooperative Bank. I, perhaps, propose, that instead of creating another bank, better go and revive the Uganda Cooperative Bank, where Ugandans have shares. 7.18MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Allow me to appreciate my sister for the motion and I am here to support it on having a national agriculture bank. However, as we do this, we need to consider our local people. How are they going to access it? I know it is a big challenge in our country when it comes to farmers, especially those in Rukiga, on how to access such banks. They always get loans at a higher rate and end up failing to pay back. Mr Speaker, I support the motion 100 per cent and request that we consider our local people when they are getting loans. Thank you.7.18MR HERBERT ARIKO (NRM, Soroti East Division, Soroti City): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you. I thank the hon. Dr Apea, for the motion. I stand to support the motion for a few reasons. One is that this bank will help us with the stabilisation of prices and the market for 5933THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022agricultural produce. One of the key problems we have with our agricultural production now is that the farmers are not certain about where they will sell, and at what prices. So, I believe that the bank will provide a product that will help us gain certainty of where and how much to sell our product at.The second thing is about value addition. We try to do agriculture in Uganda but most of the time, we sell our product in raw form. This bank will provide the opportunity for financing for machinery and equipment for the farmers – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Member for Karamoja? (Hon. Basalirwa rose_) MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Sports Club, I am getting concerned that you are sitting for too long. Health experts tell us that when you sit for more than three hours consecutively without a break, it affects your health. You are still young. (Laughter) I am seeing you taking something; you are still productive. However, Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you to allow a two-minute health break, for purposes of our health?  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: House is suspended for two minutes. (Laughter) (The House was suspended at 7.21 p.m. and on resumption at 7.23 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, you know we have a lot of Members’ issues that I want us to clean up before we go for recess. We are trying to control and see that we do not leave a lot of pending issues and continue processing them. Some are always overtaken by time. When I met with the Speaker, we agreed that before we go for recess, we clean up these pending issues so that Government can start well. Colleagues, it is also not good to sit for long. Like Hon. Basalirwa has advised us, you also need to work out. In a day, my target is to do a minimum of 10,000 steps, and you can do it. When you are in office, move around. When you reach home, just walk around. Do not be a boss everywhere. Most of you can afford a smart watch, it helps to count the steps; how many steps you have taken; you look at your breathing rate and work out.By 6.30 a.m., I am always with Hon. Caroline Kamusiime, Hon. Kirabo, Hon. Kateshumbwa and Hon. Alioni playing golf. We are on the course by 6.30 a.m. Some of you, by 6.00 a.m., are playing basketball. So, we need to work out but that is an excuse for sitting here and we do not stretch. So, let us move quickly because I am going to preside over the World Tourism Day celebrations after here.7.25MR ALBERT LOKORU (NRM, Tepeth County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion on establishing the national agricultural bank in our country. This motion is timely and ideal for our farmers because this time around in this country, we are talking about very important projects to transform households in the rural areas. I come from Karamoja and our main economic activity is livestock rearing. In Karamoja, we have also – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, conclude. We have one minute each.MR LOKORU:  - in marketing livestock. Do you know what? The method of saving money is too traditional and it warrants the establishment of this particular bank we are talking about.A person sells a bull at cost of Shs 2 million but keeps the money in a coat, which is risky. (Laughter) When we have this bank in place, it will help many of our farmers. Thank you very much.5934MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION7.26MR YOV AN ADRIKO (NRM, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this motion. It is true that agriculture is the backbone of Uganda’s economy. Ninety per cent of the MPs here are farmers.What I am advising - local farmers are faced with a lot of challenges, particularly in terms of lack of capital. I will be happy if Government supports local farmers with agricultural loans. Secondly, my people in Vurra Constituency are requesting for hoes. Recently, Government gave hoes and farmers were very happy. This time, they request Government to support them – (Member timed out.)7.27MS ZUMURA MANENO (NRM, Woman Representative, Obongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I second the motion that Government should establish a bank for farmers. My reasoning is that wherever we establish the bank, it should be accessible to the community. If it is going to be regional, let it go to every region such that the farmers, who are deep in the villages of Obongi for example, will also be in position to access it. Thank you. 7.28MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County, West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister. I am really happy that this is coming when you are the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I think this is the best news that everybody in this House should open their hands to and welcome.Mr Speaker, when you get the opportunity to meet up with the Head of State, tell him that I think this will be a landmark achievement, if it ever comes to fruition. However, Mr Speaker, agriculture and industrialisation are like twin sisters. Agriculture is Nyakato  and industrialisation is Nyangoma. I would propose to Government that this bank be twinned for us to have “agriculture and industrialisation Bank” – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins, conclude. MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, I was just saying that for us to complete the equation, we intertwine agriculture with industrialisation for us to have a push into the middle income. Mr Minister, this is something that you have to pursue before you are transferred to another ministry. Thank you. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a looming transfer? (Laughter)7.29MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. If you go to our current banks, you will see there is something written as, “agricultural loans” but if you go to that section, you may find there is no consideration for an agricultural loan because there is no crop, which has a gestation period of less than three months. So, the banks give out an agricultural loan, they expect the farmer to pay within three months. What kind of agricultural loan are we talking about? We need a loan, which can accommodate the farmers, keeping in the mind the gestation period and the market effect at the same time. The loan we have also has issues. There are situations where the bank requires the farmer to give a land title, yet – (Member timed out.)7.31MR ALIONI ODRIA  (NRM, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to submit as a farmer. In 2009, there was the formation of the Uganda Agricultural Credit Facility. In this, the fund is managed by Bank of Uganda and Government is represented by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This facility has been giving loans at an interest rate of 12 per cent. However, accessibility to that fund is a very big challenge.Mr Speaker, I am fully in support of the formation of the agricultural bank – (Member timed out.)5935THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am adding you a minute. MR ODRIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Why we need this bank is that we, the farmers, are expecting the minister for finance to come here tomorrow and present something on the situation the farmers are going through. I am one of the victims. I have invested a loan of over Shs 480 million in my seed development project. We used to work with NAADS, but everything was scrapped. We are in trouble and we need this bank. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure?MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Right now, Government has set up an agricultural loan. It is giving tractors and helping farmers in northern Uganda, through Post Bank.Looking at this motion, Mr Speaker, I would like to find out if it is still necessary to urge Government to establish a separate bank. Why not ask Government to improve on the services being rendered through Post Bank to the farmers? Are we proceeding well? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, we do not have a Post Bank branch in Bushenyi and Mitooma. If you are getting their services, we are not.Secondly, Government has many interventions scattered in different banks. There is a facility under Bank of Uganda – you can go to UDB, Centenary - they are scattered. And what the honourable colleague is saying is that they could be consolidated under one bank instead of them being scattered. This would be a Government bank to focus on agriculture only. (Applause)Above all, this is not a directive to Government; it is a proposal for Government to go and look at. Therefore, Government will still have leverage on seeing how best it can implement this resolution, in case it is adopted. So, honourable member, I think we are proceeding well.7.35MR CHARLES TEBANDEKE (NUP, Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the mover of the motion and also strongly support it. Financial accessibility is the focal point in solving the challenges of the farmers. When we establish an agricultural bank, it will help in lending money to our farmers for a long period and at a lower interest rate. Some of the countries that have adopted this have developed very much in agriculture, for instance, Nigeria.Mr Speaker, reducing poverty and improving food production can be achieved by 80 per cent should we establish the agricultural bank. I beg to submit.7.36MR RONALD KANYIKE (NUP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I entirely support this motion. I am very excited that this initiative has come at a time when there are no elections coming up in a few months. This is because many initiatives have not helped our people because they come towards or during election time and they take them as political tokens. It is very true that our people are living in a destitute state of life because many programmes have elevated them from their poverty state. We have NDP III, Vision 2040 and Sustainable Development Goal 1, which is, “End poverty in all its forms everywhere.” I think this programme if it is well formulated and implemented, I am very sure it will –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Santa. 7.37MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Repre-sentative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion with these three submissions. 5936MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONOne, I am a farmer. Two, during the UPC Government, Uganda had a bank, which would help farmers with loans at subsidised rates. Therefore, I would like to see what happened during the UPC Government also happen in this Government. Three, majority of women are farmers. They are in rural areas, and lack access to credit. So, if this bank is given the light of the day, then these women will have access to the bank and will improve their productivity and add value to their products. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Kyoga, Hon. Aisha and then Rwampara and Kumi. 7.38MR MOSES OKOT (FDC, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I associate myself mutatis mutandis the submissions of my colleagues. Mr Speaker, the establishment of an agricultural bank is the best thing we can do for the country at the time. However, I must appreciate the fact that as a country we do appreciate dual existence of an economy. We have appreciated capitalism and Marxism.  In the very manner, if we must do social engineering at the very grass root, the only way to go is to establish an agricultural bank that takes care of the interest of the common man or the hoi polloi  and –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  I had picked Aisha. But honourable, you know, me and you when we were legal scholars, mutatis mutandis, means with the necessary amendments and all that. So what amendments did you propose?MR MOSES OKOT: What I wanted to propose is that you cannot eat your cake and keep it at the same time. When we appreciated the IMF and World Bank policies, our arms were arm-twisted. In so doing, we must be very careful in appreciating the establishment of such a bank that expects 100 per cent Government participation, which would be directly arm-twisting the position of the World Bank and IMF. That is the intention of the mutatis mutandis. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not gotten the modification. (Laughter)7.40MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In August this year, my district started a farmers’ cooperative society. Last week, the farmers met and resolved to start farmers’ shops around and that farmers would be loaned farm supplies against money. However, then the big question to us leaders they are speaking to is: who would facilitate these farms supplies, the fertilizers, pesticides? Therefore, having a farmers’ bank is very important. However, even when we do not have a right to bring motions that have financial implications, this is not going to be rocket science. You will have started Parish Development Model, which is for farming - (Member timed out.)7.41MR JULIUS TUSIIME (Independent, Rwampara East County, Rwampara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Under the current agriculture products that we have in commercial banks, the challenge for our local populace is that one cannot even have an agricultural product insured under the schemes. Mr Speaker and colleagues, the establishment of an agriculture bank, not only shall it provide appropriate technology financing, it will also provide affordable credit to our local farmers. This is a noble motion and I, therefore, stand to support it, because it will enable us to increase productivity and agro-industrial development in Uganda. I thank you, and I call upon the Minister and Government to receive it ably and ensure that it is implemented. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us hear from Veronica, then Kumi, then I pick STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT[Ms Alum]5937THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022Hon. Musana, Hon. Milton and Hon. Noah, and then I pick Hon. Nuru, Hon. Frank, Hon. Amos and Hon. Enosi. 7.42MS VERONICA NANYONDO (NUP, Woman Representative, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the mover of the motion. In this Parliament, we have passed many Government programmes aimed at improving people’s standard of living. However, in most cases, we have failed. I pray that before we offer our full support to the establishment of this agricultural bank, let our farmers out there know all the do’s and don’ts of this bank. Let them know all the necessary requirements that farmers will need to have to access the loans, let us sensitise the people so that we establish a bank when they have all the information - (Member timed out.) 7.43MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I first want to appreciate the doctors plus Hon. Remigio; thank you for the brilliance; you are indeed looking at our future and securing our future. Mr Speaker, from the financial perspective of this country, looking at our economy and how it is performing, I have a concern that the cost of money is the real barrier that has been hindering us from the progress that we have been waiting for. Therefore, this is the right moment for us to say that we support this motion. Let Government not to waste time. Let it support this brilliant idea from the brilliant doctors; it is the way to go. Once we support this motion and we have a national agricultural bank, you will note a decline in the cost of money straight away. Number two, we shall be able to raise our taxes –(Member timed out.)7.44MR ERIC MASANA (Independent, Buyaga East County, Kagadi). Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to support this motion because it is a game changer. The biggest problem that the country has been facing is unemployment. Mr Speaker, we are talking about agricultural value chain, agro-processing, value addition; previously, these have only just been put on paper. If we introduce the national agricultural bank, and these are operationalised, we would see a lot of employment to our young people and we would solve the biggest problem we are facing in this country and have peace. The language of the agriculturalists will only be understood by an agricultural bank - (Member timed out.)7.45MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion on two grounds. One, this motion is helping my party and our Government because this was a commitment made to Ugandans during campaigns that the NRM manifesto will see us have an agriculture bank for the farmers. Therefore, it is timely and I thank the doctors, who came up with this motion. Secondly, Mr Speaker, in the early 1980s, the cooperative movement was very vibrant: Busoga Cooperative Union, Bugisu Cooperative Union, Banyankore Kweterana and Teso Cooperative Union and they were premised on the Cooperative Bank, which used to support farmers. Now that we are responding to the call and the plight of Ugandans, this is the right time to ask our Government to fast-track this – (Member timed out.)7.46MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My father was the Chairperson of Buruuli Cooperative Union in the 1970s. This was the time when the farmers were joined together to support the cooperative bank, which existing that time. But at the same time, 5938MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONthe unions and the cooperative societies used to get together and of course, at the end of the day, when the season of planting came, the seeds would be in stores on time. However, in our time in Government, we bring seeds almost at the end of the season. I fully support this motion because the creation of this bank will help our farmers and also revive the cooperative banks and cooperative societies. I beg to submit. 7.47MR NULU BYAMUKAMA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Philippians started a commercial bank in 1908. China started an agricultural bank in 1951. In 2001, we fought to make sure that the Uganda Commercial Bank becomes an agricultural bank but Government did not listen to us. Now that you have come, I am so happy –(Interjections) - yes, since 2001 and I was here. Yes, since 2001 I have not been happy. This is the day that I am starting to smile because the bank –(Member timed out.) 7.48MS MELSA A V AKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to thank the doctors for this important motion. The rural population in our country, Uganda, majorly depends on agriculture for their livelihood, and it is normally very difficult for them to practice commercialised agriculture due to financial constraints. Therefore, I second this motion that Government takes it up to establish this agricultural bank. Thank you.7.49MR ENOS ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion on two grounds. The first is that I look at how accessible this bank can be to our farmers. The current commercial banks that are trying to provide services to farmers are not that accessible. Therefore, I also look at this as being another opportunity to have a bank that will have tailor-made services for the farmers. They provide what we need, not what the commercial banks offer to us. However, we also need to look at the challenges that come with a commercial bank that is fully owned by Government. There is also a chance of misusing that opportunity like UCB was mishandled by a few politicians. So, while I support the motion in all ways, we need to critically look at the proposal. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, that is why I have been warning you about interfering with Uganda Development Bank. There is a time when people would go to Uganda Development Bank and get money and after they would go to the Ministry of finance and ask some officials there to make a call and declare the loan bad; that bank was making big losses. Now, when we left them to be free to do corporate governance, the funders - because we do not have much money to put in, so, funders like IBADEA, the Islamic Development Bank and the International Monetary Fund will only give money if they find we are not interfering. We are doing our oversight duty. So, we have very good examples, colleagues.Now, we can no longer interfere as politicians. We have to always be very cautious in trying to interfere with the operations of these banks. Otherwise, they will only get money, which we can appropriate yet we cannot afford for example, to raise US$ 300 million. But if they can borrow on concessional terms and are run in a proper manner, then they will be able to raise cheap capital, and that is very important.7.51MR JOEL LEKU (NRM, Terego West County, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The need for an agricultural bank is long overdue. Us who come from West Nile know what the Cooperative Bank did during that time. [Mr Mutebi]5939THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022The only time we had money in circulation in West Nile, was when the Cooperative Bank was in existence. However, there are issues, which need to be addressed regarding the agricultural bank; the security for the loans, we need to squarely address that. Then, there is the cost of insurance in commercial banks, which is about 2 per cent. This is a little bit on the higher side for a common farmer. We need to look at it closely. Then there is the issue of incorporating the SACCOs into this agricultural bank –(Member timed out.)7.53MR FRANCIS LORIKA (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad that we are discussing something that has been long overdue; the issue of supporting farmers. It is true, we can only transform this country through agriculture. However, this has been lacking because most of the farmers have been borrowing money from money lenders to manage some of their farms. This is a very good idea that I believe will support, especially those who have always had the ability or have had the dreams of transforming from subsistence to commercial farming. So, they will actually be able now to get money and also progress into other business sectors. I am glad that my colleagues are supporting this. I also want to inform you that –(Member timed out.) 7.54MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am actually disappointed that the concept of the Parish Development Model came without thinking about having this bank. I just want to take you right to the grassroots because these days, agriculture has become very expensive; there is need for cheap credit. The majority of our people do not even have land these days; they just rent land to farm. So, when they get this money, they will be involved and will be able to get employment. Productivity will go up and people will gain incomes. We need inputs for agriculture, vaccines, pesticides and insecticides but people cannot afford them. These days, even maize is sprayed. So, people need the money and this bank should be able to provide this – (Member timed out.)   7.55MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Indeed, this is what can redeem the farmers of Uganda; they needed this yesterday. In our neighbourhood, in Kenya, this is what has reformed the farmers. Mr Speaker, today you were struggling here with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development asking for seedlings and what have you. If we had the agricultural bank, the scheme would have solved the problem. So, it is like we are just in a bottle and not going anywhere, because today, we were discussing matters that can be handled by this kind of bank. So, it is my humble prayer, honourable minister, that these proposals be tabled and considered by the Cabinet of Uganda because Uganda cannot move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Amos? 7.56MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. All the good ideas Members have contributed here, I support them as well. Mr Speaker, it is true we need an agricultural bank because there is already an opportunity. When you go to the rural people, you notice that 80 per cent of the farmers in Uganda have already started an informal way of saving and lending money to themselves. That is already an opportunity, which Government can build on. 5940MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONHowever, we need to go deeper and study because there is going to be a fight from commercial banks. They will not allow funds from the agricultural bank to operate, unless Government puts its feet down strongly –(Member timed out.)7.57MR   RICHARD ANYWAR (NRM, Agago West County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Given that 80 per cent of our population depends on agriculture or are directly employed in agriculture, this bank coming in place though still a little bit late, it will transform agriculture into a money-making business for most of our farmers. Secondly, Mr Speaker, given the climate change and weather patterns that threaten agriculture, through this bank, farmers will be able to insure their crops and this will help in giving them confidence in working in agriculture –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Asaba?7.58MR PAUL ASABA (NRM, Kyaka North County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Member who has brought this motion. For sure, I consider the mover and the seconder heroes in this country. We needed this yesterday. I only request the honourable minister and those who sit in the Cabinet to ensure that this goes through without any hindrance. Mr Speaker, when you look at how our farmers get loans from other banks; the requirements - the banks do not even care when a farmer makes a loss. They will still require them to continue paying; it is really painful and the only solution is having an agricultural bank in place. And it is only today that Parliament is talking about our farmers who are engaged in agriculture. I am very happy and I think we will liberate – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, would you like to make a comment? 7.59THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Hon. Dr Apea and the seconders for the motion; I appreciate the logic. If you look at all our interventions in developing the agricultural sector, just like you will find breeding, seed generation and multiplication and research, important, so is agricultural financing. However, because a clear framework of financing has never been discussed and put in place, we keep on shifting from one trial to another. My commitment to Parliament is that we will receive the idea. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will prepare a policy document, pass it to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, then we will present this to the Cabinet because it involves a number of policy reforms. For example, on the question of subsidies, we have been giving subsidies to the agricultural sector in all these interventions, on seeds, tractors, all these are subsidies. The question is: is it a normal subsidy or half subsidy? How do we go about it? Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for your guidance that we do not conclude it today and commit Government; we may not be able to – we will consult and when the policy proposal is accepted, we will, through you, engage this House through the relevant Committee on Agriculture, Animal and Fisheries, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and maybe the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and move ahead. I am happy; the proposal of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is not going to be in vain. (Member rose_). Maybe I can take this information?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, information is supposed to help you in your submission, but you said you want to conclude and then take information? That will not be helpful. (Laughter) Thank you, colleagues, although we [Mr Okot]5941THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022have debated it for long. We need to conclude a few issues. Colleagues, I now put the question that the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to establish a national agricultural bank be adopted by this House. (Question put and agreed to.)Motion adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is something we cannot rush. I am going to give you six months under rule 220. Colleagues, I have been in the Cabinet and I know the process. This is something that has a financial implication. We need to consult extensively and we must do a serious business study and so, we cannot have it rushed. Clerk, at six months dot, I will need the minister to come. However, before then, honourable minister, you can even keep on updating the House on the measures being taken to implement the resolution of this House. Thank you. Next?RESPONSE BY MINISTERS TO URGENT QUESTIONSI) ON THE GRABBING OF LAND BELONGING TO THE UGANDA SCOUTS ASSOCIATION LOCATED IN KAAZI, WAKISO DISTRICTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The minister is not with us here. Let us go to issues for the Minister of Local Government – responses to the various issues. II) ON THE DELAYED V ALIDATION AND APPROV AL OF STAFF STRUCTURES OF NEWLY CREATED CITIESTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I know the Minister of Public Service had got interested in this matter but you work together as Government. Honourable minister, you have only 10 minutes to answer all your issues. So, just do a summary; they remain on record. 8.03THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Rusoke): Members, the first issue was on local councils that do not have stamps - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they have called a substantive item, honourable minister. MS RUSOKE: So, I leave the other one?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A specific issue raised by Hon. Isingoma on structures for newly-created cities and its effect on service delivery. MS RUSOKE: Hon. Mwesigwa, the MP for Hoima East Division, wanted to know why the country has delayed validation and the approval of staff structures for the newly-created cities and its effect on service delivery. Mr Speaker, in January 2022, Cabinet under, Minute 21 (CT 2022) approved the 10 cities in Uganda and the structures for the 10 cities to implement. The following actions have been taken: 1. The structures were customised to enable the cities come up with individual human resource structures that address their uniqueness;2. The customised city structures have been adopted by the respective city councils and implementation guidelines for the said structures have been prepared and disseminated to the city authorities;3.  The job descriptions and person specifications were prepared to enable the City Service Commissions place the existing staff and recruit the right people in the right jobs; Mr Speaker, validation of the existing staff, formally belonging to the respective municipalities and annexed areas from the mother districts, was also done and successfully concluded in all the 10 cities of Hoima, Masaka, Mbarara, Fort Portal, Soroti, Jinja, Mbale, Lira, Gulu and Arua.5942MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONAt the moment, city service commissions are undertaking a placement exercise for the existing staff and, upon completion, external advertisements will be run in the media by the end of October 2022 to fill vacant positions in all our 10 cities. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, that is enough. We do not have much time; you have many questions. Colleagues, she has been one of the most loyal ministers to this House. She is ever here from 2:00 p.m. until late and then she goes to the field on other days. We appreciate you, honourable minister.III) ON THE PROVISION OF STAMPS TO SUBCOUNTIES IN THE NAWANENDE TOWN COUNCIL IN KAMULI DISTRICT FOR LCI CHAIRPERSON.8.07THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Rusoke): Mr Speaker, Government committed to print and distributing stamps for all local councils, but some councils complained that they were omitted. In case any Member has a council that has the same complaint, the process is that the Chief Administrative Officer writes to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government for order and the printing of those stamps. For those that complained, we are printing the stamps at the moment and once they are ready, we shall distribute them. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. (Mr Aogon rose_) Honourable colleague, read rule 44(2). For such a question, you have a supplementary question, which can only be raised by the Member who raised the issue – no, I need it in writing. I am applying your rules, honourable colleagues. They are not mine. (Laughter)IV) ON WHEN GOVERNMENT WILL OPERATIONALISE THE FIVE REMAINING CITIES8.08THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Rusoke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The five cities have not yet been operationalised because Parliament passed a rule that interim governments are abolished. Therefore, these cities will be operationalised in 2025 so that members can participate in elections to head these cities. (Interjection)  A Member is asking: “Which cities are those?” (Laughter) I need permission from the Speaker on that.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.V) ON MODALITIES FOR THE SHARING OF PROPERTIES BETWEEN CITIES AND MOTHER DISTRICTS8.09THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Rusoke): Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interjection) - the question was not on municipalities at all. The question was on -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, focus. You are allowing people to take you off track.MS RUSOKE: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Local Government is working with the Attorney-General to come up with the Local Governments (Cities) Regulations, in accordance with Section 175 of the Local Governments Act, CAP. 243 and the process is in the final stages. The draft regulations provide a framework for equitable sharing of assets between the districts and cities, in accordance with Section 188 of the Local Governments Act, CAP. 241. [Ms Rusoke]5943THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 27 SEPTEMBER 2022Mr Speaker, we quote these CAPs because there was a court ruling that the Ministry of Local Government had not considered the stipulations in these. I hope the Attorney-General whispered to you that he is about to provide and the deadline is Thursday this week; I told him to whisper to you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. My whispers with the Attorney-General cannot be - (Laughter)VI) ON DELAYS BY THE GOVERNMENT TO HONOUR ITS SHILLINGS 10,000 MONTHLY PLEDGE TO THE LOCAL COUNCIL LEADERS8.011THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Rusoke): Government of Uganda pays ex-gratia of Shs 120,000, annually, to all LC I and II chairpersons, which is Shs 10,000 per month. Government policy is that this money is accumulated and paid once at the end of every financial year. On the issue of local council leaders missing out on ex-gratia, the Ministry of Local Government is in the process of verifying the number of leaders who missed out. This is a process we hope to be concluded by the end of October 2022. We will, then, communicate to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the current deficits, if any, for appropriate action. The Ministry of Local Government has received feedback that this money is insufficient to enable these leaders execute the various mandates, given the current economic situation. The ministry has already prepared and submitted a comprehensive Cabinet paper on emoluments of local council leaders, which is awaiting discussion and consideration by the Cabinet –(Interjection) - we submitted, requesting for increment. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you have answered all the questions that have been pending. I hope you do not have any other pending questions.Thank you. That covers the issue, which the Minister of Public Service was also talking about. Minister of Public Service, are you satisfied?8.13THE MINISTER OF STATE MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Grace Mugasa): Yes, Mr Speaker. The answers she gave are the same as those from the Ministry of Public Service. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleagues, for being here till late. House adjourned until tomorrow at 2:00 p.m.(The House rose at 8:14 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 September 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 