

Tuesday, 15 September 2020

Parliament met at 3.06 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I welcome you back from the political activities in which parties have been involved and Members have participated.

It was our plan to work expeditiously from now until the Independence break. Therefore, the work which remained on the Order Paper and whatever work is urgent should be done within this period. This is because I believe that after the nominations in the second week of October, it will be difficult to convene the House. Therefore, I would like to urge the Government and chairpersons of the committees to ensure that they are available to do our work.

However, honourable members, that arrangement to sit and work expeditiously will be interfered with briefly because I regret to announce the untimely death of our colleague, hon. Faith Alupo, MP for Pallisa, which occurred this morning. We are in discussions with the family and burial arrangements will be communicated to you later. I would like to convey the condolences of the House to the bereaved family, the people of Pallisa and the country at large.

On another sad note, we lost a number of senior citizens. Mr Festo Karwemera passed away on 30 August 2020. Mr Karwemera was, among others, involved in extensive research in the culture and language of the Bakiga. He had written extensively on those issues.

We lost Fr Gerald Picavet, a renowned Catholic priest and philanthropist in Busoga. He died on Wednesday, 9 September 2020 in Jinja. Fr Picavet came to Uganda from the Netherlands in 1974 as a missionary. He contributed a lot to the promotion of education and vocational skills.

We lost Ambassador Ahmed Senyomo, who died on 11 September 2020 in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. At the time of his death, Ambassador Senyomo was the Assistant Secretary-General for Economic Affairs at the Organisation for Islamic Cooperation, a position he was elected to in 2018.

We also lost Mr Kitaka Francis Xavier. He passed away on 12 September 2020. Mr Kitaka was the Chairman Emeritus of both Cipla Quality Chemicals Industries and Quality Chemicals Limited. He was also a founder and chairman of both Cooper Uganda Limited and MTK Uganda Limited. 

Honourable members, we also lost other citizens due to poor visibility of heavy goods vehicles. We lost Mr Stephen Wako, a candidate for Kigulu South in the National Resistance Movement (NRM) primaries. He died at dawn on polling day, 4 September 2020. This followed an accident along the Jinja-Iganga highway, involving a sugarcane truck. 

On the night of Saturday, 12 September 2020, we lost Mr Shaban Nkutu Muziransa, who equally died due to a car accident on the Kayunga-Buikwe Road at Naminya, again involving a sugarcane truck. Mr Nkutu was a prominent lawyer, former Busoga Kingdom Attorney-General and the President of the Uganda Badminton Association.

Honourable members, both these accidents and many others could have been avoided if the trailers and lorries had better visibility. The problem of fatal accidents involving large vehicles has become persistent. We have, on many occasions, asked the minister responsible for transport to implement the laws and regulations on reflectors on heavy goods vehicles.

In May 2020, out of concern about these increasing accidents, I convened a meeting with the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Works and Transport on the need to improve the reflective measures. It is clear from the road casualty statistics that 40 per cent of collisions occur during the hours of darkness, when visibility is impaired. This is mostly due to heavy moving or stationary large vehicles, including trucks that ferry sugarcane, among others. This leads to poor judgement by drivers, thereby causing increasing accidents. 

To increase the visibility of these vehicles, there is urgent need for them to be fitted with retro-reflective tapes. The Traffic and Road Safety Regulations, 2012 already make this requirement mandatory. I, therefore, direct the Minister of Works and Transport to immediately implement regulations 5 (1) and 6 (1) of the Traffic and Road Safety Regulations, 2012. The Minister of Works and Transport came to this House, got the support of this House to get the regulations endorsed, but the regulations are peacefully asleep in the office of the minister as people continue to die.

Honourable members, let me invite colleagues to stand up for a moment of silence in memory of all those we have mentioned above.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, an incident occurred at Parliament, which is being investigated by the police. Someone arrived here at the gates of Parliament with some strange package. We expect the Uganda Police Force to expeditiously handle that issue and advise us about the circumstances surrounding it. 

Fourthly, honourable members, His Excellency the President appointed the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice of Uganda in the persons of Justice Alfonse Owiny-Dollo and Justice Richard Buteera as Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice respectively. We congratulate them and wish them well. The three arms of state are now fully constituted. 

Today, the world marks the International Day of Democracy under the theme “COVID-19: A Spotlight on Democracy”. The day provides an opportunity to review the state of democracy in the world and the current governments throughout the world, strengthen national programmes, development, consolidation and promotion of democracy in the respective countries. A motion to this effect is on the Order Paper and it will be considered by the House. 

This same week, honourable members, two historical events occurred. His Majesty the Omukama of Toro clocked 25 years since his coronation. We congratulate King Oyo Nyimba Kabamba Iguru Rukidi IV on that anniversary and wish him well. This week also, the Kyabazinga of Busoga, William Wilberforce Nadiope Gabula IV, marked the sixth anniversary of his coronation on Sunday, 13 September 2020. We congratulate him, and we wish him and his subjects well.

There were other happy events. We pay tribute to our golden boy, Jacob Kiplimo, who excelled in the 5,000 metres at the International Amateur Athletes Federation Golden Spike in Ostrava, Czech Republic. We also recall that before we went on recess, we had noted the performance of our golden boy, Joshua Cheptegei, and I know that we shall have an opportunity to speak to the motion when it is presented. 

Honourable members, on 4 September 2020, I received a letter from the General Manager of Pearl Dairy Farms Limited, Mr Bijoy Varghese, highlighting the continued adverse effects of the new tariff barriers placed by the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania on Uganda dairy products. You may recall that before we went on recess, the same company had brought to our attention the non-tariff barriers from the Kenyan side against the dairy products of Uganda. 

They are complaining that there is a high increase in taxes and duties by the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania, which has increased the cost of consignment of powdered products by 160 per cent and liquid dairy products by over 200 per cent. This is compounded by the border impasse with Rwanda and the barring of Ugandan products from the Kenyan market. 

These barriers to intra-EAC trade are at odds with the East African Common Market Protocol and undermine the spirit of the East African Community. As you may recall, hon. Turyamuhweza and hon. Michael Tusiime have previously raised related urgent issues that await responses from the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Minister of East African Community Affairs. 

I would like to again refer this matter to the Prime Minister for his consideration. I ask him to report back to the House on actions taken by Government to ameliorate the plight of exporters of Uganda dairy products on Thursday, 17 September 2020. Thank you very much.  

There were a few matters of national concern. I think I saw hon. Osegge.

3.20
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter that is proving to be a scare out there, especially to people who intend to stand for political office in the forthcoming national elections in 2021. 

It is said that the Electoral Commission is considering not allowing anybody to be nominated if they have a name that is different from the one on their academic papers of senior six. They are quoting the case of hon. Samuel Otada Amooti Owor v. hon. Taban Idi Amin and the Electoral Commission, Election Petition No.93 of 2016. Therein, the said Court of Appeal nullified the election of hon. Taban Idi Amin whose academic qualifications in the name of Taban Idi Amin were at variance with his national identification registration and voter registration details of Taban Idi Amin Tampo. 

It is said that the Electoral Commission is even considering disqualifying women like me, who acquired their husbands’ names by virtue of marriage. By the time I was in school, I was not married, but when I got married, by law I think I acquired my husband’s name. For the two terms I have come to this Parliament, I would get nomination after swearing an affidavit to get a statutory declaration.

This is going to cause a lot of confusion among the intending candidates unless the Electoral Commission comes out clearly. Knowing what we have gone through, sometimes issues come up, which may not be correct in the law, but they will be used against the candidates that some people intend not to deal with. 

Madam Speaker, my plea is that you use your good office to implore the Electoral Commission to declare the position of the law to help all the intending candidates know what is expected. My worry is that if I am going to be told to denounce my husband’s name, it is as good as telling me to divorce my husband and to separate my name from who I have been for the last 26 years – (Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give in relation to the issue being raised by the honourable colleague is that the Electoral Commission appeared before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs some time back and this issue arose. We told them that as far as the courts are concerned, there is no uniform position on that matter. 

Whereas they are quoting the Otada case, there is a case I argued up to the Court of Appeal, involving my good friend, hon. Cissy Namujju. She also had different names. I won the case in the High Court of Masaka, but I lost it in the Court of Appeal over the differences in names. There is also a Supreme Court decision of Sserunjogi saying something completely different. 

Therefore, the information I would like to give you is that there is actually no uniform position from the courts as far as the issue of change of name is concerned. As a result, the Electoral Commission cannot use that to deny people nomination. Thank you. 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, honourable member, for that information. That is exactly our worry because where there is witch-hunting and an intention to make sure that Angelline Osegge does not return to the 11th Parliament, it can easily be used. By the time you tussle it out in court, it will be too late for you.

Madam Speaker, we request that you cause the Electoral Commission to come out clearly on this. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, the matter is very important. It is not even based on the law. The people who change names are the women. The men do not change names when they marry - No, they do not take on their wives’ names. So, this is actually targeting the women in this election. 

Therefore, it is very important that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs comes here before the closure of this week to assure the country about this matter because it is very urgent and important. 

3.25
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the reopening of schools for finalist students.

Ever since COVID-19 emerged in our country, there has been a lot of mixed communication from the Ministry of Education and Sports. In April 2020, there was an attempt to announce resumption of schools from around 25 to 28 April 2020. That was when not much was known about COVID-19. Thereafter, there was another announcement that finalist classes would begin - that was around June - but there was no preparedness for schools to reopen. Recently, there has been communication that schools are going to reopen for the finalist classes.

Madam Speaker, there has been a lot of confusion. Therefore, I would like to know what the Government position is on this matter. If we are to reopen schools for finalist classes, what is going to happen to the gap that will be created between the classes? I meant that gap that is created when one class moves on while the others remain behind.

Secondly, what is the level of Government preparedness in case a COVID-19 outbreak occurs in schools? Yes, there is the tracing of contact persons but when these children get back to school, one cannot rule out that they will be in contact with everybody else. How prepared is Government?

Finally, I would like to implore Government to come out clearly and explain to the country why they cannot boldly declare this year a dead academic year, since it is just three months to the end of the year, so that we can have schools resume from where they ended last time. It is important that the Minister of Education and Sports comes to clarify the ministry’s position regarding the reopening of schools –(Mr Ssenyonga rose_)- You can give that information but I will not resume the stage. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR SSENYONGA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. We, the proprietors of schools, are going through very hard times. Many of our teachers do not stay within our communities. Therefore, each time there is information, we call the teachers to come back and get prepared to start with the teaching of candidate classes, only to be told schools are not reopening.

Last week, hon. Judith Nabakooba, the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, said that whatever had come out from the ministry should be disregarded until His Excellency the President says something. That still caused confusion amongst us, the teachers and parents. 

Even my colleague can bear witness that in most areas now, schools are undergoing renovation - painting, removing beds to suit the requirements, and so on. Therefore, when the minister says that what came from the Ministry of Education and Sports was not part of the Government’s position, we remain in total confusion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: That calls for the Prime Minister to come and clarify what the Government position is. If one minister says something and another says it is not true, then the Prime Minister should come to clarify it to the country.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. As proprietors of schools, we are indeed very confused. I happen to own a nursing school and since it is a health institution, we were requested to prepare for the ministry to come and inspect the school to see if we are prepared to reopen. It is good that the team came and they told us what we were supposed to procure, to be in compliance with the guidelines, which we have done. However, when the minister later said that the position was not yet clear, after they had made us incur more debts, we did not and we do not feel pleased.

Madam Speaker, I remember before we went for recess, I had asked a question in that regard and you had asked the minister to respond as to when she would be bringing a comprehensive report to Parliament. I recall that part of my question was to find out if Government could secure a bailout to pay teachers since most of them were and are still not working. I had requested that even candidates should be exempted from paying examination fees to Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB), Uganda Midwives and Nurses Examinations Board (UMNEB) or anybody.  Unfortunately, these questions have not been answered.

Madam Speaker, if they say only candidate classes should reopen, some schools have only about 7 to 14 candidates; how can fees from 14 students sustain a school? Where do you expect the proprietor to get the money to run such a school? 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we are in total confusion; we need clarification from Government. Government should not bury its head in the sand because people, mainly teachers, are dying because they have nothing to eat. If they cannot pay teachers, then I doubt my Government. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Madam Speaker, my suggestion is that Government can help to pay registration fees since most of the businesses from which parents used to get money to pay school and registration fees have not yet been opened. 

Secondly, we heard that Government had given teachers Shs 22 billion but up to now they have not received that money, yet there has been news that Shs 11 billion of the Shs 22 billion was swindled by a few individuals from the Microfinance Support Centre. Yes, these few individuals were arrested and taken to court but there is also information that they were bailed out shortly after. This raises a lot of questions. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, regarding the issue of the education sector, we really need a discussion because there are many things that have not been talked about. Recently, for instance, I received a petition from lecturers in private institutions asking for relief. When that happened, I realised that while Government had dealt with primary and secondary teachers, they did not deal with employees in tertiary schools. Therefore, there are a lot of issues we need to discuss.

I would like to invite the Minister of Education and Sports to come very quickly to Parliament so that we can handle this issue. We need to hear when the schools will reopen, if they are going to reopen, how will they will reopen and so on? 

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Madam Speaker, I would like to give some brief information in regard to the issues that Members have raised concerning schools. 

I know that you are still giving a directive to the Minister of Education and Sports, but I would like to say that Cabinet always sits on Mondays and in yesterday’s Cabinet meeting, there was communication that a special Cabinet meeting will take place this week and thereafter, the President will address the nation. It will be after that, that details about education will be availed by the responsible minister.

Therefore, we are still waiting for that communication, which is likely to come by the end of the week. Otherwise, we are intending to have a special Cabinet sitting over all these issues and I know Government is concerned about this.

THE SPEAKER: Are you confirming or not confirming that schools will open?

Mr kiwanda: We are not confirming yet, until His Excellency the President gives a statement. After which, the details shall be given by the Minister of Education and Sports. 

Mr ssenyonga: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like clarification from the honourable minister.

Yesterday, I was able to meet the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) for Mukono. I gave him the open view of the people. If playgrounds everywhere are now full of people playing football, with even supporters watching from the sides of the playgrounds, how come the Government cannot denounce this and pronounce themselves clearly over it?

The other issue, which the minister should clarify, is about the Shs 11 billion. The money that was sent to private school teachers is not the one that was stolen. That money came to the teacher’s SACCO two years back but this one was given between June and July. That means that the money should still be somewhere.

Also, referring our teachers to the microfinance centre or SACCOs is as if they are going for loans. However, they advised us that this money was to help the needy teachers as a token to them, rather than a loan through SACCOs. That should also come out clearly when you meet as Cabinet.

Mr macho: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister, hon. Kiwanda. I call his attention to what he has briefed the august House on, that the President will give a statement concerning the COVID-19 situation. 

Shall we, the people of the 40 border districts and majorly Busia Municipality, who have been on lockdown for seven months, be allowed to be part of Uganda? We have been on lockdown for seven complete months, with vehicles not allowed to move in and out of Busia, without any care from Government. For seven months, not even a minister from the national COVID-19 taskforce has visited Busia. I would like to know whether the President will give a statement on that matter. Thank you.

3.39
THE MINISTER of state for finance, planning and economic development (microfinance AND SMALL ENTERPRISES) (Mr Haruna Kyeyune): Thank you, Madam Speaker. About the Shs 20 billion to support the private school teachers, I will soon make a statement as regards the progress of the implementation of the Emyooga, and the Shs 20 billion is part of the Emyooga.

Initially, we had 18 categories of beneficiaries but we added the 19th category, which is the private school teachers. Every constituency is supposed to mobilise all the private school teachers in that specific constituency to form a SACCO, which will be supported with Shs 60 million. We have the money and it has not been stolen.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have a day to discuss the issue concerning education because we would like to talk about the classrooms, spacing, candidate classes vis-à-vis others, etcetera. No one will answer those issues today. Let us have a meeting where the Minister of Education and Sports will come to answer our questions.

Mr ssewungu: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and honourable members. We shall have that time but the issue of private school teachers was about their survival during the COVID-19 time. 

I followed the President when he was addressing the nation on the issue of these teachers. If you talk about people borrowing money during times of poverty, how will they get what they need to pay back? The issue of private school teachers concerns all Members of Parliament here. I will not pick an individual or the minister. We are all under pressure because the teachers do not have something to live on.

You talk about Shs 60 million for a constituency; my constituency alone has over 200 teachers teaching in private schools. What will they share out of the Shs 60 million as development fund?

The issue at hand is: how do we cater for teachers now that there are rumours that you are going to open schools, yet people are surviving on empty stomachs and are being asked for house rent? Therefore, let us not hide behind Emyooga. At one time there was Entandikwa, Bona Bagaggawale, Steady Progress, but nothing has changed the people of Uganda. 

Let us look at specifically private school teachers because Government teachers are getting some salary that they are surviving on during this time. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will put aside two hours to discuss the issue of education so that you can raise all the issues.

3.41
Ms jane avur (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Pakwach District is a gateway to West Nile. We were among the 45 districts that remained in lockdown when the country reopened to private and public transport. We were later on reopened. However, right now, the people of Pakwach find difficulty in accessing health services due to lack of masks. When I talked to the District Health Officer (DHO), he said there has been a circular sent that they cannot receive even mothers at health centres to access health services.

I pray that the Government moves expeditiously to provide the people of Pakwach with masks because we are at risk. Most of the districts in West Nile have already received them but these are the same people that ply day in and day out through Pakwach District –(Interruption)

Mr okupa: Thank you, honourable colleague. We passed money here to provide every Ugandan with a facemask –

THE SPEAKER: Actually, it was Shs 89 billion.

Mr okupa: It is disturbing that up to date - I came from Kasilo yesterday and Serere as a district has not received even a single mask. We need an audit of what transpired –(Interjections)- I am told even here in Buvuma, Kalungu, Bugiri and a majority of the districts, masks have not been given. What happened? Where did the money go? Where have the masks gone? Are we serious in protecting Ugandans from contracting COVID-19 if we are not providing masks?

We need an explanation from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of Health as well as the Prime Minister. Where did that money go? Where are the masks for the people of Kasilo County in Serere District and other districts that have not got? It is not only West Nile or Pakwach.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had even been told that the distribution would start in the 40 districts. We need answers.

Mr mwijukye: Madam Speaker, about this issue of COVID-19, from the time we passed a supplementary budget here, money was given but we cannot get accountability. Up to now, doctors and health workers are complaining. The security officers who were supposed to get the money never got it. Now, it is masks. Where is this money for COVID-19 going? Who is keeping the money? Who is using COVID-19 to extort money from Ugandans?

We must not take this for granted. I think that as people are suffering, some people are just taking this as a project to get money. We need to ask the Minister of Health to come and tell exactly what is happening, whether this is about COVID-19 or a venture for collecting money.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I direct the Minister of Health to come and update the country on the status of the distribution of masks, particularly, starting with the border districts, especially Pakwach, which is still under lockdown. We need answers by Tuesday next week.

MS AVUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have raised the matter of the floods in Pakwach on the Floor several times but it has gone beyond destruction of property. We lost a one Opio last week because over 10 villages in Pakwach Town Council are totally surrounded by water. People have to cross at a cost using boats donated by local politicians. Opio was trying to cross to see his mother but unfortunately, he did not have money. He tried to walk through the water but he drowned and died.

Government is supposed to provide roads. Therefore, I request the Government to, in the same way, intervene by giving the people of Pakwach Town Council, especially the people in Pajwong, Jupabira Village and other surrounding villages, at least a motor boat. They are finding it difficult to cross to the eastern side of the Nile to do farming. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that your office takes this very seriously because I have been talking about it time and again but nobody has come to the rescue of the people of Pakwach. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is annoying. The last time the Minister of Internal Affairs was here, he assured the country, on the Floor of this House, that he was personally engaged on the issue of the areas where there have been floods. That is the assurance he gave but apparently, nothing is happening. 
Therefore, I invite the Prime Minister to come and explain to the House what has been happening and what plans they have for the areas, which have been flooded for several months now. Let us have an answer on Tuesday next week.

Hon. Akello, two minutes, please.

3.41
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Agago District, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Chief Justice and his Deputy upon their appointment. I do this because the Chief Justice comes from Agago District. Therefore, I stand here proudly, as a member of Parliament representing the Chief Justice, who is number four in this country. 

I would also like to thank His Excellency, the President for according us this pride, as the people of Acholi and Agago District. 

I would also like to thank you, as the Chairperson of the Committee on Appointments, for approving the Chief Justice’s appointment, even if there were issues some people wanted to raise. I thank you and the entire membership of the committee upon that as well as the entire House. 

Madam Speaker, I have a matter of national importance that needs urgent attention. On Sunday 13 September 2020, there were heavy rains in Wol Town Council. There was destruction with a lot of hailstones and floods affecting the entire population of Wol Town Council. 

Roofs of over 50 houses in the town council were blown off. There is one Pentecostal Assemblies of God Church under construction whose roofing level also collapsed. 

The 50 households whose roofs got blown off will require urgent attention. I raised this matter with the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, who of course said that there was no money and he was expecting some money from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

However, I now see hon. Kyeyune, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development here. I would like to beg that you give money to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness so that within this week, my people are attended to.


I raised a matter here before we broke off for the primaries on all the areas that flooded in my area and they are in dire need of support from the Office of Disaster Preparedness. They include the sub counties of Patongo, especially the areas of Lukwangole and Ngokwe in Patongo Town Council, the areas of Ajali and Lira Palwo especially in Agago Sub County. All these are in dire need of support. 

I, therefore, would like to request that the ministry takes charge and comes to the rescue of my people. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We ask the Office of the Prime Minister, especially the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, to attend to the situation in Agago and ensure that the people get the necessary relief.

Honourable members, the other matters do not qualify. The one of Cheptegei was already raised. We are waiting for a motion. The other one is a constituency issue. Let us go to item No. 3.   

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH ON THE COMPLAINTS BY INDIVIDUALS WHO WERE REPATRIATED FROM VARIOUS COUNTRIES WHERE THEY HAD BEEN STRANDED DUE TO THE COVID-19 LOCKDOWN AND QUARANTINED AT SHERATON HOTEL FOR THE OBLIGATORY 14 DAYS YET, UPON EXPIRY OF THE DAYS, THEY WERE UNJUSTIFIABLY RETAINED FOR AN ADDITIONAL 3 DAYS AND WITHOUT TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE EXPENSES INVOLVED

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Health is not there.

MINESTIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION OF 3 MAY, 2018 ON PAYMENT OF MONEY OWED TO UGANDA-SOUTH SUDAN TRADERS

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE AND SMALL ENTERPRISES) (Mr Haruna Kyeyune): Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence to allow us come back tomorrow to make that statement.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you confirm that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will come here in person? This matter has been on the Order Paper for many weeks. 

MR KYEYUNE: Madam Speaker, I am going to inform my senior minister to ensure that he comes here in person. 

MR MUYANJA SSENYONGA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to rise on a point of order. A few minutes back, we were together with the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the Parliament canteen. I do not know where he disappeared to. 

Therefore, just to ambush our honourable Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come up with that request - I kindly request him to first contact the minister because we were together in the canteen just a few minutes ago. That is the point of order I am raising. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the minister knew that you were in the canteen. Nevertheless, Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, please, tell the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Mr Matia Kasaija, that he has kept this matter on the Order Paper for almost two months. He must be here tomorrow. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EMYOOGA PROJECT

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO FINANCE AND SMALL ENTERPRISES) (Mr Haruna Kyeyune): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At the 26th Sitting of the First Meeting of the fifth session of the 10th Parliament of Uganda held on Thursday 6 August 2020, I undertook to present to the House a statement on the Presidential Initiative on Wealth and Job Creation (Emyooga). 

I am, therefore, pleased to report to this august House as follows:

The National Population and Housing Census of 2014 found that 68.9 per cent of Uganda's households are still stuck at subsistence level.

Furthermore, His Excellency the President established during his wealth creation countrywide tour from August to September 2019, that these households, which are outside the money economy, were largely not benefiting from Government's existing wealth creation programmes; for example, the Youth Livelihood Programme and Operation Wealth Creation - leaving them vulnerable to cross-generational poverty.

To address this gap, Cabinet approved a proposal on the "Presidential Initiative on Wealth and Job Creation” on 19 August 2019 to facilitate socio-economic transformation of these households from the subsistence to money economy and market oriented production in line with the NRM Manifesto. 

The Presidential Initiative on Wealth and Job Creation has two major components, namely:

    1. Establishment of zonal artisan/Jua Kali parks - implemented by the Office of the President;

    2. Setting up specialised funds (Emyooga)- implemented by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Emyooga Programme Design

The Emyooga programme was conceived to scale up direct support to communities through establishment of various specialised funds/”Emyooga”-specific Apex SACCOS at constituency level but with operations/branches at parish level. This approach is consistent with the parish model adopted in the National Development Plan III.

The following 19 specialised funds shall be set up at the constituency and parish levels, countrywide:

    1. Boda-boda
    2. Women entrepreneurs
    3. Carpenters
    4. Salon operators
    5. Taxi operators
    6. Restaurant owners
    7. Welders
    8. Market vendors
    9. Youth leaders
    10. Persons with disabilities
    11. Produce dealers
    12. Mechanics
    13. Tailors
    14. Journalists
    15. Performing artists
    16. Veterans
    17. Fishermen
    18. Elected local leaders
    19. Teachers in private schools

Direct membership to the Constituency Apex SACCOs shall be by the respective parish groups/associations, which, in turn, shall draw voluntary membership from individuals in the community, engaged in a related economic activity; for instance, welders, tailors, etcetera or belonging to a specific special interest group, for example, persons with disabilities and veterans, as applicable.

Madam Speaker and Members, the Emyooga Programme has directly linked savings mobilisation to production, which has not been the case with similar Government programmes in the past.

Each of the first 17 categories, Emyooga-specific Apex SACCOs will receive Shs 30 million per Constituency per SACCO as seed capital while the Elected Local Leaders' Constituency SACCOs will receive Shs 50 million per Constituency per SACCO and the Teachers in Private Schools SACCOS will receive Shs 60 million. This will catalyse the creation of revolving funds for lending to members in the parish groups (projections of groups to be set up and beneficiaries countrywide attached as Annex A).

Implementation Framework

My ministry designated the Microfinance Support Centre Ltd (MSCL) as the lead implementing agency for the Emyooga Programme and it shall work in collaboration with the District Emyooga Taskforces that have been set up in each district and chaired by the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) and with staff from the Micro Finance Support Centre zonal offices, District Community Development Offices and District Commercial Offices, among others.

Furthermore, the Emyooga Programme is being implemented in the following three phases:

    1. Community Mobilisation, which we have done throughout the country;
    2. Group training and registration, which we are currently doing;
    3. Seed capital grant disbursement, which we are about to do in next few weeks.

Update on Implementation of Emyooga Programme

Madam Speaker, my ministry provided Shs 30 billion in the Financial Year 2019/2020 to MSC towards implementation of the Emyooga programme and this Financial Year 2020/2021, Shs 210 billion has been provided. This quarter, Shs 140 billion has already been disbursed to MSC for programme implementation.

In the Budget, we have Shs 220 billion for the financial year but this quarter, we have so far released Shs 140 billion to MSC as the implementing agency to be disbursed to those organised and registered SACCOs.
 
Status of Implementation

I wish to report on the status of the Emyooga Programme with respect to the three phases of implementation highlighted above, as follows:

Community mobilisation phase; 

Between November 2019 and August 2020, the programme was successfully launched and commenced in rural Buganda (Greater Masaka, Mukono, Mpigi, Mubende and Luweero), Busoga, Bukedi, Teso, Bugisu, Acholi, Lango, West Nile, Sebei, Karamoja, Kigezi, Rwenzori, Bunyoro and Ankole, despite the COVID-I9 outbreak disruptions. 

The sensitisation meetings and launch of the programme in Kampala has been scheduled to start on 22 September, 2020.
I spearheaded this phase, which involved regional and district sensitisation meetings targeting national and local leaders with the meetings attracting at least 4,080 participants; 134 districts Emyooga taskforces were formed; community mobilisation and group identification by the district Emyooga taskforces was also conducted and 29,747 parish associations have so far been formed countrywide.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Members and ministers who participated in these meetings and who are part and parcel of the district task forces.
Group trainings and registration phase:
Under this phase, at least 21,963 parish associations have been validated by MSC in 47 districts out of which the company has so far facilitated the formal registration of 14,416 parish groups with the respective local Governments. 

Furthermore, the registration process for 893 Constituency Apex SACCOS in 59 constituencies, with the registrar of cooperatives as well as training of SACCO leaders are in advanced stages. The list of Constituency Apex SACCOs is also attached as Annex B. 

Seed capital grant disbursement
Under this phase, seed capital shall be disbursed to Constituency Apex SACCOs to meet criteria, which is being developed by MSC. It is envisaged that about Shs 620 million shall be disbursed to beneficiary Emyooga SACCOs per constituency.

Therefore, every constituency will get Shs 620 million as seed capital for the 19 SACCOs.

Challenges

The implementation of the Emyooga Programme has not been without challenges. I would, therefore, like to highlight the key constraints we have faced so far.

The first is that the COVID-l9 outbreak and the corresponding containment measures caused disruptions that led to the temporary suspension of the programme implementation from March to April 2020, as key players in the implementation framework, for instance, RDCs, focused on the prevention of the spread of COVID-19. The implication is that the programme is now behind schedule but we are doing whatever we can to ensure that come November or December, we would have disbursed all the money to the prepared and organised SACCOs; and

Secondly, the mind set and attitude. There is need to change the mind set and attitude of our people not to always expect hand outs from Government because this is a general problem; it is actually a cancer. People only wait to get hand outs from Government. They earn money but spend all of it and they do not save any. Therefore, we need to ensure people embrace a saving culture. Even if we construct roads and come up with many special programmes, unless we embark on ensuring people embrace a saving culture, we will not be able to fight poverty. 

The budget is inadequate because Parliament, in its wisdom, created new constituencies, which we had not budgeted for and yet, every constituency must have a budget of Shs 620 million to support its 19 formed SACCOs. 

We, therefore, ask Parliament to support us with a supplementary budget to cover the constituencies that we had not budgeted for. 

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, in view of the developments above, I wish to request for support through the provision of additional budget allocation of Shs 35 billion to the Emyooga Programme in the Financial Year 2020/2021. This will be to facilitate the scaling up of the programme to cover the new 47 constituencies and to support the activities of the district Emyooga taskforces.

Secondly, we request for support in delivering His Excellency, the President’s message on socio-economic transformation, through the Emyooga, to the population and communities in our respective constituencies.

Madam Speaker, I cannot deliver the success of this programme alone; we need to work together. Honourable colleagues are very important in the entire country but more especially, in their constituencies. They have many people who believe in them. We need to work together to ensure we deliver the success of this programme.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

4.10
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and to appreciate the Government for coming up with the Emyooga Programme. However, as the minister rightly pointed out, the money is not enough. What strategy do we have? How are we going to make sure that everyone deserving gets this money? 

This is a programme that has created excitement all over the country. Many groups have submitted their requests. Therefore, how are we going to make sure that everyone who deserves gets this money? What explanation shall we have for those who will not get this money because certainly, this is going to be a big problem?

The minister pointed out that 47 districts were not budgeted for. However, have the rest of the districts received sufficient funds to give to the Emyooga groups who applied? 

Furthermore, the minister pointed out that our people always expect hand outs but I think this was a promise by the Government. Government said they were going to give this money for the Emyooga. We should not say that people always expect hand outs. What is important is for us to follow up this money and ensure it is used in the intended manner so that it can be returned.

We are excited that the interest rate is only 8 per cent per year and we have been explaining to our people that for one million shillings, one only pays Shs 80,000 as interest for a whole year. Therefore, people are anxious to get this money.

Finally, I would like to thank the honourable minister for the efforts that his ministry has invested in training for these Emyooga. It has been widespread except that we cannot tell whether everyone is involved. Thank you.

4.13
MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, I would like to also caution him. He has requested the honourable members to be fully involved by mobilising the youth to benefit from this programme. I would like to inform him that not all members of Parliament are fully involved in this programme. 

This matter has created a lot of anxiety among different groups and so, the manner in which these people are going to receive this money is structuralised. The RDC with the district commercial officer and the community development officers, among other civil servants, is likely to cause problems. Therefore, if you do not involve us, this is likely to cause problems, the same way it happened with the Youth Livelihood Programme, where the youth would sign for, for instance, Shs 10 million but what they would actually get to do business was only Shs 5 million. At the end of the day, this money is likely to cause problems.

Honourable minister, can you streamline these gaps and make sure that this money, once it is sent to these groups, helps them to deliver on what it is intended for.

Honourable minister, there is a lot that you need to do with the money, especially the money that is dispersed around campaigns season. That is a danger. This is likely to be taken as a bonanza to people who have will vote Government and yet, they are supposed to pay it back. 

Honourable minister, you need to sensitise the people. This is still lacking. Madam Speaker, we are likely to have big problems with this money. Thank you.

4.15
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would be doing myself a disservice if I do not say congratulations to you upon your landslide victory in the Central Executive Committee of the NRM. Thank you very much and we congratulate you.

I would like to know from the minister whether the ministry has got a system of tracking the implementation and challenges in the districts. If that is not there, then some districts will lag behind while others will be benefitting and getting the money.

I would like to give an example of Kwania. The mobilisation is very poor and when the team from MSC came, they realised that we were not yet in position to receive this money.

Therefore, I would like to know whether your team could get to Kwania. If the capacity is not enough, build their capacity and work with them to ensure that they know what to do and do the right thing. Honourable minister, I am requesting that your team gets to Kwania.

Secondly, I thought you would be coming to Parliament with a proposal for a supplementary budget for the newly created constituencies so that Parliament would then have to support. It does not come from Parliament but it is supposed to come from your ministry. This is what I would like to know; whether you first want Parliament to bring it or it is the ministry to bring the request. 

Finally, I would like the minister to develop a mechanism because there is the RDC chairing, the district chairperson who is a politician and then, the technical team. I do not know how you are putting those groups together to ensure that Emyooga is implemented smoothly, effectively and efficiently.

I see that in most districts that I have consulted, there are differences, which will affect implementation. Therefore, I suggest that you bring those teams together once again, so that they know the different roles that they are going to play in the process of mobilisation, processing and giving out the funds to the different groups that are supposed to benefit.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.18
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. Emyooga Programme is indeed exciting, like hon. Kamateeka has stated, in most districts.

However, I would like to call upon the Minister in charge of Microfinance to impress it upon the MSC to step up on sensitisation and even training of these groups.

Whereas I state that this is an exciting programme, in Pakwach District, people, on the other hand, are concerned about their money that was locked up in SACCOs that long closed and up to now, Government is not saying anything about it.

I would like to implore the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come out clearly on how they can rebuild the mind set of the people. Whereas he is urging Ugandans to save, many of them saved in these SACCOs but they long collapsed and up to now, Government is not saying anything about their money.

Madam Speaker, I thank you.

4.19
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for the statement. My concern is drawn from the previous interventions, particularly the Youth Livelihood Programme.

The element of training is very important. I have heard from the minister that training and community mobilisation have already taken place. However, in my district, as I was going through the campaigns for primary elections, I got many concerns from the community. They were telling me that they have been hearing about Emyooga but they do not have any information from anybody.

When the minister says that training and effective community mobilisation have already been done, I wanted him to come out clearly on the issue of training. Who are these people who were involved in this training and which districts were covered in this training?

A lot of money was given through Youth Livelihood Programme but there was nothing, which changed the lives of people. Maybe, it was because the money was supposed to be paid. The expectation is that now that this money is supposed to change people’s lives, the issue may be different. Therefore, the issue of training –

Also, as hon. Kasolo said, the Youth Livelihood Programme had many challenges through the offices of community development officers; where the money, which is allocated to the people does not reach the way it is allocated.

If, for example, a group is supposed to get Shs 12 million, they will say that Shs 4 million was for processing. There should be a proper structure used this time, not like the one, which was for previous interventions that failed. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.22
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get this clarification from the minister. He said that this fund is going to the 19 SACCOs in every constituency. However, in my constituency, we have over 50 parishes. Every parish has these groups that have already been trained. They are excited and they have applied for these Emyooga funds. There are close to 20 groups or even more per parish.

When the minister says they are only going to give 19 groups – he talked of groups in a constituency - I then get worried about the many groups that have registered in every parish and they want this money. I would like to get this clarification from the minister.

The minister talked about participation of the members of Parliament. It has not come out clearly what the role of MPs is in this Emyooga Programme. Are we members of the taskforce? What are we and what are we supposed to do? 

In some districts, the RDCs are dominating. Some RDCs are political and they try to bring in their politics in the selection of the benefitting groups. I need the minister to be clear on the roles of members of Parliament in this.

Thirdly, what is Emyooga in Ng’akarimojong? I would like to know. The other time, you came with Entandikwa. What is it in Ng’akarimojong? Now, you are talking about Emyooga; what is it? 

That is why you are saying people want to eat money and want free things because you have not told us what this money is. Is it for free? Emyooga may be a Luganda word and the people who know it know what it means and what they should do with this money. 

Finally, you are talking about private teachers. Why are you excluding Government teachers, who are doing badly? What does Government pay them? Their salaries are meagre. Why don’t you also include Government teachers? May be for once, Government primary school teachers’ wives can form SACCOs and they can also benefit from this Emyooga. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.25 
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you upon that struggle. It was a tough one but with God’s grace, you came through. We are happy about that. 

The minister has come up with Emyooga Programme. These programmes are good for the people but the biggest challenge is implementation. I would like to know from you what other different strategies you have brought, this time, to make this a success. Programmes like Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) and Youth Livelihood Programme because of the issue of implementation. The design must be pro-people. Sometimes, you design these programmes and take them to the people instead of asking them what they need before you implement them. This is something that you need to critically look at. 

In my constituency, we have what is called village loan associations and they are almost everywhere. They are very organised. They are small groups that lend money amongst themselves. Why don’t you target those small groups? They are there and very effective.

You need to look at it very critically because if you exclude them, very few people will benefit and yet, the majority of the people in the communities believe in and belong to these groups. You need to take them seriously.

The other issue is the timing. You are saying you are going to disburse the money in November and December. This is the time when we will be busy with campaigns and this is going to cause problems. Whether you want it or not, they will say that this money is a reward for voting so and so in the office. Paying back will be a problem.

We have gone during oversights to check UWEP and the Youth Livelihood Programme and these are the reasons the youths are giving. They thought the money was a reward for voting so and so in the office. Why don’t you take your time, do the design properly and implement it after elections? May be you could get better results this time. 

I would like to assure you that if you disburse this money within the campaign period, be sure that it will be abused by the people. It is going to be very difficult for you to recover this money. I do not know what strategies you have put in place for recovery because some people have been arrested because of the previous programmes. 

Previously, people were given a good period of time with low interest rate. What other incentives are you going to give them? For example –(Member timed out.)

4.28
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for the report. Above all, this is the first time we are meeting after many of our colleagues went through “political massacre”. I would like to say that that is a normal phenomenon in political life. Therefore, those who have been left on the other side should have a spirit of forgiveness. As Christians, we believe that the Lord closes one door and opens the other. 

In a special way, Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate you for successfully making it back to NRM CEC. You will definitely give us a very good voice there. Particularly, we women should be very proud of that. That is why the devil is provoked. They had to murder a little girl to show their anger. We are saying, however, that there are people who are praying here and the devil will not prevail in this Parliament. God’s representative is in Parliament. 

I would like to respond to the minister’s presentation. First of all, the minister has not explained to us the mystery of 19 groups in one constituency. Secondly, the minister has not told us how to fit in district constituencies. Madam Speaker, you and I represent district constituencies and when the minister talks of Shs 620 million per constituency, what does he mean in the context of district constituencies? Are you trying to say that those who represent districts will not be fitted in this programme? That is very important for us to know.

The minister is aware that in a special way, under the guidance and supervision of the former minister, hon. Janat Mukwaya, I have personally, with the guidance of the ministry, organised over 3,000 groups in the entire district. You are telling me that 19 groups will take Shs 620 million. I would even be happy if you could give Shs 2 million per group to stimulate them to let them grow and learn the culture of borrowing and paying back.

What is the mystery of Shs 620 million going to 19 groups? Secondly, how do you fit in women representatives in your structure in as far as your lending channel is concerned? I thank you. 

4.32
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Bulisa County, Bulisa): Congratulations, Madam Speaker and all those who have gone through their primaries including NRM. I wish success to those who are yet to go through their primaries. As an advocate of national dialogue, it is increasingly becoming abundantly clear that this country required a national dialogue yesterday so that we proactively reduce some of the challenges that we have. 

From a planning angle, having just discussed how COVID-19 has affected the economy and aware that in this financial year, we are supposed to be dealing with NDP III, which by the way, Parliament never validated and discussed - I would like to plead with the minister to review the Emyooga Programme and dispense it as a COVID-19 stimulus. Many informal sectors have collapsed. Many SMEs have collapsed. The Committee on National Economy made some recommendations.

Therefore, why are we starting fire and forgetting that the Committee on National Economy and the minister have identified the victims of COVID-19? Any money now should be dispensed in that direction and more so, it should be more of NDP III because we are doing too much balkanisation. There is too much scattering and sprinkling that will have no impact. I can tell you, like I have said before on Youth Livelihood Programme, Operation Wealth Creation and Etandikwa; unless we want to continue doing the same thing and expecting different results, then something may be fundamentally wrong.

Therefore, I would like to plead that we try to work within the Budget Framework and the NDP III. Madam Speaker, I would also like to request that we get time to discuss that, more so the COVID-19 stimulus, so that we deal with the problem.

The other area is the delivery mechanism; Government uses more money in the programmes I have mentioned before than the religious foundations like World Vision and the Heifer Project for example, which use less money and yet have more sustainable programmes, are more visible and are causing impact. Why do we continue throwing money where we do not benefit? I think it is also important that we start partnering with faith-based delivery mechanisms like Send-a-Cow which have achieved more than our Government money which -

Madam Speaker, if I can end with this. We have not seen a culture of recovery in Government programmes and yet in the others, they are doing very well - and this is an area to go.

My final request is can we concentrate resources and say that “are we doing a cluster funding of a rural development bank?” Can we put all the money in agriculture to agro-financing? Can we do a housing and mortgage financing instead of firing everywhere without impact, sustainability and institutional- and yet we are in a planning framework of NDP III.

I request that if we are going to transform and attain a middle income status, let us seriously consider those recommendations. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.63
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In this House, I am one of the few linguistic members because I can speak Swahili, Runyankole, Rukiga, Runyarwanda, Luganda and I try some Lusoga. However, I have tried to look for the meaning of that word “Emyooga” and I have failed to get it.

Secondly, why is that whenever we are going towards campaigns, there is a sort of fund that is created in that form? In Kalungu, we have three Members of Parliament. Now, the RDC invited people for that study of Emyooga; people never had lunch, they sat on the floor and the RDC told them to vote for the President, hon. Ssempijja and hon. Aisha Sekindi. 

Then I asked those who informed me whether they did they say anything about me and the answer was in the abstract. I thought maybe it is because I am in the Opposition. This means that the idea is totally hinged on politics.

Now, the moment you give the youth money without education - and feeding people with money will never solve any problems of this country, as the honourable member has stated - people went there expecting money; they quarreled and said, “Honourable, they invited us and we walked to the district, sat down on the floor but we came back with nothing. However, they talked about two things; Emyooga and voting the President and the other two members of Parliament.”

Hon. Kasolo is my friend and he is from Masaka. He knows what Masaka Diocese is doing under MADO; the diocese has been providing animals and people have reared these animals and earned from them.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I a member of the Committee on Public Accounts and hon. Ruth Nankabirwa - the Government Chief Whip now - was once the Minister of State for Microfinance. What happened to the other funds and how they stole money - records are available in the Auditor-General’s Office. I would like to assure hon. Kyeyune that sooner or later, there will be issues raised about that thing called Emyooga, as it was raised.

In Kiboga District, not a single milk plant was planted but the minister had said that they had milk plants. We went there with hon. Kassiano Wadri to visit the entire district and people were rearing cattle to get milk but nothing was done with the money out of Operation Wealth Creation that went through Microfinance.

Therefore, as we talk about Emyooga, expect that people want money - that is the culture that you have created in the people; that they can get money from Government, eat it and they will hide until you forget about it.

4.39
MS ANGELINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to contribute a few ideas on the Emyooga albeit not understanding the meaning of Emyooga. (Laughter) 

It is evident that each time we are developing a new programme, we involve new groups, especially programmes that are intended to develop the poor and the low income earners.

The issue of experience matters; if we are going to say that because the new scheme has come, you are going to get new groups coming together without adequate training, then we are as good as throwing public money without realizing any impact.

Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that we deal with existent groups just like my colleague from Soroti County proposed, because these people have come through, have understood what they want to do and have known the difficulties that are involved and they can manage this money. They have already set up systems and they can recover this money and be able to pay back so that it forms a cycle and others can borrow later.

What is happening about this Emyooga is that everybody is excited about it and when the minister went to our constituencies, especially in Soroti District, what I gather is that the training was supposed to trickle downwards. However, what has happened is that there is no adequate training.

People are going to do the same thing and you will find that whatever they are doing is going to either flood the market or will not have the market at all. They have borrowed this money and they are supposed to pay back and at the end of it, we are going to see people selling their few assets that they have acquired in the name of paying back the money for Emyooga.

Madam Speaker, if we want these people to develop, we must give them adequate training and good direction as to what business venture to get involved in. We are also spreading thin our resources and at the end of the day, you are not going to have an impact. It is just going to be taken as a gift and worse still is the timing it has come in and at which it has been brought.

Before we sufficiently deliver the programmes that we have had like the Youth Livelihood Programme, have we done an impact assessment? Have we seen what went wrong? Why didn’t it perform? Instead of improving those ones, improving the women programmes, we are coming up with a new one! Yes, we are incorporating the new groups of people but we must ensure that we excellently accomplish what we have started.

Madam Speaker, I would like to implore the ministry to rethink this so that we have an impact. I thank you.

4.42
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker and congratulations from the people of Rukungiri upon all your successes. I am very sorry for what happened yesterday and my condolences to the people of Pallisa on the loss of our colleague.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to add my voice and thank the minister for his statement and what he has done so far. I have always said that if we can follow the Rotary Four-Way Test, Uganda would be very far. It states, “Of the things we think, say or do, is it the truth, is it fair to all concerned, will it build goodwill and better friendships and will it be beneficial to all concerned?”

The Emyooga Programme -  I would like to seek clarification from the minister on the difference between Emyooga Programme, the Youth Livelihood Programme, the Operation Wealth Creation Programme, the Entandikwa and the National Agriculture Advisory Services (NAADS) because all these programmes are benefiting the same Ugandans every time.

Secondly, when the minister was in our region, Kigezi, in Rukungiri District, he told people that in order to form a SACCO, they must start by saving. He also said that they were now including the private school teachers and those who are not on the Government payroll. However, those teachers have spent close to seven months without earning. Where do we expect them to get money to first save and form groups to become successful and benefit from Emyooga? 

We have done a lot of programmes using associations and so, I would like to advise this Government that instead of going to associations, let them go to homesteads, follow them and see what will happen.

Lastly, I would like to inform Government that the monies that they always send through associations have benefited only a few and this has created hatred among communities and corruption. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.45
Mr Robert centenary (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Congratulations on your victory. We celebrated it with you in Kasese and we are happy that you are back to the Central Executive Committee (CEC).

The Speaker: Thank you.

Mr centenary: On the issue of Emyooga, honourable minister, I think you need to revisit your policy framework on the implementation of this programme.

I know that in this country we have a challenge of people working in different sectors but they lack common user facilities. When I heard your team explain how they are going to constitute the groups to benefit from the Emyooga, I already knew there would be a problem especially because they were not clear on how they would appraise and assess the benefiting groups. 

The formation of the groups themselves – because they said they would select people from the same sector per parish. Imagine a particular parish where probably you have one carpenter and so, one needs to look for other carpenters from maybe the neighbouring parishes to bring them together yet we have people who work in particular workshops, who only need a simple financial boost to purchase common user facilities and put them to use.

When you look at the Shs 620 million that you are allocating to each constituency, you notice it can only go to market vendors. A place like Kasese Municipality has about 10 markets. These market vendors require just a small minimum capital of about Shs 50,000 to Shs 100,000 to put up a tomato stall. They do not have anywhere to access credit from.

If you are trying to resolve the challenge of financial inclusion, especially to stimulate economic activities for the economically active poor, you should be targeting those particular places where those people trade from. For instance, you can form maybe a Market Vendors’ Association and give it about Shs 100 million from which people can keep borrowing and repaying but with a clear system of repayment. 

Actually, we even have existing SACCOs for example, the one of the boda-boda riders. They have a big membership but with very little capital to purchase boda-bodas at minimum interest and paying down when they are repaying those motorcycles. 

Those should be the targets but when –(Member timed out.)

4.48
Ms rose mutonyi (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to express my congratulations to you for having gone through the CEC elections, which were very tough. I wish you well in your duties.

I would like to thank the minister for giving us the report. However, I am very worried. When this issue was introduced to the people – and the minister came to Mbale where I was - it excited so many people. They told them to form groups at parish levels. In Manafwa, we have so many parishes and every parish produced groups for salon workers and boda-boda riders, among others.

When I hear about 19 groups sharing Shs 600 million, I think that is just going to be money lost. These people are not used to such bulk of money. They have just formed groups haphazardly without even proper training yet they are going to be given a lot of money. 

How sure are we that they are going to use this money profitably when even at the beginning when district officials asked them to form the groups and apply, they were being charged Shs 20,000 and that persisted until I intervened to stop it.

How sure are we that this money is not going to the district officials? Like for the Youth Livelihood Programme, people would pay a certain amount of money to receive the rest of the money. In the end, it is you to refund the money. That is why most youths used to take off when police was chasing after them.

This bulk of money is going to be wasted. Worse still, the timing is wrong because of the campaigns. Who is going to follow up those groups to recover the money without training them?

Therefore, honourable minister, I think this money is going to be wasted like the Entandikwa of 1995. That money got to some people yet they were not prepared and they ‘ate’ it. Some married wives and I do not know what others did with the money. 

Later on, they said, “We gave the votes to the President. Money got lost.” So, you are bringing this at the wrong time. You should be a bit patient until after the elections before you bring in this money. We are going to have bad results because you excited many groups and –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Honourable members, I think there is a misconception. I thought the 19 are categories, not groups.

4.52
Mr Kenneth lubogo (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister, for the statement.

I think there are many issues surrounding this Emyooga Programme. I wonder; how do we give this money to the different constituencies in equal amounts without due regard to the particular constituencies and their formations?

For instance, I am aware of a constituency where there are about six private schools only. There is another, like mine, with over 50 private schools. Why are we considering these at the same level? I am aware of a constituency where we barely have 12 taxis yet there are constituencies where we have hundreds of taxis and you are considering this as a particular sector.

We need to prepare properly because you cannot give these constituencies equal sums of money when they have got different settings all together and population cover in a particular sector.

Secondly, the minister had informed this House earlier that private school teachers are going to be covered under Emyooga. From your presentation, honourable minister, I think you have realised that you are not addressing the issue of the private school teachers that we are concerned focus with, as a House. We are concerned about what is happening to them now; their survival. They are being sent out of their rented houses and have no food to eat. They are also not able to sustain their families. When you talk about the seed money and the Emyooga, you are not actually addressing the issue of private school teachers, which I think you need to revise.  

Madam Speaker, I am also concerned because when you consider the billions of sums of money involved and also look at how much we have been allocating or are allocating to the Uganda Development Bank, you will ask yourself some questions; if we are to seriously consider this programme in order to take our country forward, I think some of these monies, which may not be beneficial other than simply being expended on consumption - this money could –(Member timed out.) 

5.05
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am grateful for the report from the minister but there is a serious concern. Right now, the Emyooga programme is in the process of forming constituency SACCOs where Members of Parliament should be in the lead. 

The minister clearly announced that we are fully responsible for the membership. However, what is happening on the ground is that the Resident District Commissioners and the team do not invite the constituency members. The excuse they give is that the Members are busy in the campaign period. 

What is happening now is that they have a system of selecting the 30 members of every Emyooga. They are now doing it randomly so that if the Emyooga is supposed to have 45 members, then, the 30 already have their special interest and the 15 will find it as a lock to penetrate in order to come up with a different view. 

That is why I brought this humble request to our honourable colleague, the Minister of Microfinance, to make it clear to the Resident District Commissioners, commercial officers and Community Development Officers that members of Parliament, from either the ruling party or opposition, should form the monitoring team of the Emyooga. 

Otherwise, the moment they leave us out – and from the timing of this money, you will notice that many people are very anxious to get it because they know the timing is friendly and the blame will come later. We should also be equally taken serious and the minister is the only one to save this, honourable colleagues. I thank you, Madam Speaker. That is my concern. 

5.07
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his report. I was just trying to look at the criteria of choosing the districts as well as the 19 people per district. I do not know if the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been using the National Development Plan to ensure that they use the statistics from the Uganda Bureau of Statistics to benefit regions that have poverty level issues. 

I would like to give an example of the statistics of 60.8 per cent in Karamoja - we have Busoga and Bukedi. All those regions should be given more consideration so that we have more groups benefiting from this Emyooga Programme.

The other thing is the approach. A colleague talked about the policy document. I think you should consider having a comprehensive approach. First, we have the skilling programmes; can we first skill these people and then give the money after? This will make it more sustainable than giving them money because we have always had these programmes where money is given to the people and then at the end of the day, it is not able to sustain itself.

I would like to say something about the selection criteria. They used the Office of the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and the District Security Officer (DISO) to do this, which was not right. I thought most of these programmes should be able to use the District Community Development Officer (DCDO) and Government should do the monitoring so that we, the political leaders, are in position to monitor what is going on in these sub-counties. Monitoring should be from the DCDO to the Community Development Officer (CDO) of the sub-county just like the programmes of Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) are being monitored by the DCDO. 

However, the RDC ended up getting political assistants of some particular ministers and they started selecting these people as if it was a particular minister bringing this activity.

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate you for the NRM Central Executive Committee (CEC) position and for the landslide victory in Kamuli District. We also look forward to the next elections. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I invite the Minister?

5.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE AND SMALL ENTERPRISES) (Mr Haruna Kyeyune): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must thank my colleagues for the input and the pieces of advice. I would like to respond to some of the issues raised by the Members.

First, hon. Kamateeka inquired how we would ensure that everyone is brought on board. Madam Speaker, I have conducted trainings in your regions and districts and some of you have found time to attend these trainings. In every district, we have created district task forces where members of Parliament are also represented; we have that evidence.

However, to my surprise, even those colleagues who attended those trainings did not grasp the matter the way we trained them. I think we need to ask you to continue finding time and work together with the technical teams that have now been put in place. We had that task force in place for mobilisation and now we have put in place a technical task force for training. 

Therefore, we are going to implore all of you to interest yourselves in becoming members on that technical task force and I am going to issue a circular to the RDCs to ensure that whatever takes place in respect to implementation of this programme, the members of Parliament must be informed.

This programme is very inclusive. We do not want to leave anybody out of it. However, the categories to be first considered are 19 - the boda-bodas, the taxi operators, etcetera. Those I talked about in my presentation –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the minister is talking about the RDC informing the Members when there is a meeting of the task forces in our respective constituencies. I think the minister does not know how we function. An RDC has his own hierarchy of implementing Government policies. We are politicians and you have to design a policy, go through Parliament and we, as politicians, can probably approach our respective constituencies through our chairmen of the respective districts.

However, you cannot go and ask an RDC who maybe hostile to some of us who are members of the Opposition to get us positively involved. Therefore, I think the minister must go back and redesign this policy so that we all get involved and this programme must benefit us, particularly the rural people, who are already targeted for poverty.

Madam Speaker, it is not right for the Minister to expect me to wait for instructions from the RDC to summon me for a meeting. He is completely out of order.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us listen to the minister.

MR OKUPA: As the minister answers, maybe he would also help us because we know that all the resources that we pass in this Parliament, including that for Emyooga, go through the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), who is the accounting officer. Why is this going through the RDC? Can he clarify to us? The Youth Livelihood Programme goes through the Office of the CAO. When did the RDC become the accounting officer? 

MR KYEYUNE: Madam Speaker, I think if my colleagues could allow me to explain so that they get -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the Minister to answer, if there is something -

MR KYEYUNE: Honourable colleagues, what you should know is that this money will go directly to the accounts of the beneficiary Sacco not the RDCs or CAOs. Every beneficiary Sacco must open up an account –(Interjection)– but we must have a mobilisation team in place. These are not handling funds but mobilisation and identification of beneficiaries and we are working together with you.

First, we wanted to ensure that this programme is very inclusive so that no one is left behind. We need to work together. Therefore, we had to look for who is neutral in the district.

We are working with the members of Parliament and we constituted a district task force where Members are represented. I advise my colleagues that if you do not have time, please allow your personal assistants to represent you so that they know whatever takes place in respect to this programme.

Madam Speaker, about the interest rate, this money is seed capital. It is a revolving fund. We are not supposed to recover it from the beneficiaries. We are just supporting the SACCO with Shs 30 million and this must be supplemented by members’ savings so that they manage their own funds. As Government, we shall never recover that money. The SACCO members themselves will manage it.

Hon. Ayoo, we have put in place COVID-19 National Task Force, the zonal task force and district task force to coordinate nationally. Therefore, there is a mechanism to fast-track what takes place in the district.

About the emphasis on the issue of training, yes, we need to put more emphasis on training the beneficiaries and also the implementers because the beneficiaries together with the implementers, must have the correct information and knowledge in respect to this programme. This is going to be emphasised and implemented very soon.

Member groups have not been registered. Well, the 19 groups are not SACCOs but are categories of the beneficiaries. What is Emyooga? This is a Runyankore word meaning the people who are into the same enterprise coming together. If you are doing the same enterprise and you come together, that is Omwooga. For instance, once we mobilise the boda-boda cyclists to come together and start saving, that is Omwooga. If they are mixed with taxi operators and salon operators then it loses the meaning.
This programme is not to address the issue of suffering by private teachers. They are not working and are not earning salary. About that, we shall get tomorrow or next day. Let us wait for the President to address it. We did not know the extent to which COVID-19 would affect our private teachers but we want to get a permanent solution by mobilising private teachers to come together, form a SACCO and be supported. I think it is a long term solution.

After COVID-19, any problem can occur. Once teachers are mobilised and they are supported, and if they resume work, they will have money to save and it will address long-term problems.

Another question was, why didn’t you turn these already existing groups into the Emyooga? These are specialised enterprises. Therefore, if we find boda-boda groups already existing in a district - like Mama Cecilia has mobilised them - well, we can work with the already existing groups for those categories in order to ensure that they are recruited into this Emyooga programme, provided they fall within the 19 categories.

Hon. Mukitale said that we need to redesign the Emyooga to fit – Well, the beneficiaries are the most hit categories by COVID-19 and we don’t have to redesign because we are addressing the problem. They include boda-bodas, salon operators, restaurant owners and mechanics.

Why don’t we work with faith based organisations? This is like a vote of no confidence. There is a Government in place and we are still in charge. We have structures and capacity to implement our programmes.

Hon. Osegge said that we should deal with the already existing groups. Yes, I have already talked about that. Emyooga go hand in hand with saving. Yes, this money is not for sharing out. This money must be supplemented by the savings of the beneficiaries. The beneficiaries must be trained. The reason I am emphasising on training, it must be done so that - our people are sick and are used to free things. For instance, hon. Ssewungu said that his people were invited but they were expecting to go back with the money. Really that very day, and when they did not get the money, they reported my team to you.

Therefore, we need to emphasis training and that is why these people have turned Members of Parliament into their shops. Once they need soap or sugar, they come to Members of Parliament. Therefore, we need to work on the mindset change. 

Madam Speaker, we have the money but I am reluctant to release it to the groups until they are trained, and have started saving. For sure, this is not for politics. If it were for politics, I would have disbursed it yesterday. That is why I am moving step by step. Training must be emphasised so that after giving them money, they don’t share it out. They must continue saving and grow their fund. 

Hon. Johnson Muyanja raised a very important point that in Mukono, his people are selectively choosing who should register as a SACCO. Hon. Muyanja we are now at the stage of registering SACCOS and the minimum number of members is 30. Even when the 30 members are in the book, the rest can still join because the door is always open. With SACCOS, all members are equal; one man one vote. Even if you began with it, you are equal with the person who joined it today. 

Hon. Lubogo said that this is too much money and we are putting less in Uganda Development Bank (UDB). Hon. Lubogo, I don’t think that the people we represent have access to UDB funds. We are putting money in UDB to benefit that category but our people must be supported. The problem is that people need capital but they don’t have collaterals to have loans from commercial banks.
 
That is why we are encouraging them to form groups and start saving. Once we give them this money, they are going to loan it out to themselves at as cheaply as eight per cent because it is their own money. 

Therefore, they will manage their fund well and will get capital because there are only two sources of capital; credit and saving. Indirectly, it will force commercial banks to reduce their lending rates because the demand for commercial bank loans will be low. 

The people will manage their funds and get loans within their SACCOs. As a result the demand for commercial bank loans will fall. Later, those banks will have to reduce their lending rate, which makes this the best approach.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I thank you for supporting this programme. It is true there is a lot of anxiety out there. We have the money for the old constituencies and we shall provide for the newly created constituencies through Parliament; we have the money. Just go back to the people, energise them and continue advising them to develop a saving culture because without saving, we shall not fight poverty. People must save because saving is key. Even us need to develop a saving culture; it is very important.

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there was a question asked by hon. Ogwal about where does the district constituency falls. Is it also part of the Shs 620 million? Is the Shs 620 million for the district or county constituencies? There were one or two other issues raised by members. Hon. Osegge wanted to raise something.

MR KYEYUNE: Madam Speaker, in every district, there are constituencies. The district constituency also falls under the rest of the constituencies – (Interjection) – yes; it is not for Members of Parliament to go with - all the beneficiaries are within the rest of the constituencies. There are no beneficiaries in the district constituencies. They are all in the rest of the constituencies and so, they will all be catered for.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the minister because I actually thought we were helping the minister to ensure this programme benefits Ugandans; the intended beneficiaries.

I would like to know if the minister is aware that as the Emyooga is gaining ground, the Youth Livelihood Fund is dying out. The women fund is also dying out. What are you going to do about that because there is a lot of confusion? It is simply changing the name. 

Can you therefore, help this country to know whether the Youth Livelihood Programme is going to continue, as well as whether the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) and the Emyooga will continue? 

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Of course, we all know that the Youth Livelihood Programme collapsed and that is why we did not appropriate any money for it but the UWEP is still in existence. So, other special programmes still exist, of course, alongside the Emyooga Programme. However, the Youth Livelihood Programme collapsed – (Interjection) – yes! Did you appropriate for it? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to item 3 (4).

THE DISTRIBUTION OF TARMAC ROADS IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Works and Transport present? Not present. Next item, please.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CONTINUED PROHIBITION OF UGANDAN DAIRY PRODUCTS TO ACCESS THE KENYAN MARKET

THE SPEAKER: Minister for East African Community Affairs? 

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to thank the colleague who raised this as a matter of national importance.

Madam Speaker, during the Sitting of 29 July 2020, hon. Tusiime Michael, the MP, Mbarara Municipality rose on the issue of national importance regarding the impact of the move by the Kenyan Government to prohibit Ugandan dairy products from accessing the Kenyan market on the East African Community integration agenda.

The pre-Covid-19 period and more specifically, the last quarter of 2019 and first quarter of 2020 saw a tremendous decline in Uganda’s trade, specifically in the manufacturing sector transfer to Kenya for the first time in three years. 

This followed a well-designed, sophisticated and systematic effort by Kenya authorities targeting not only finished goods transfer but also the exponential increase in costs on raw material, especially on imports. 

Pearl Dairy is a Ugandan-registered company that exports milk to Kenya with established stores in Nairobi, Eldoret, Meru, Nakuru and Mombasa. Pearl Dairy Limited has an investment portfolio of $50 million and a workforce of 1,500 people within the region. 

It has an installation capacity of 800,000 litres per day though currently, they are operating with only 120,000 litres per day, which is only about 15 per cent of the installation capacity.

The Kenyan market is the preferred target market for Lato Milk, which is being processed by Pearl Dairy, within the region. This follows the closure of the Uganda-Rwanda border at Katuna in February 2019 and with Tanzania’s tariff barriers of TShs 2,000 on each dairy product, making the Tanzanian market uncompetitive for dairy products within the region.

In January 2020, Pearl Dairy Limited Company depots in various parts of Kenya were raided and stock of over $640,000 was confiscated by the Kenyan authorities. At the same time, about 34 trucks carrying milk to Kenya were denied entry and returned to Uganda. 

On l6 January 2020, the company closed all its operations in Kenya. There was also a deliberate smear campaign in the country’s media to discredit the brand, hence causing untold embarrassment and loss. 
The confiscated stock was later returned to the company. However, a stock worth about $500,000 had since expired. Subsequently, Kenya started limiting liquid permits applied for to a few per week; about 10 percent of the liquid permits, which were applied for. 

I just would like to note that the Kenya market has been one of the biggest export destinations of Ugandan milk exports amounting to over $100 million annually for Lato Milk only. The dairy sector has over 35 companies in Uganda with a total installation capacity of 1,600,000 litres per day, a 23 per cent of the production within the country. I have also attached the list of all the dairy companies that are operating actively within Uganda.

The reasons that have been advanced by the Kenyan Government over the closure are as follows:

    1. The Kenya Government, while conducting its operation claimed that Lato Milk does not meet the East African Community Rules of Origin criteria.  
    2. They also claimed that the dairy milk from Uganda was a counterfeit milk. 
    3. That there was a substandard milk emerging from Uganda to Kenya.

Our view is that the claims are unjustified and they are mere non-tariff barriers aimed at frustrating Lato Milk, which is a product of Pearl Dairy from the Kenyan market because of the following reasons:

    1. The first item on lack of the EAC Rules of Origin criteria is not correct. It is because a joint verification mission was conducted by a team of Ugandan and Kenyan officials in Uganda here on the production capacity in December 2019. It is in this report that the joint team concluded that the milk from Uganda meets all the EAC Rules of origin. However, the joint verification report was not signed by the Kenyan representatives pending their further consultations on the matter. This was a deliberate effort to frustrate the outcome of the report, having moved across the whole country and confirmed that Uganda had the capacity to produce the amount of milk that was already in the market. 
    2. The second item of counterfeit milk is an issue of infringement on Intellectual Property. That is, the trademark, “Lato Milk” is a trade mark for Pearl Dairy.  Meaning that the issue of counterfeit does not arise. This was cleared during the meeting. 

    3. On the substandard milk, milk and other related products are covered by the harmonised EAC standards for milk, and Lato Milk meets these standards which are developed and enforced by the Bureaus of Standards of all EAC Governments. More still, before exporting the milk to Kenya, clearance is given by both the Kenyan and Ugandan Ministries of Agriculture and Dairy Development Authorities that the milk meets the requisite standards plus the National Standards Bureaus of both partner states. This is the sheet and clearances are done before the milk move across. 

Madam Speaker, on the engagement that Uganda and Kenya have done, the ministry has convened a meeting with relevant stakeholders to establish the facts concerning the matter. On 08 July 2020, we came up with the way forward, which was established through this meeting. 

A verification mission was conducted in December 2019 with the main aim of verifying that the milk originates from Uganda and that Uganda had sufficient capacity to supply milk to Kenya. This was proved though the report, which was not signed by the Kenyan delegation pointing out that they need further consultations and guidance from higher authorities in Kenya. 

An inter-ministerial meeting comprising of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Dairy Development Authority, Ministry of East Africa Community Affairs, and the Presidents' Office and the Pearl Dairy was held at the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. In the meeting, it was agreed that the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives handles this matter and seeks the guidance of His Excellency the President on the appropriate way forward. 

The guidance by the President was sought in which he guided that a positive approach of consistent engagement be pursued other than imposing retaliatory measures. In the same meeting, we approved that a “protest note” against the action by Kenya be developed and shared through diplomatic channels. This was done and delivered to the Kenyan Government through the diplomatic channels. To date, the response has not been received from the Government of Kenya.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the ministry is committed to the following:

    1. Continuous engagement with the Government of Kenya to resolve the impasse and other non-tariff barriers. 

    2. The bilateral meeting the ministry has earlier scheduled with Kenya on 27 July 2020 by Video, which was postponed at Kenya's request. Further engagement is still ongoing. The Kenyan Ministers of East African Community, and Agriculture are yet to commit the bilateral- Engagement of the other countries especially DRC, South Sudan and Algeria during the forthcoming Joint Permanent Commissions to open up their markets for Uganda's milk and milk products to ensure we get alternative markets across Africa has been noted. Pearl Dairy has been able to start exporting Lato milk to Ethiopia, Malawi, South Sudan and Algeria. This is now a potential market of which the closure of Kenya is trying to open up the Uganda products to other areas. This is the work of the private sector. 

    3. Explore domestic markets. There are over 10 million school going young people in Uganda in over 20,000 schools both Government and private. It is also important to begin to explore the possibility of doing business with such a huge demographic segment once schools open in the post COVID-19. Trading with the schools will not only increase the nutritional value intake by the students, but it will also offer a livelihood to farmers, manufacturers and employees as a whole. This should be done partly through parents’ and teachers’ associations. 

    4. Uganda Insurance Authority should introduce an export guarantee insurance scheme by licensing insurers in Uganda to de-risk the regional exports. This is something which we are also following up as Ministers of EAC, and it is before the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who are supposed to handle this under the sectoral council on finance and trade. We are also going to hold the EAC secretariat accountable especially on non-tariff barrier matters which are politically motivated in the region. The EAC secretariat should be empowered to take the mantle and prevail over matters that distort intra-regional trade and compromise the spirit of the customs union and common market. 

Madam Speaker, after having the bilateral engagement with the Government of Kenya on Dairy products, we shall report back on the actionable recommendations that should have been agreed upon by the two parties. That is tentatively the report that we have. I can, however, say that there have not been much effort that Kenya has put. We are, however, still pursuing to see that we have a bilateral way to resolve this matter. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I just have one comment. When I met the Lato Milk people, they told me that they had invested in their industry based on the assurance that the East African Community Market was a very busy market and now it turns out not to be true.

Then in different interactions when I travel, we find that the Joint Market Commission agreed between our countries and other countries have never taken off.  I believe that you should now look at COMESA and other countries to create market for our people. We need to activate more of the joint market commission.

5.48
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, we need to appreciate the spirit in which the ministry or Government has approached this matter. This should be the method of doing business with our neighbours. You will remember, Madam Speaker, when the Sugarcane traders were stuck with stocks of sugarcane; the Government was not willing to come up with a proactive approach as it has come up now. Therefore, I would like to implore the Government to always be alert and make sure that you help all categories of business community who are surviving on regional trade.

Madam Speaker, regarding the matter of milk, I would like to advice that this is a diplomatic matter and we need to balance our trade since the economists are here to advise us. There should be some areas where we should also hold onto and get the Kenyan Government to understand where we are coming from.

If they are frustrating the inflow of our dairy products into Kenya, there could be something also which is very vital to their economy that we could also decline to receive because we survive on one another. We should also be able to find a smart way of getting something out of our neighbours.

The problem we have in Uganda is things are free for all. We do not take it as a painful matter; a matter where we should defend with our soul and spirit and we just leave it to anyone. It is high time we stood up to defend our people and also let our neighbours know that we cannot be taken for a ride. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.51
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the minister, what is becoming of the East African Community today under the custom union and most especially dealing with the non-tariff barrier.

From the presentation, it is getting away from the East African Community level where the secretariat and even the East African Legislative Assembly will be dealing with handling the issues of non-tariff barriers that countries put to block other partner states. However, it ends up becoming a matter of bilateral agreement like an understanding between Uganda and Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania and yet I thought under the East African Community Custom Union, all other partner states would get involved in ensuring that the policies of non-tariff barriers are clear and these issues are discussed at the secretariat and the councils of ministers and it is dealt with.

Once it becomes an issue of Uganda-Tanzania, Uganda-Kenya, the President of Uganda discussing with the President of Kenya or Tanzania, then the notion of the East African Community Integration is lost because they cannot come in to help a union as one body but you find people doing it like coalition of the willing.

This is why I would like to know from the minister if we are to go like this, then how far will this help us? The most unfortunate part of it is that we are always the victims from around our endeavours in the community. May be only Burundi but with South Sudan, Rwanda and Tanzania you get the same problems especially where we are having good supply of theses goods then they begin to bring these non-tariff barriers, honourable minister. 

Madam Speaker, as a country, we need to have a very strong position on those who block and distort our traders among the partner states of East African Community. This is becoming too much and this is one of the issues which is making Ugandans lose interest and support for the East African Community Integration.

We are putting our position that this must be dealt with at the level of the secretariat and EALA level so that as a country we also feel that our efforts are also being recognised at the East African Community.

Finally, honourable minister, as Government, we need to look at other markets because what we have now, if we continue with supply of agricultural products the way we are doing, then the East African Community Market is becoming smaller because they also produce almost the same products. Therefore, we now need to look outside what is within the region. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.   

5.54
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, I would like to very much commend the honourable minister by the way in which he is going about this apparent cheating of the Uganda products into the Kenyan market. The East African Community was predicated on strengthening interregional trade as the main lying factor. Clear protocols were signed like the common market protocol and specifically the issues of the rules of origin which took a long time to negotiate and agreed upon are very clearly spelt out.

Now, we are beginning to see that some members of the community are getting very selfish where matters of interest to them impeach on their trade, they begin to behave otherwise. 

I would like to agree with hon. Cecilia Ogwal that we must begin to look at other products of these countries that export to our country and keep products for them and we begin to retaliate and reciprocate these gestures. We cannot continue to lie low when they trample all over us. 

Our only products are milk and sugar which are being made difficult to enter the Kenyan market yet they have several products that enter into Uganda. Why don’t we reciprocate, and make sure that they also get the same message that we can also use the same rules of origin against their products? 

Madam Speaker, if the East African Community is to survive again, there must be fairness, equity, benefits to all the member states and not only one-member state trying to over shot over the others.

Therefore, honourable minister, while you try to continue to pursue the negotiations, we must begin to plan on how we can deal with this.

The previous speaker, mentioned about us looking for other markets everywhere and I think Lato Milk can be sold globally. Powdered milk is on huge demand and we must also look for other global markets where Lato Milk can be sold because there are very few countries that can produce the quality of Lato Milk that we produce here. I thank you so much, honourable minister and Madam Speaker.

5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and also appreciate the colleagues who have been here. You have given good advice to the ministry and Government.

We would like to also report that the East African Community is built on a foundation, which is enshrined in the protocols that were signed in 1999. 

Despite all these protocols, there are some partner states, which have not observed them based on the regulations that we as ministers and the council keep giving directives on. 

We have a mechanism in such circumstances where you find that there is a dispute, which resolves on these issues that arise. Before we get to bring the matters to the East African Community especially at the Secretariat level, we try to make a bilateral engagement. We believe sometimes it resolves matters faster. 

There could be issues that are so salient that they can be resolved by the bilateral engagement before to get to the level of the secretariat. That is exactly what is happening between Uganda and Kenya. On several occasions, these matters have come up and they have been resolved.   

Therefore, it is a process, which is also under the mechanisms that we use to resolve matters within the region. It is not about not reporting to the secretariat but a process, which is within the law.

We are following the right procedure. This engagement is a procedure, which is in the treaty. We believe that at a time when we realise it is not being resolved, then we shall now extend it to the secretariat although we have already noted to them. We have copied the secretariat in and they are aware but we have not put the matters fully for them to come and implement them.

Madam Speaker, about the bigger market, it is okay. That is why we have given a report that despite the closure of the Kenyan market, we have advised the Minister for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives under the Export Promotion Board to look for other markets.

By the way, we had even got the market to the United States but the mechanism of movement of our milk there was a bit also locked due to the closure of borders and airlines not being operational.

We believe that even while Kenya is still silent on opening up its market, we might have our milk sold across the whole world because it is high quality milk.

The Joint Permanent Commission is a matter, which we have started on. It is the one opening the market across the COMESA region. We believe these are some options that we shall come up with.

About retaliation, I do not buy into this idea from hon. Cecilia and now from hon. Baba. Uganda has always resolved its matters on diplomatic approach. I believe aspects of retaliation are not yet and rarely do we mention them as a vocabulary as a country.

We shall continue engaging at a diplomatic level. However, at the same time, we need to look at the benefits, which emerge with other products. We could also be selling across the regions not basically on issues, which arise with milk. 

Therefore, I am a bit reluctant. I will discourage the members from having this kind of vocabulary that we do retaliation as a country.

On Non-Tariff Barriers (NTBs), which hon. Ayo has talked about, we have a mechanism of following them. This is a non-tariff barrier. At every three months, the committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Committee on East African Community normally sit and look at all these as ways. 

When we have new and emerging NTBs, we resolve them under East African Community (EAC). As for now, we have taken almost seven months without sitting as the East African Community. That is why you find these NTBs taking long to be resolved.

Otherwise, I would like to thank you. We shall come back and report on an effort that will have been arrived at by the ministry to see that we have Kenya address the matters that we have put before them. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you. We can take item four for laying papers. I do not know if the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT ON PUBLIC DEBT, GUARANTEES, OTHER FINANCIAL LIABILITIES AND GRANTS FOR FY 2019/2020

6.02
The Minister of state for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Microfinance and small enterprises) (Mr Haruna KYEYUNE): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report on public debt, guarantees, other financial liabilities and grants for the Financial Year, 2019/2020. I beg to lay.

The Speaker: Does this go to the Committee on National Economy? This is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.
 
REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UGANDA SEEDS LIMITED FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2019

THE SPEAKER: I do not see a commissioner here. Can I ask an ex-commissioner to come and lay? Hon. Okupa, please come and lay this report.
 
6.03
Mr Elijah okupa (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, allow me to lay these reports on behalf of the Parliamentary Commission:

    i) Report of the Auditor General on the financial statements of Uganda Seeds Limited for the Financial Year ended 30 June 2019.
    ii) The report of the Auditor General on the special investigation on Kammengo Technical Institute. 

I beg to lay.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, those two reports are sent to the Public Accounts Committee and Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back.

Honourable members, I think we have done quite a bit of work for today. I would like to adjourn the House to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow afternoon.

(House rose at 6.05 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 16 September 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)
 
