


Tuesday, 22 September, 2020

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting convened to pay tribute to the late hon. Faith Alupo, Woman Member of Parliament for Pallisa District.

Honourable members, due to the prevailing COVID-19 conditions affecting the globe and the requirement to observe the COVID-19 Standard Operating Procedures, it has not been possible to have the body lay in state as is usually the procedure. We did put up the picture as you see and condolence books were provided.

I would like to thank you for sparing time - this is not an easy period - so that you can attend this auspicious occasion to see off our colleague.

We thank you for the messages of condolence, sympathies, understanding and cooperation. On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I convey our heartfelt condolences to Mr Ochom and family, the people of Pallisa and the nation at large for the loss of a very young, resourceful and dedicated Ugandan.

God bless your soul in eternal peace, hon. Faith Alupo.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ALUPO FAITH, PALLISA DISTRICT WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE

2.37
The second deputy prime minister and minister for East African Affairs (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Madam Speaker, I move the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Hon. Alupo Faith, Woman Representative for Pallisa District, for her dedicated service to the nation.

It is moved under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and it goes as follows:

“WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the demise of hon. Alupo Faith, Woman Representative, Pallisa District, which occurred on the 15  September 2020 at Mulago Hospital;

AWARE THAT Hon. Alupo Faith joined Parliament in June 2018 and diligently served on the Appointments Committee and the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry;

NOTING THAT prior to Hon. Alupo Faith joining Parliament in 2018, she served at the Electoral Commission as a sub-county election officer, Uganda Bureau of Statistics as field interviewer and worked as a field worker with the Probation Office in Makindye Division; positions she devotedly and diligently served;

APPRECIATING THAT Hon. Alupo Faith was a humble, hardworking and diligent legislator who was passionate about her work and ably represented and served the people of Pallisa;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

    1. That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Pallisa District and the entire country for the loss of a distinguished daughter of Uganda.

    2. That Parliament takes cognizance of the distinguished service rendered and contribution made by Hon. Alupo Faith to the people of Pallisa and Uganda of as a whole.”

I beg to move.

The mover is the Rt Hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament. I am representing him here.

By courtesy; Hon. Aol Ocan Betty, Leader of the Opposition in Parliament and also hon. Baryayanga Andrew Aja, Member of Parliament for Kabale Municipality and representative of the Independents.

The Speaker: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded. Justify it.

Mr kivejinja: It is seconded by the Leader of the Opposition –

The Speaker: Justify it. You can now speak to the motion.

Mr kivejinja: Madam Speaker, this is the justification for a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Hon. Alupo Faith who has been a Woman Member of Parliament for Pallisa District.

We are yet again here in a sad mood to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, Hon. Alupo Faith who passed away on Tuesday, 15 September 2020. This sad news has left the country and all of us in deep sorrow.

In 2018, the Government effected a split of Pallisa District creating Butebo District from part of its territory. The incumbent woman Member of Parliament for the district, Agnes Ameede, decided to remain as a representative of Butebo leaving the position of Pallisa Woman Member of Parliament vacant.

Hon. Alupo Faith won the by-election on the National Resistance Movement(NRM) ticket and has been diligently representing the people of Pallisa since her election in June 2018.

She breathed her last on Tuesday morning from Mulago Hospital where she had been receiving treatment for high blood pressure and diabetes.

Between 2007 and 2008, she began her first job as a field worker at the probation office in Makindye Division. From 2008 to 2009, she worked as a field interviewer at the Uganda Bureau of Statistics. From 2010 to 2011, she started work with Electoral Commission as a Sub-county Election Officer, Pallisa District.

She joined Parliament as a District Woman Representative for Pallisa from 2018 up to the time of her passing.

The late Alupo Faith died at a time when we needed her most at 36 years. In addition, being a first timer in Parliament, there is a lot we expected from her.

She was a good cadre of the NRM philosophy who was deployed on the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry where she advanced the development of the entire country above her own interest and placing above self the wellbeing of the people that she and all of us represent in Parliament.

The late Hon. Alupo Faith is applauded and will be missed by all of us. As it is indicated in the scriptures, Hebrews 6:10, God is not unjust, He will not forget your work and the love you have shown Him as you have helped His people.

She was indeed a reliable, committed, respectable, dependable and dedicated servant of Uganda. We shall surely miss her.

Hon. Alupo Faith was born on the 9 October 1983. She completed her Primary Leaving Examination at Pallisa Girls Primary School in 1997. In 2001, Alupo attained her Uganda Certificate of Education at Pal and Lisa College in 2003. She obtained a Uganda Advanced Certificate at Muljibhai Madhvani College, Wairaka. She completed her Bachelor’s Degree in Social Work and Social Administration at Uganda Christian University, Mukono in 2007.

After four years, in 2011, she joined the Law Development Centre Kampala and attained a certificate in law practice.

Hon. Alupo Faith is survived by her husband and two children. We extend our deep condolence and sympathies to the family, friends, constituency and the country at large. May the Almighty God rest the soul of Hon. Alupo in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Can I invite the Leader of the Opposition?

2.49
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Faith Alupo.

At the age of 37 only, a cruel hand of death has robed us of a young leader who represented her people in this Parliament. As a social scientist, Hon. Alupo was passionate about matters to do with women and children.

The deceased legislator had been receiving treatment for blood pressure and diabetes during her admission at the hospital. However, the cruel hand of death could not spare her life.

Her sudden death is a big blow to the family, the people of Pallisa and Uganda at large because she had clearly started embarking on various projects to help her constituency.

To the family of the deceased, kindly accept our commiseration. We mourn with you.

Hon. Alupo, your curtain has drawn and your life on earth has ended. Our only prayer is for your family and friends to remain strong during this moment of trails. Hon. Alupo, fare thee well. May God rest her soul in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Leader of Opposition. Can I invite hon. Baryayanga for the Independents?

2.51
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Kabale Municipality, the Independent Members of Parliament and on my own behalf, I commensurate with all of you and the country at large on the passing of our dear colleague, Hon. Faith Alupo.

Hon. Alupo’s death came as a shock and I believe to many others too. She was a young lady at only 37 years of age. Indeed, Uganda has lost a resource in her as a legislator and a social worker.

In her short term in Parliament, I understand she had embarked on various projects to help her constituents in Pallisa. I wish to commend her for her noble service.

She was committed to her party, NRM, and served diligently as a member on the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry. We can perhaps pick a leaf from her calm demeanour and diligence. Rest in peace, fallen colleague. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, mover and seconders. Hon. Alupo was on the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. So can I invite the chairperson of the committee to pay his tribute? 

2.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Robert Kasule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just as the mover and the seconders of the motion have said, we are going to miss Hon. Alupo. She was a friendly and calm person who was willing to learn. I did not know that she was such a young person. I thought she was a little bit older than what I have heard - 36 years old!

On behalf of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, I am saddened by the death of Hon. Faith Alupo. In fact, it took us long to believe that she had passed on. When she was seconded to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, she asked me if I could help her settle in and learn how to deliberate, first of all, in the committee and on the Floor of Parliament. She came so humbly that we accepted and managed to pass through the Rules of Procedure and part of the Constitution. She was very happy and I wondered why. When I inquired as to how she managed to come to Parliament, she narrated to me her humble background. 

Unlike us who grew up here in town, Hon. Alupo grew up in Pallisa and she did not know much of what goes on around the rest of the country. Coming to Parliament was a shock to her and she took it very humbly and was thankful to the people of Pallisa. She was learning and was quick to learn.

She used to sit somewhere behind the Chamber - around this COVID-19 time - and attended almost every session. One day, I went to her and asked her why she attended almost all sessions in the week during COVID-19 time. She told me, like many of the Members of Parliament, who come from upcountry, when you come to Kampala to deliberate, you have to stay for some time; even when it is urgent to go back to Pallisa. This is because it is a long distance and you have to work on your car and the people you walk with. She said she spent the whole week here before going back. 
So those days when she was here, she had to attend Parliament; whether she was on the list or not.

Lastly, I talked to her around COVID-19 time and we wished each other success during the NRM primaries. Little did I know that I would not again meet the person who wished me well and I wished her the same. 

Therefore, on behalf of the committee, I say, rest in peace; we shall miss you. This has been an active member in the field, both locally and abroad. She was simple and willing to learn, and worked for the people of Pallisa.

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us time as the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. We shall miss her. I hope we meet in Heaven. 

2.58
MS JENIPHER NAMUYANGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. On behalf of the people of Kibuku and the local government fraternity, I register my condolences to the people of Pallisa, the Parliament of Uganda and to the people of Uganda for the loss of the young legislator, a true African woman; very humble and true to her word. 

Hon. Alupo would maintain a smile even under difficult conditions. We are going to miss her. This is a person that has been very loyal to the NRM party. I remember when we were in Kyankwanzi, as the NRM party, Hon. Alupo came even when she was heavily pregnant. She felt the labour pains in Kyankwanzi but she was there to support the party and learn more without even looking at the condition she was in. 

The people of Pallisa are going to miss her because she acted with a lot of humility. You would never see her conflicting with anybody and we are going to miss her. 

Madam Speaker, as a matter of concern, I have been in my constituency and I noted that Kibuku initially had two COVID-19 cases comprising of young boys who had been put in prison in another district. After picking samples from them, they were released to come and mix with the community without getting the results out. Then, after a week, they mentioned that these boys were positive and instructed the district health officer to look for them. One of the sources of the spread of COVID-19 is inmates. I believe, as Government, we need to do something.

The other thing is the politics. Most of our people in the rural areas have not believed that COVID-19 is with us. They want people to organise rallies and hug each other. They still even shake their hands – so, it is a bit risky!

The way burials are attended in the villages is as if things are still normal. Therefore, we still have to do serious sensitisation to the communities to fight the disease.

Hon. Faith Alupo has left a young family - of two young children. I know we are paying tribute but what do we do to support the family thereafter? This is something I will leave to everybody but it is very prudent that we stand with the family and support it, especially the young children that have been left behind. May the good Lord rest her soul in peace and sustain the family.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As I invite hon. Opendi, I would just like to inform the House that, first, it is a difficult situation because Mr Ochom has not able to attend this special sitting because he is under quarantine, but other relatives are here. I would like to introduce Mr Richard Omut, an uncle to Mr Ochom; Mr Ismail Omoding, a brother to the late Hon. Alupo; Ms Marion Kyakuwa, a sister – I think she has gone out; then there are the young children - Emma Malinga, who is right there and Israel Ochom, who I think has gone out with her sister. Those are the children. We welcome and commiserate with them. I think we shall take up what hon. Namuyangu has asked us to do. 

3.04
MS SARAH OPENDI (Independent, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Tororo, I would like to extend my condolences to the family, the people of Pallisa District, and to this Parliament upon the loss of one of us, Hon. Faith Alupo

When I received this message, it was just after our primaries and I was with my agents. The first message that came through was that our colleague had succumbed to COVID-19, something that I did not believe. I asked myself, “Where did she get this from?” I know Pallisa as one of the low-risk districts. If we are to go by the statistics that we have currently, it still remains one of the districts with the lowest number of COVID-19 cases within the Bukedi subregion. I, therefore, wondered and thought that something could have gone wrong, and then I received information that our colleague had high blood pressure and diabetes. 

However, what again disturbed my mind was that I had been here with hon. Faith Alupo just before we went for the primaries; I think the very last meeting we had here. I joked with her and a number of colleagues. I told her, “Are you telling me that I should prepare another mama kit?” She said, “Yes, go and prepare.” We also talked about her situation and I said, “I hope you go through the primaries successfully because when you are in that state, it is sometimes not easy.”

I, therefore, want to extend my condolences to the very young family. The children are young and may not even understand what is actually going on. We need to really pray for them because I strongly believe after a certain time, they will start asking where their mother went. As of now, it may look normal and they may think as usual, she could have travelled and may be coming back. 

Madam Speaker, this leaves us who are living –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, this is something that the Ministry of Health has often told us. We have Non-communicable Diseases (NCDs) with us, so a lot of care needs to be taken once one has these diseases. Now that we have COVID-19, this is actually a high-risk factor for those with non-communicable diseases and they need to take extra precaution. We do not know where she could have picked this from. I do not know whether it was really COVID-19 but the NCDs are a high-risk factor for COVID-19.

To the people of Pallisa, you have lost a very young able legislator, who was still full of life. Although I was told that she did not make it through the NRM primaries, I strongly believe she had other plans and could still serve this country in other capacities. 

With those few remarks, I would like to say that may the Lord grant the family, friends and relatives strength to overcome this grief. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.08
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Busia Municipality, I would like to extend my condolences upon the loss of my beloved sister. 

Hon. Faith Alupo was a great friend, who became like a sister. I would like to thank the parents of hon. Alupo for having given birth to a daughter, who had a character admired by everybody. 

I would like to mourn with the people of Pallisa and the family; you have lost a mother, a sister and a friend of women and children. Many times, when my sister stood on the Floor of Parliament, she talked about issues concerning children and women. 

As the NRM party, we have lost a cadre. I last talked to her when we were going for the NRM party primaries and she asked, “Macho, will you make it?” I said, “I will try to make it but you know what happens in our party sometimes.” It is bad that God has called her at a time the party wanted her most.

Madam Speaker, in Samia we believe that the dead talk to God. I want to send my sister, Faith Alupo, to go and tell God that while she has gone, we have not got a ministerial statement on the COVID-19 pandemic in this country. 

Secondly, my sister, I would like you to tell God that accountability for COVID-19 funds that were donated by Ugandans, friends of Uganda and international bodies has not been availed to Ugandans up to date. However, many quarantine centres, for example the one at Dabani in Busia District, still lack food, water and sanitary towels for the women who are detained there. I have used the phrase “detained there” because quarantine centres in this country are like torture chambers. We cannot have more than 20 to 50 people in a quarantine centre and we are given only Shs 100,000 to survive on for a full month. 

I, therefore, pray that as politics is going on, we, the leaders, should think about the plight of our people. I remember my party Chairman, President Museveni, said that when we come to such a time when COVID-19 is spreading at a high rate, something should be done about politics. However, we have been in this political dance for the last two months and it is difficult to implement Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) at a political rally.

Lastly, as leaders, we should call upon Government to be clear on deaths related to COVID-19. I listened attentively to the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister while he delivered his statement; he never talked about the cause of death of my sister, the hon. Alupo. I think it would be very clear if Government told us what killed our sister, Alupo? What killed her should define why her dear husband is in quarantine at such a time when he would have heard words of encouragement from us, the legislators, in this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to inform the family and the House that there is a condolence message from the Government Chief Whip to the members of the family. On behalf of the NRM Parliamentary Caucus, she has enclosed Shs 1 million and it will be given to the family.

3.12
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Butebo District, the parent district of Pallisa, and on my own behalf, it is with shock that I learnt about the death of hon. Alupo since we had not known that she was unwell. 

I first met hon. Alupo in 2014 as one of the contestants for Woman Member of Parliament at a local church fundraising. I extended my greetings to her and she replied with a smile and gentility. The smile and gentility defined her personality; no wonder, when I opted to relocate to Butebo District, she became the people’s preferred choice to become Woman Member of Parliament for Pallisa District. 

Hon. Faith Alupo was that easy person who embodied a life that was simple and a heart free of malice. It is sad that we, from the greater Pallisa, have lost her. Like many of us, she had ambition. She looked forward to being in the Eleventh Parliament. 

Her demise should be a lesson to all of us here about the fragility of human life. As we seek re-election, we should conduct ourselves in a manner that does not impede basic fundamentals of humanity such as promoting human rights, peace, unity and love of our neighbours. That is when we will be at peace and indeed win ourselves a place of rest in God’s kingdom. 

On my own behalf and on behalf of the people of the greater Pallisa, I would like to convey our gratitude to Parliament and to Government for the management of Faith as a patient and for the funeral arrangements. We thank you very much. May her soul rest in peace.

3.15
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like, on behalf of the people of Mitooma and on my own behalf, to convey our sincere condolences to the family, the people of Pallisa, to this Parliament and to the people of Uganda on the sudden demise of hon. Faith Alupo.

It is so sad that we did not know that she was so young. Looking at Faith’s build and stature, you would not think that she was this young. It is so sad. We also did not know that she was sick at all. As my colleagues have said, the news was shocking.

Hon. Faith Alupo was humble, graceful and the epitome of what a Member of Parliament should be. She carried herself well. These days, we are so short of examples – maybe I should not say that, but coming from this campaign that we have just experienced, our young people need role models like Faith. I hope that they do care to observe such role models so that they can also grow up to be persons of responsibility and persons that carry themselves with grace. 

She always addressed me as “canon”. She always wore that signature smile that we all see on these booklets. She will go down as that humble person that carried themselves with grace, as a cheerful person and as an encourager.

For one or two years in Parliament, one is still grappling with the issues and procedures of Parliament, but Faith was a quick learner and she had indeed started representing her people very well. As colleagues have said, she was passionate about women and children’s issues, so we met a lot in these fora outside Parliament. We will miss her very much. 

I would like to say to the family that in Jeremiah 29:11, the word of God says, “I alone know the plans I have for you, plans to prosper you and not to harm you, plans to give you hope and a future.” It is so sad seeing these young children – the baby especially – but if we commit ourselves to God, God will fulfil His plans for this family. May God grant her eternal peace, and comfort and strengthen the family through this difficult time. Thank you.

3.20
MS VERONICA BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion to pay tribute. I speak on my behalf, on behalf of the people of Kaberamaido County and district, and on behalf of the Teso Parliamentary Group where I am the vice-chairperson. 

Hon. Faith Alupo was a member of the family of Teso Parliamentary Group, although her original and geographical group was actually Bukedi Region. However, as an Atesot girl, she identified herself with the Teso Parliamentary Group. It is a very painful moment for Teso Parliamentary Group and for all of us, Members of Parliament, to lose such a young legislator. Like the Prime Minister has said, it is a loss to Uganda, to the NRM party, and to us who had a lot to share with her.

As a member of the Teso Parliamentary Group, hon. Faith Alupo was a team player. She was very calm and soft spoken. She used to call me “honourable Mummy”. I have lost an honourable daughter. 

I would like to thank God for the short life of Faith and for giving her time to touch our lives and touch the lives of her family; she gave us two children and her husband, who she is survived by. She has been a good example because everybody here has said all sorts of nice things about her.

The Teso Parliamentary Group has a welfare group and we have contributed Shs 10 million to help the family. 

Finally, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, personally for making sure, in this time that we are all running in different directions, that we pay tribute to her on this day. I would like to ask and pray that the Almighty God rests her soul in eternal peace. Amen.

3.23
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me, on behalf of the people of West Budama North, to convey our heartfelt condolences, first to the people of Pallisa and to the bereaved young family that hon. Alupo Faith has left behind.

Madam Speaker, we have lost a colleague and a mother. I am very sure that we all have a lot of pain in our hearts. Sometimes, you are tempted to ask, “Why at this time? Why us? Why is it that it is us, as Parliament, to lose a colleague at this time?”

Sometimes it is not very easy to answer such questions but we get comforted that hon. Faith Alupo has only gone ahead of us. Probably, she is going to prepare the way for us as a family.

Hon. Faith Alupo meant a lot to the people of Pallisa. I got to share this with her during the NRM National Conference. I had to hitch a lift with hon. Alupo coming back on my way from Namboole because I had parked my vehicle at Kireka. During that time, there was a lot of commotion on the way and she gave me a lift. She just spotted me walking and stopped; I did not stop her. She just stopped and asked, “Honourable, why are you walking? Let me take you”. I told her my vehicle was parked somewhere. She said, “Let me take you to where your vehicle is.” 

It was very courteous of her. We had not interacted so much but the fact that she could have such courtesy for a colleague tells a lot about the personality of hon. Alupo. In fact, I felt that I was even inconveniencing her. She had other colleagues in the vehicle. She wanted to take them to their respective places and she was still determined to take me to the exact spot where my vehicle was parked. I said, “Honourable, you have already done enough; I can move on from here.” 

Colleagues, as Parliament, we have lost such a very courteous and generous –(Member timed out)

3.26
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Amuru, allow me to convey my deepest condolences to the family of hon. Alupo, to the people of Pallisa and above all to the Parliament of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, it is very sad to speak to such a motion because we have lost a very young and humble legislator. I would also like to note that hon. Faith Alupo was actually my birthday mate. I am older than she was but we are both Independence babies. I am praying hard to God that He may allow me to reach my birthday this year and perhaps, in a very special way, I would sing for her and with her because I know she has left us in body but in spirit she is with us.

I am also saddened by the fact that these children are young. However, I have faith in God that they will grow to become perhaps even the next legislators for Uganda. The Holy Book, in James, says that true religion is a religion that looks after the orphans and widows. Therefore, the onus is on us who are present and alive to always support the family, not just the children but also their father because I know he must be going through a very difficult time.

Madam Speaker, I would like to like to share one experience I had with hon. Alupo. One time, I was discussing the challenges and some of the activities that I have in the constituency in Amuru. She then walked in and said, “Honourable, what are you talking about?” I told her that I was just talking about the groups that I was training in my constituency. She said, “Can you share more with me so that I also go and do it in Pallisa? I really want to come back and I must do more.” It is unfortunate that we never got to share afterwards and it is also unfortunate that she lost. However, the most unfortunate bit is that she is gone and no more.

Madam Speaker, I would like to encourage us. I know this is a very difficult time but I would like to encourage us to stay strong and above all, pray for these children. As a pro-life person, I am proud of hon. Alupo because she has promoted life. Often times, some people are afraid to carry a pregnancy, especially when we are in big offices, but she carried it with so much joy; she carried it with that signature smile on her face. 

With this, I would like to pray that the good Lord may grant our sister eternal rest. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.30
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Butaleja and my own behalf, I would like to convey my condolences to the family and to the people of Pallisa District for the loss of their Woman Member of Parliament. As the whip of Bukedi Sub-Region, I was so saddened by the death of our colleague, who is also a member of Bukedi Sub-Region Parliamentary Group.

Like Members have said, for some of us who were so close to hon. Alupo, we know the humility she had. When I was looking through the order of service, I found out that hon. Alupo is a daughter of a reverend and I got a flashback - the good background of this Member of Parliament comes right from the background of their family.

Madam Speaker, hon. Alupo has been a very strong supporter of NRM, not simply because she came here on the NRM ticket but what she would speak about the party would make you admire what she believes in. As NRM, we have lost a very strong cadre and the people of Pallisa have lost a very good legislator.

I used to joke with hon. Alupo so much. We used to converse in Lugwere. When she wanted to go to the district, she would ask me, “Hon. Milly, kino nkikole ntya?”, meaning “how should I do this?” She would wear a smile and joke. She was really down to earth and yearned to learn more; she would consult where she thought she had no knowledge about whatever she wanted to do.

Madam Speaker, when I heard the Rt Hon. Prime Minister presenting, I felt very sad that many mothers are dying of non-communicable diseases especially during pregnancy. I remember we paid tribute to another Member of Parliament under similar circumstances, the former Woman Member of Parliament for Iganga District.

We passed a resolution here and said that we must do a lot of capacity building for health workers to sensitise Ugandans on these non-communicable diseases. As Members of Parliament, since we have a lot of challenges, I see a lot of risk; many of us are at risk of dying from such diseases.

Madam Speaker, we should not just talk about these things but put them in practice. Ugandans should also know that COVID-19 is real –(Member timed out.)

3.34
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity you have given me to say a word of tribute to our fallen colleague. It is painful to be speaking here about the death of a young and promising leader, a humble and non-confrontational person.

I had known hon. Alupo for quite some time, and I knew her especially for her humility and simple nature. I would like to give an example. In December 2015, she approached me asking for support because she wanted to contest for Woman Member of Parliament for Pallisa District. I was open and frank to her; I told her, “My sister, you have delayed because some people have already approached me; why don’t you wait?” She told me, “No, let me proceed; if it is my time, I will get it. However, since you have already committed yourself to work with other people, I will respect your opinion”, and she did it. Later, when the opportunity came for her, I was also available to work with her.

Madam Speaker, hon. Alupo, by her nature, was a nice person to work with. You will notice that in this House, many times constituency Members of Parliament knock heads with the district women representatives. In my case, however, it never happened and I knew it would never happen as long as hon. Alupo continued to live and be the Member of Parliament for Pallisa. This is a lesson for us to learn from; we need to put ourselves in a situation where we work with each other for a common goal and avoid conflicts.

I have heard hon. Othieno saying that maybe she has gone to prepare for us. However, I am very sure that none of us is willing to follow her immediately and go where she has prepared, although we can simply say it here. What I am trying to say is that this is a saying that you cannot understand. Even when it could be true that she has gone to prepare for us, nobody believes that it is happiness there and therefore, we should join her very fast.

I will conclude by appealing to all of us, where we can, to do the little we can to support the young family. To the Government, thank you for what you have done so far. To you, Madam Speaker and the Parliament under you, thank you for the support you have given. When at any point we or the family come to you, please still allow us to disturb here and there. I would like to thank colleagues who have shown support. Thank you for the brotherly and sisterly response. May the good Lord rest her soul in eternal peace.

3.38
MR ISMAIL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank you for allowing the motion here to enable us pay our final respects to our colleague as she goes back to the Lord. It is also sad to lose a lady or woman because it is a woman who builds the nation.

I have often told people that a woman can give birth even without a man - that is how Jesus was born - but a man can never give birth if left alone, unless he is with a woman. Therefore, the loss we have experienced is a big loss for our community. The people of Pallisa have lost a lot.

Madam Speaker, my constituency is a neighbour to Pallisa District. Immediately you cross the swamp, you reach my constituency, Kanyum. Therefore, we have a lot to share both politically and socially.

When we heard about the death of hon. Alupo, we were saddened.  I was informed by my driver who was in the field, because I had not yet got the news, and I consulted thoroughly. First of all, what he told me was very scaring, that she had died of COVID-19 disease. I told him that he cannot spread such a message until I confirm.

Madam Speaker, it is a big loss to us. To the family, I would like to wish you prosperity and never to lose hope because death of a family member is not the end of life. The children and other members will grow up. Most of the prosperous people on earth today started with a very hard background and environment but they made it up to where they are today. Therefore, hope should never be lost. We, therefore, pray for her soul to rest in eternal peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.41
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice in thanking you for accepting us to pay tribute to hon. Faith Alupo. 

This was a young lady who was always smiling. The first time I met her after her swearing in, she was with hon. Opolot who told her, “I want you to get to know hon. Asamo; she will always guide you where you may have a problem.” The first time, her salary delayed and she was quiet. I asked her if she had been paid, she said, “Not yet and they have not told me anything.” I told her, “No, you cannot just sit here; you are supposed to get your money.” So, I directed her to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and ensured that her money was paid. Otherwise, she was relaxed and did not even bring up that problem. 

I asked her, “Why don’t you have a new car?” She said, “These people have not yet paid me. They are giving me examples.”

Madam Speaker, during the time of voting for cities, I remember that day you were supposed to give her an opportunity to raise an issue of national concern. I met her and asked, “The Speaker has called you; where were you?” She said, “Toto, I had gone to eat.” 

I told her that next time she asks to raise an issue of national concern, she has to be in the House.

She asked, “What about these cities, what am I supposed to vote?” I said, “We are all supporting the city status because that is an issue of development.” She said, “Okay, I need to consult.” That is how hon. Alupo was.

Whereas we mourn this colleague, I am asking myself: when we come to Parliament after the general elections, we get inducted and guided. However, because there is very little induction done to people who come in the middle of the term, they tend to reserve themselves.

You can imagine we got to know that the late was in hospital when she was already dead. I would like to think that if there was that kind of induction, maybe she would have been free to inform members about her condition; she did not. 

Madam Speaker, I know that you are the kind of person who hears that a member of Parliament is sick and you try your level best to rescue that person. While people are talking about COVID-19, Hon. Alupo had pressure and she was also pregnant. I asked her why she was going for party primaries, yet, she was pregnant. I was monitoring all the honourable members in the east. The day she lost, I called people in Pallisa –(Interjections)– I have my informers and they said, “Hon. Alupo has lost.” I said, “This is terrible.” With the high blood pressure and pregnancy, this was a terrible state even though we can think of another thing.

If she had confided in somebody, I know that you the Speaker would have done something.

I would like to say that we have seen the young children and hon. Jennifer Namuyangu has begged us. Madam Speaker, maybe you will make a pronouncement. These children are young and I doubt they even know what is happening. We need to give a hand to support the children. Hon. Alupo just came to Parliament in 2018. I do not think that even her pension account is okay. Maybe we need to pray for that. 

I would like to leave the family with Psalm 23, which says, “The Lord is My Shepherd.” I know the children will grow and become useful people in this country. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you. To confirm what hon. Asamo has said, I did not know that hon. Alupo was sick. I was just informed that she had died. I asked, “Was she sick?” I did not know. 

Then I asked, “Where did she die from?” They said, “In Entebbe.” “What was she doing in Entebbe?” I asked again and got confused. I was also told that she had both hypertension and diabetes beside the pregnancy.

3.45
Ms MARGARET baba diri (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. On behalf of the people of Koboko, I would like to convey my sincere condolences to the family of late Hon. Faith Alupo, the people of Pallisa, Parliament and Uganda at large.

The death of Hon. Alupo is very painful because she has died too young. At least, if she were something like 60 years, we would say that she had lived long enough. Otherwise, at only 37 years, it was the beginning of her life. 

She started very well by contesting to become a member of Parliament. The way she was representing the people of Pallisa showed she had a future to do better things for Pallisa District and the country at large. Unfortunately, all that has been cut short.

Secondly, her death is painful because she died when pregnant, meaning she was carrying another person. At least if she had died alone. You can imagine being pregnant with hypertension and Coronavirus; you cannot survive. That is why our girl has left while too young.

I got to know hon. Alupo very well because she never bypassed me. Every time I passed, she would greet me. I would ask, “Who is that?” She would say, “This is Faith Alupo.”

With time, I was now –(Member timed out.) 

The Speaker: Give her a minute.

Ms baba: Madam Speaker, I am sorry for the parents and the relatives because we have lost her contribution to the family. May the Lord rest her soul in eternal peace. Thank you. 

3.48
Mr CLEMENT ongalo-obote (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for granting us this opportunity to pay our last respects to our fallen colleague.

On behalf of the people of Kalaki, I would like to convey my condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Pallisa District and this Parliament upon this loss.

The death of any person is a tragedy to those who knew them and those who were served by that person. Certainly, it is more tragic when the person was as young as our colleague and with a promising future. 

I first learnt of the death of our colleague from social media. I immediately called hon. Jacob Opolot. Before I could say anything, he told me, “Yes, it is true it has happened.” It was indeed very saddening. 

Hon. Alupo was a friend to everyone in this Parliament. Not once have I heard of anybody speaking negatively about her. 

I would like to say what I have said here before. In the course of my visit to the various parliaments especially in Africa and particularly in Zambia, we were taken into a room that has a gallery. We asked about it and we were told, “This is the gallery for members of Parliament who died while still in service.” 

The police or military have reserved a special room to honour colleagues who have died in service. I always believe that this is something we should consider doing. It binds those of us who are living to colleagues who are gone and those who will come in the future after us.

I would like to thank you for the opportunity granted to me. I pray that the bereaved family gains strength from the Lord and that our dear sister finds eternal rest in the Lord. Thank you. 

3.50
Mr Andrew koluo (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Death has robbed us of a young legislator.

Hon. Alupo was a member of our committee. She was very quick to learn, inquisitive and used to talk about many things related to industry and tourism in Pallisa District.

On behalf of the people of Toroma, I share the great grief upon the loss of hon. Alupo. This sudden death reminds me of something, because when I was in the village, I did not know that we had lost such a great leader. I got news from our local FM radio. However, I could not believe the news of her death.

I take this opportunity to request Government to speed up the distribution of masks to the people more especially the people of Toroma whom I represent. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.52
MS JALIA BINTU LUKUMU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to pay tribute to the late hon. Faith Alupo. I would like to extend sincere condolences from the people of Masindi District and from the Uganda Parliamentary Sacco for the loss of our valued member.

When hon. Alupo was sworn in as a member of Parliament, we interested her in joining the Uganda Parliamentary SACCO. She cherished the values and cores of the saving culture. I would like to inform this august House that up to the last minute when she breathed her last, she was our member and she was that person who did not want to touch her savings. Uganda Parliamentary SACCO will miss her.

Madam Speaker, in our policy, when we lose a member, the SACCO contributes Shs 1 million to the bereaved family. At an appropriate time, we shall invite her people to come and we hand over this contribution.

I would like to talk about non-communicable diseases. Uganda is one of the countries that have registered the highest number of cases of non-communicable diseases. These diseases are not only affecting the older persons. It is surprising that these days, even children suffer from diabetes and hypertension. This is something the Government should take interest in especially in developing mechanisms of prevention. If we do not handle the preventive measures, we are likely to fall into a big ditch.

Madam Speaker, you cannot see these diseases. You just see somebody depreciating and collapsing. I want to propose that in this coming financial year, Parliament appropriates enough funds to help the Ministry of Health to make sure that they sensitise people on the preventive measures rather than looking at the curative measures. This will help our community and our people to live longer.

I pray that the Almighty Allah rests the soul of hon. Alupo in eternal peace. Thank you.

3.56
MR FRANCIS MUKULA (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the entire Agule County and Gogonyo County specifically that has just been curved out of Agule County, I stand here to support the motion.

Hon. Alupo loved her district. She is born in Pallisa and married in Pallisa. She is born in Pallisa County, Pallisa Sub County but married to Gogonyo County, Ajepet Parish, Gogonyo Sub County where I am her member of Parliament. She really loved the district.

This is really a big shock to the relatives, to me, the voter, the district and the entire country, more specifically the people of Gogonyo County who have lost a mother and a wife.

Madam Speaker, hon. Alupo is my cousin and my leader. Death is really an enemy. It has robbed us of such a young upcoming leader.

She has been naturally calm, loving and patient. One thing to note about her is that she did not have quarrels and conflicts with anybody especially her political opponents. You would never hear her mentioning anything bad against her political opponent.

To the family, the husband, the children, the parents and brothers who were seeing a leader coming up, who had a lot of pride and happiness, please, take heart. I know you were seeing the family growing, the district and the country. Please, take heart; God is with us. May the soul of my cousin rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

4.00
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Adjumani, I want to say that in this kind of situation, the only consolation we are left with is by our faith that each one of us has been given a piece of work to do by our creator. 

It is very unfortunate that we do not know and we will not know what amount of work there is to be done. We get to understand this at the point of our death. As it is believed by our faith, today, our sister has left us. It is after accomplishing the work that she had been given by the Almighty God.

When we pay tribute like this, it should also act as a mirror to us. It is very important to note whatever has been spoken here so that those of us who are still here will learn some lessons. Whatever we are saying here, apart from the prayers that we offer, is not helpful to the fallen sister. It is only for us who are still breathing. That is the reason I said it should act as a mirror. 

At our sister’s point of death, these are the things that we shared together here. How about when it comes to my time? What will other people say about me? 

It is very important when you are a Christian because this streamlines the way we do our things, the way we behave and the way we interact with others. With that, life flows with a lot of intimacy. May her soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you. 

4.02
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. 

When I was told that she was pregnant and they had removed the foetus of eight months, with which they were going to be buried on the same day, I felt very bad. However, we are consoled by the fact that we serve a living God and she is going to Heaven. Although we fear the way to Heaven, we know we will get there soon. 

I was reading the Bible and in 1Timothy 6:7 reads: 

“We brought nothing into the world and we take nothing out.” “The Lord gives and the Lord takes away. Blessed be the Name of the Lord” Job 1:21

Sometimes, we fight over earthly things. You find people fighting like they will never die. You find people grabbing land like they will never die. When you die, you do not even take an inch; you just go the way you were born. 

Therefore, every time I go for burial, I reflect and say that we must stop these fights. They are not useful and they do not help us. After all, we are all going to die and leave these things here. 

Hon. Alupo was not chaotic. I had never seen her quarrel with anybody. She was a very simple person and yet, she was a member of Parliament. There are people who are leaders and want to be felt. They step on everybody but death is very powerful. That is why when one of us dies, we feel threatened. 

You hear people say, “Our good cadre.” When cadres die, their children start suffering and so you are forced to ask what they are going to do since he was their good cadre. Hon. Abiriga was a good cadre and yet, his children cannot be helped. Another cadre is now gone. You will come here and tell us how she was a good cadre. Two weeks down the road, the children cannot get fees.

I hope now that you have said she was a good cadre, you will do something about it so that we do not meet children suffering and yet, she did her best when she still lived. I heard honourable colleagues talk about Kyankwanzi. She did her best to serve this country and serve the party she belonged to. 

I would like to thank you and also inform you that they have allowed only 70 people to go for burial, which means most of us will not be going. That is what the organising committee said. Nevertheless, we will see how to send a message to Pallisa, on behalf of the Commission. May her soul rest in peace. 

4.05
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Madam Speaker, talking about the demise of hon. Faith Alupo is talking about a friend, a colleague and above all, a sister.

For the time we were together, hon. Alupo has demonstrated selflessness and commitment to both work and family. At 36, hon. Alupo has gone too soon. Pallisa has lost a servant leader. Her inspiration, wisdom, energy and enthusiasm to work shall forever be missed. 

On behalf of the people of Budaka and Uganda Women Parliamentary Association, I convey my heartfelt condolences to the people of Pallisa and the whole country. My thoughts and feelings are with the bereaved family. May her soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.07
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion, as moved by the Deputy Prime Minister.

We are gathered here today again in a very difficult moment because we have lost a young colleague, who had spent here a very short time.

Hon. Alupo was a humble person and I kept wondering where the humility came from. I have just realised, when I went through this booklet that she was a daughter to Rev. James Okiring. It is no wonder that she was humble. She was a well brought up lady and it is very important that we bring up our children well. 

Madam Speaker, on that fateful morning, I was with hon. Anita Among when we received the unclear message that had been sent out. It stated that hon. Faith Alupo needed prayers since her condition was not good. They promised that they would update us. We decided to call hon. Jacob Opolot and he told us that we had lost our honourable sister. I think it was just a humble way of breaking the bad news. It was very saddening to hear that we had lost a colleague at that age. 

Madam Speaker, when the Deputy Prime Minister moved the motion, he informed the country that hon. Alupo was undergoing treatment for diabetes and hypertension. However, over the weekend, I listened to news coming from Teso. The RDC of Pallisa warned people not to come for the burial because our colleague had died of COVID. 

Madam Speaker, I think we deserve the right information. Of course, the health workers have told us that if you have pre-existing conditions, your case is worse. However, I think the issues of public health need a firm approach because it will help us to understand them. 

We keep reading in the press that 10 members of Parliament and staff have been found COVID-19 positive but we do not know who they are. I think it is good manners for us to know so that we get to know if we have been in contact with them so that we take precautions. Why are we shy? These are issues of public health. We want to protect Ugandans. Let us be honest and tell people the truth on what the cause of death is. Who is positive in Parliament? This is in order for us to send the right message out there. 

Of course, Madam Speaker, it is very burdening for a husband, like we have heard, that he might not be able to attend the burial because he is quarantined. That needs to be cleared. If it is true, then, possibly, that is a condition of COVID-19.

It is also very painful. Imagine your spouse is being buried but you cannot attend. These are very disheartening things. The Government needs to come out clearly and tell us the truth. 

In such situations, Psalms 46:1 tells us that God is our refugee in difficult times. He is our strength and He is ever present to help whenever we are in trouble. May the soul of hon. Alupo rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite, hon. Chekwel, I would like to comment on what hon. Okupa has said. Indeed, we had situations where hints were thrown. For instance, some months ago, there was a picture of one of the members on social media claiming that the member was positive. 

Therefore, as the head of the institution, I waited for official information to tell me that one of the members tested positive and also a guide on what to do. No one wrote to me; no one telephoned me. I had to call the member and ask them if it was true, to which she told me that she was at home fine. 

When this one happened, I asked myself: “We have tried to be careful; we have got sanitisers, temperature guns, we have been sanitising and washing, where did it happen to hon. Faith Alupo?” Is it here? What do we do? No one has said anything. Therefore, that is a very difficult situation. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is the very first time that we are not having a colleague’s body in this House and there is total absence of information from the Ministry of Health. Yet, we expect the Ministry of Health to give us some brief medical report on what could have happened.

They are not here but the procedural point I am raising is wouldn’t it be procedurally right that at an opportune time, the Minister of Health comes and updates the House? These kinds of statements are not good. They leave us wondering. We need to give proper information to the public, who may think that a member died of COVID-19, whereas not. 

THE SPEAKER: They are aware because I told them that on Tuesday, we were going to have a tribute. Therefore, I expected that someone would be here to give us the post-mortem report. However, we take your point.

4.13
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. On behalf of the people of Kween and Sebei at large, I would like to sincerely convey our condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Pallisa, Members of this House and Uganda. 

It is very unfortunate that we have lost a very young legislator, who was here for barely one and a half years. 
We are aware that for one to reach this House, one has to go through many difficulties and the family is challenged. The people of Pallisa went through a lot but their legislator has just been in this House for a very short time. It is very unfortunate.

When hon. Alupo joined Parliament, we would just bypass each other and exchange greetings. When we were almost passing the motion for the creation of the constituencies, I had a long discussion with her, as we were waiting for the House to start. She was telling me about how she was excited about the constituency and that she had actually achieved - because when she was campaigning, her people asked her that since she was just joining Parliament for a short time, if she would lobby for the new constituency, then they would have achieved a lot. She was very free with me and told me about her pregnancy and how she was planning to go about the campaigns.

When I received the sad news about the loss of my dear sister on WhatsApp, I wondered what this was all about. We got information about what she had succumbed to, which they said was COVID-19. Others said she died in the process of giving birth. Even as I was seated there, some people were asking me why the body of hon. Alupo was not brought to the House and if it is true that she died of COVID-19. I join my colleagues in demanding that they tell us what caused hon. Alupo’s death. That would help us – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute to conclude.

MS CHEKWEL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That would help us so that we know and take precautions. I also wanted to say something about these non-communicable diseases. There are very many of our people whom we have lost due to diabetes, high blood pressure and we have people suffering from stroke caused by high blood pressure.

I would like to support what one colleague talked about. We need to sensitise our people on how we can prevent these non-communicable diseases, which are causing a great havoc. We have lost many of our people and others are in hospitals.

This is very bad. We have lost many colleagues in this House and it is just a reflection of what is happening across the country. To the bereaved family, I would like to say, please, take heart. We shall continue praying to God to strengthen you. May the soul of our fallen colleague rest in eternal peace and may God bring up the children to be successful and useful members of our society. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.18
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kumi, I join colleagues to pay tribute to hon. Faith Alupo. We have lost a very young leader, who had a bright future ahead of her. 

When hon. Faith Alupo came to Parliament, she was posted to the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and I sat there with her for barely two years. While she was in that committee, she was very diligent and committed in all the committee activities.

However, what strikes me most about the time she spent with me is that as a friend, she consulted a lot on many things, especially the workings and administration of Parliament and also, issues to deal with the constituency.

Hon. Alupo took sometime consulting on what to do in terms of interventions in the constituency. Whereas it is very easy for – as a person who has had interest in human rights and women rights for a long time, I think what strikes me out of hon. Alupo’s time here is the challenge that women members of Parliament face in determining what to do for that big constituency. I know many women here are challenged with what to do for their constituency. A woman member of Parliament has a thousand villages while a constituency has about three sub counties to run for five years.

What kept hon. Alupo looking forward to doing something in her constituency was the dynamics of what to do as a woman member of Parliament. 

This is something we missed to do in this Parliament - on what we should do and how to redefine the position of a Woman Member of Parliament in this House. If we return to this Parliament, it is something that is very important for us to discuss, in order to make the lives of women members of Parliament easier in terms of service delivery and impact in the constituency.

Hon. Alupo was my friend and we shared a lot on issues of family and she loved her family very much. I can confidently speak about that. I would like to say that the man in her life was a very lucky man because hon. Alupo loved her husband, children and loved to make a contribution in the area of family. One time, when I was with her and we were joking about her pregnancy - I found her very heavy and looking very tired. I asked her: “Faith, have you taken in another seed?” She laughed. I said, “But you have taken in at a very wrong time - when we are going for a very hectic time of elections. How are you going to balance having a pregnancy with an election, which is very hectic like NRM primaries?” 

She smiled about it and said that everything was about God. Little did I know that it was going to end this way! Indeed, we do not know the plans that God has for our lives and that is very important for us to know. However, while we have the conversation on what killed hon. Faith Alupo, I conclude that she died of pregnancy complications - non-communicable diseases, coupled with a pregnancy at this time of elections; it must have been difficult for her. I conclude that she died in the line of duty.

Many women in Africa pass on because of this duty, which one cannot control or choose. In Africa, once a woman decides to get pregnant, they can never be sure whether they will end up alive or dead. This debate reminds me of what we have not finished in this House in terms of maternal health. It is very sad to lose such a young woman. This is the second time we lose a young woman and not just an ordinary woman but a Member of Parliament, to a pregnancy. That should remind us more on what we must do. 

I condole with the family, the people of Pallisa District, Parliament and Uganda at large. May her soul rest in peace and in power, in Jesus name.

4.23
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, hon. Faith Alupo. I would like to convey my condolences to the family and the Parliament of Uganda, on behalf of the people of Jinja Municipality East Constituency. 

I have heard the Prime Minister say that the late hon. Faith Alupo was a good cadre of the National Resistance Movement. I hasten to add that she did it with decorum. It is a leaf to borrow from because whenever it came to parliamentary business, she supported her party with decorum. She even supported her positions with respect for other colleagues. She was a true icon of parliamentary multiparty democracy.

It is always plausible in this House that when dealing with very controversial matters and one stands on the Floor as a member of the Opposition and colleagues have lacked arguments to counter what they may be saying, not to heckle them when submitting. I did not see that in the late hon. Alupo. 

Throughout the time she was in this House, she felt that the only way of expressing herself was through the chance given to her by the Speaker to speak on this microphone. I think we need to emulate her on that. 

I have heard people say that she spent little time in Parliament but we need to know that she had a very strong side to her. She respected the decorum of Parliament and everybody else in here. 

Having said that, let me sound a strong warning. I have noticed that there is a debate as to whether she died of COVID-19, high blood pressure or other causes. I would like to challenge you colleagues - we are in a campaign period – even at my home, while there as a politician, very many people walk into our homes because we are looking for votes. I normally ask them why they do not have masks and they have always said to me that there is no COVID-19 in the villages. So, you see, it is a very challenging situation. I think the Ministry of Health or Parliament as an institution, needs to come out with a strong voice about this. 

When I heard about the death of hon. Faith Alupo, I imagined what happens in our places on a daily basis. As you wake up, you find over 100 to 200 people in your home but none of us can stand to tell employers of our voters, that they must have a mask. I have a place where they must sanitize and some people forcefully walk past that point but I keep telling them to go back. You realise that the culture in this country is that people do not respect procedures.

This should go to all colleagues that while we look for votes, we must consider life to be very important. Otherwise, if we do not pay due regard to the COVID-19 Standard Operating Procedures put in place by the Ministry of Health, there is a lot that will happen to us in this country. I beg to submit.

4.26
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion on my behalf and on behalf of the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus. I convey our condolences to the family of the late hon. Faith Alupo, a person I used to tease that she was a Muganda lost in the East. This was because when one looked at her face, they would realise that the size her nose – I used to tease her along those lines and she would take it lightly. All she would ask of me was to invite her to the Buganda Caucus meeting. So, it is really sad news that we have lost a very jolly fellow and a friend. 

My appeal goes to the family. In Buganda, when a mother dies, children rely 100 per cent on the uncles. Uncles, my appeal is that you do not leave the husband alone. The little savings and whatever the lady had sweated for can help the children to survive happily and for them to always remember that their mother was a freedom fighter. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

4.28
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Among the Itesots, in a moment like this, we say, “ican.” This means sorrow. This is the state of affairs that we are faced with right now because of the nature of the death of hon. Faith Alupo. It was a one-off boom that Alupo is dead. This was a very sad moment for us.  

We know very well that hon. Alupo was such a young person. You have introduced the children here. The husband is in isolation. He cannot come and participate in the burial of his wife, his recent bride, because he just wedded her recently; it is a very sad moment. 

Most importantly, we have lost a very hard earned human resource, a woman. Much as hon. Alupo has departed so soon, she was an accomplished woman. She was raised well. She was able to attend school – you know how difficult it is for the girl child in this country – but she successfully completed her education. 

She was a woman of value. She was able to establish a family. She has left behind children. We indeed cannot forget the saying that when you educate a girl, you have educated a nation. This country has lost and the family has lost. That is why I say it is very sorrowful for us, not only as the people of Pallisa but as a nation and as a family of Parliament of Uganda.

We would like to thank her family, especially the Late Rev. Okiror and Margaret Okiror for all that they invested in her to become a resourceful person and a leader in this country. 

I would like to say, as a representative of the people – for those of you who have followed – hon. Faith Alupo was passionate about the fate of her people. I remember when we were confronted with a disease called Hepatitis, hon. Alupo was one of those who rallied the whole of this Parliament – she contributed, highlighting the fate and the dangers of the Hepatitis disease, which had attacked Pallisa. 

The other issue was about the quarantine of livestock. She knew that the state and the economy of the people of Pallisa was going to be greatly affected. She prayed and asked for vaccines to be provided and for the quarantine on the markets to be lifted, so that the people could at least sell their livestock and send children to school. That is the person that we have lost and we can do nothing but we thank God for her and for what she has been able to do in the short time.

Madam Speaker, allow me to also thank you, for, as we can see, the casket is not here but you have taken initiative to provide for this tribute to take place. We would like to thank Parliament, the staff and for all that you have done to honour hon. Faith Alupo; that in her two years – very short time – in Parliament, we can give tribute to her. I would like to support this motion and I would like to thank you very much. May her soul rest in peace.

Perhaps I may not return but allow me to guide colleagues who may be able to make it. We would like to invite you to come to Pallisa to see off our colleague. Pallisa is a drive from here - for most of you who know – to the East. You will reach Iganga and from Iganga town, about five kilometres to a junction called Nakalama, you take the left turn. 

You drive 51 kilometres from that turn to a place called Tirinyi. In Tirinyi, you will find another left turn that takes you 21 kilometres to Pallisa District headquarters. From there, we have endeavoured to coordinate with the traffic officers so that they can guide us. From Pallisa town, it is 8 kilometres to the final resting place where we will lay hon. Alupo tomorrow.

You are welcome, Members. Parliament is providing us transport; a bus. Hon. Mwijukye, the Commissioner, said that there is restriction but the structure and arrangement is that we shall have 250 people attending the send-off and Parliament is specially provided for. At least we can afford a tent of 50 people. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.34
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Madam Speaker, I stand here to support the motion that was moved by the Leader of Government Business, this afternoon.

On behalf of the people of Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong District and on my own behalf, we would like to extend our condolences to the people of Pallisa and the family of our late colleague.

This afternoon, I would like to use the loss of our honourable colleague as a message to the 10th Parliament and to Government in particular. If you look at the Budget that we passed for the current financial year, allocation to communicable diseases leaves a lot to be desired.

Madam Speaker, this Parliament needs to pay keen attention and improve the allocation to the health sector. If Members of Parliament are going to shy away from ensuring that they take allocation to health seriously, we will continue to get this problem throughout the country. This is my prayer number one.

Secondly, I, together with the people of Teso, am embarrassed. I wonder why Government went ahead to organise elections. Maybe our colleague would not have died. Why did the NRM Government push for this election? Very many countries all over the world postponed their elections. If Alupo had not gone for this election that we have gone through in the NRM primaries, she would not have died. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this death will be put on your head as Government. You must be prepared to respond. This must be told on you. We, the people of Teso, are not be happy. The people of Uganda will not be happy. Why did you choose to sacrifice the life of the people?

Madam Speaker, on 18th, we had 423 people infected by the disease in the country. Why –(Interruption)

MR KIVEJINJA: Is the honourable member in order to turn this debate or rather condolence ceremony into a Budget session, when he participated fully in how money was allocated? Is he in order to say that it is Government which is responsible for the deaths in this country and not God? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us simply pay tribute to our colleague and leave the confrontational issues. We can speak about that after tomorrow but simply talk about the good things about hon. Faith Alupo. Thank you. (Laughter) Hon. Brig. Byekwaso?

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, it is always important at this national level, whenever there are critical issues that affect the country, that we make mention of the genesis of the problem –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you continuing?

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, let me conclude by saying that we, the people of Teso, would like to welcome all other people who will be in position to share with us in this trying moment. Our cultural institution is very much disturbed over this loss.

I urge the family to be firm and let us turn to the Lord. The Almighty God is the Alpha and Omega. I thank you.

4.39
BRIG. GEN. FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and I would also like to thank the movers of this motion. I stand to also support it.

I would like to start briefly on where the previous speaker stopped and say that this is not only a Teso affair; it is for all Ugandans that today, we mourn the death of this legislator at such a young age.

On behalf of the UPDF fraternity, especially members of Parliament, I join to pay tribute to the late hon. Faith Alupo. At a personal level, I did not interact much with her but I would see from her demeanour that she was a very patient, calm and committed person and a person who used to socialise with others without antagonism.

Of course, Madam Speaker, at such a moment, we all feel bad and sad and inevitably, we have to mourn. However, I would like to say, on a light note, that as the Bible says, when people pass on, we only change form. We have changed from the physical that we see into that spiritual that we cannot see, that we cannot touch but we know that someone is still alive.

If I can borrow from a recent burial where I was, an 11 year old boy got up and said, “You people, stop mourning or crying for my mother. I am already happy because I was crying before but my tears have dried up because I know my mother is there cheering me and is in a better place; she is gone where she wouldn’t want to come back.”

Madam Speaker, let us join and instead of mourning Faith, celebrate her because at her age of 36 years, she has lived a legacy; something she is going to be remembered for. She is an example of a strong woman, a leader, a people’s representative, a mother of two and an embodiment of women emancipation. Let us use her to continue the cause for women emancipation in this country.

On this note in my conclusion, I also would like to mourn her child. This is a culture where we are that children of that nature are not mourned. No wonder, almost none of us has mourned that little baby. It is painful especially for us who had such. I have an example, Madam Speaker, that I mourn that baby.

Lastly, let us use this occasion also to make it and use every opportunity to stop the spread of COVID-19 through observing the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). I do not want to say what caused hon. Faith Alupo to get this disease but let us use every opportunity available to stop the spread of COVID-19. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.43
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to support the motion raised by the Leader of Government Business to pay tribute to the late hon. Faith Alupo, who has been the Member of Parliament of Pallisa District.

It is indeed unfortunate that it has happened that way. All has been said but on my behalf and on behalf of my people and the people of Bbaale County in Kayunga District, I stand to pay tribute to hon. Alupo. I had an opportunity to interact with her, especially when there was a function about the Bakenye community in Pallisa.

That function of the annual general conference was well attended by most of the Bakenye in Uganda and it took place in her constituency. When we approached her to officiate in that conference, she readily availed herself and she was the guest of honour. Indeed, she gave us a lot of hope and encouragement and all the Bakenye in this country were very happy. At this moment, these people have asked me to pass their tribute and thanks in that regard.

Madam Speaker, I must therefore, pass my sincere condolences to her family, husband and young children I have just seen here, the entire friends and the people of Pallisa people, the entire Parliament, the NRM Government and all of us as Ugandans. We have missed a young legislator who had hope and a lot that she was ready to offer.

It is unfortunate that it happened that way and there is nothing much we can do. I would like to say that may the Almighty God that gave her to us consider her for eternal life. Thank you, very much.

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Madam Speaker, I would like to join the rest of my colleagues to pay tribute to our departed colleague, hon. Faith Alupo. Also on behalf of the people of Samia-Bugwe in Busia and the people of the greater Bukedi, as a Chairperson of Bukedi Parliamentary Caucus, I would like to join the rest and also thank you, Madam Speaker, for having given us the opportunity this afternoon to pay tribute to our colleague, hon. Faith Alupo.

Hon. Faith Alupo has been with us as a Member of Parliament for close to two years but from our interaction with her as a Member of the greater Bukedi, she manifested with humility into a person who later became a Member of Parliament but most especially, very friendly.

I would like to remind the Members, especially hon. Ameede who has been very friendly with her, hon. Opolot and hon. Oseku that we had a corner somewhere where most people would find us and they called it a “Bukedi Consultative Corner” just at Parliament here. And almost every day whenever we had a session, hon. Alupo would pass there and we have a chat. That is the type of person that we have missed.

Madam Speaker, I would like to second the talk, which was done by our coordinator for the Bakenye. We also emerge from a small and the most marginalized clan within this country, which is spread across the whole country. As members and leaders, when we came to Parliament, we started trying to identify our roots and we discovered that that there are so many Bakenye in Pallisa, Kamuli, Tororo and as far as Kitagwenda. We have been trying to get them together to see if we can empower them in all aspects like education and other things that can bring them emancipation.

Hon. Alupo was at the last conference we had in Pallisa and she identified with that community. They settled so much around the lakeshores and are so much around the area of Gogonyo, which is a lakeshore. This is the type of person that some of us, other than being colleagues, already identified with. We identify with people that we believe we should - who we are seeking out to see that we emancipate them.

As Bukedi Members, she is somebody that we believe we never had any issue with. For the short time we have been with her, there have not been any complaints and I believe that we should emulate her wherever we are, in case we attempt to interact with our colleagues to work as a team especially per district.

I just would like to say that as Bukedi, we shall miss her and as greater Pallisa, everybody will miss this leader who just came in barely two years ago. However, what is most important is that it is God who plans for each and every person on the time we shall live on this earth. I pray that the Almighty God provides for her eternal peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members for your tribute. I just have two comments. The situation we are in today clearly shows the challenges that women face to be able to work as leaders. You remain a wife, mother, in charge of the great African family, you still have to do your work as a legislator and you have to satisfy your constituents. 

All these are things that we take for granted but that are the realty of leadership, especially for women on the African Continent. Therefore, we pay tribute to hon. Alupo for being able to be all those things and still be able to represent her people.

Secondly, honourable members, in the African tradition, when somebody dies, people gather. So at the homes of hon. Alupo, there have been people for almost five to six days. 

I appeal to Members that if it is possible, I would like to ask the parliamentary groups to make contributions to support the family and also the children whom you have seen. I hope that we can rise to the occasion and help our colleague, especially now that the husband is not even able to take part in the funeral or take charge of the situation. I hope that we shall be able to do something to support the family.

I would like to thank those who have contributed: Teso Parliamentary Group has contributed Shs 10 million. We also have the Shs 1 million from the Government Chief Whip and another Shs 1 million from the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) Parliamentary Group. Hon. Byekwaso has just informed us about that.

With this, I would like to put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Speaker: I put the question that this House do pay tribute to hon. Faith Alupo, Member of Parliament for Pallisa for her exemplary service.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

The Speaker: The Clerk is directed to extract the tribute and the Hansard and hand them over to the family.

Honourable members, thank you for your participation. House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow afternoon.

(The House rose at 4.52 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 23 September 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 
