Thursday, 26 September 2013 

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I will begin by amending the Order Paper to make room for presentation of a petition from the sugar sector. There are some problems and there is need to address them. I will also make an amendment to permit UWOPA to move a motion on resettlement in the areas affected by the oil refinery in Buseruka.

But having said that, I want to inform Members that hon. DrLyomoki has lost his father. He died last night. He is called Mr Abel MagoolaWanzighe. He will be buried on Sunday but the details will be communicated between now and the weekend.

Also, I want to draw your attention Members that on 16th September, I informed you of the continued absence of hon. Gen. David Sejusa from the sittings of the House. He is a Member representing the UPDF. In that communication, I informed the House that I had written to him requiring him to attend the next sitting of Parliament. I have waited for him to come to attend Parliament and he has not come; so, he has not complied with that requirement and has not made any communication to me in regard to that matter. 

In the circumstances and in accordance with Rule 101(8) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I refer this matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to investigate the Member’s conduct and report back to this House before the 10th day of October, 2013. 

In addition, hon. Members, I had in the First Session instructed the Clerk to Parliament to compile a compendium for the rulings of the Speaker weekly but also at the end of every session, to put them in a compendium where they could be accessed. Unfortunately, this has not been done. Consequently, some decisions were taken here which were not brought to my attention. So, I am reiterating my instruction to the Clerk to compile the decisions of the House and the decisions of the Speaker so that they are available for use. 

But in particular, I am referring to a ruling made on the 21st Sitting of the Parliament, Tuesday, 6 August 2013 whereby the Deputy Speaker, who was here, had suspended some Members of this House and had also attached conditions to their return to the House. Unfortunately, this was not brought to my attention, it is only last week that the Clerk wrote to me, drawing my attention to this matter. So, the Members will be required to comply with the ruling of the Speaker so that they can continue attending the House. Thank you very much. 

MOTION MOVED IN ACCORDANCE TO RULE 110 AND 111 SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT FOR A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL TO BE INTRODUCED 

2.56
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a motion to introduce a Private Member’s Bill moved under Rule 111 (1): 

“WHEREAS Article 94 of the Constitution and Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament recognise the right of a Member to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AND WHEREAS Article 93 of the Constitution authorises Parliament to proceed on a Bill or motion that does not impose a charge on the Consolidated Fund, or alter taxation otherwise than by reduction;

AND WHEREAS the Penal Code Act Chapter 120 of the Laws of Uganda, the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 (Act No 14 of 2002) and the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces Act, 2005 (Act No.7 of 2005) all contain several provisions that prescribe either mandatory or discretionary death penalties upon conviction; 

NOTING THATthe Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court have consistently ruled in Attorney-General v. Susan Kigula and 417 Others (Constitutional Appeal No. 3 of 2006) that mandatory death penalties are inconsistent with the Constitution since they restrain the court from evaluating the circumstances of the offence in order to mitigate the sentence and arrive at an appropriate sentence;

NOTING FURTHER THATa mandatory deathsentenceimpinges on the dignity of a human being and, therefore, goes to the core of the right to life which is the most fundamental and the right on which all other human rights are based;

CONCERNED THAT since 2009, when the Supreme Court held that all mandatory death penalties on the Statute Book are inconsistent with the Constitution, the Government has not introduced a Bill in Parliament to revise the death penalties in the Laws of Uganda especially since Article 28 (12) requires every penalty to be prescribed in the law; 

CONCERNED FURTHER THAT in the absence of any guidance from Parliament by law, since May 2011, when the Supreme Court (in Tigo Stephen v. Uganda (Criminal Appeal No. 8 of 2009) defined ‘life imprisonment’ to mean imprisonment for the natural life of the person, for the purposes of imprisonment which is specified in many laws passed by Parliament or already on the Statute Book, this definition has not yet been set out in the law;
RECOGNISING the role of Parliament under Article 79 to make laws for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved that:
    1. This House accepts the introduction of a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, ‘The Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2013’; and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Hon. Odoi-Oywelowo and hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi have seconded it.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you for allowing us to propose this motion to this House. I would just like to highlight to the House the object of the proposed Bill which we intend to bring to the House.

The object of the Bill is to amend;
    (i) the Penal Code Act, Chapter 120 of the Laws of Uganda;
    (ii) the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002;
    (iii) the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces Act, 2005; and
    (iv) the Trial on Indictments Act, Cap 23.

The Bill seeks to amend those laws to remove all references to the mandatory death penalty prescribed by the laws and to restrict the application of the death penalty to “the most serious crimes” by converting the maximum penalties prescribed in those laws into imprisonment for life; to remove the restriction on the mitigation in the case of convictions that carry a death penalty; to define life imprisonment or imprisonment for life and to provide for related matters.  

Madam Speaker, the Bill also gives effect to the commitment made by the Government to the United Nations following the first Universal Periodic Review of Uganda’s human rights record, to consistently apply the rulings of the court by converting all death sentences into life imprisonment where they are not executed within three years.

Secondly, we propose this Bill to cure the defects in the existing law. The Penal Code Act, Cap 120, the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 and the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces Act, 2005 all contain several provisions that prescribe mandatory death penalties. 

A mandatory death sentence is one that requires a court upon conviction to sentence the convicted person automatically to death.

A mandatory death sentence restrains the court from evaluating the nature and circumstances of the offence and the individual characteristics of the offender. 

The right to life is the most fundamental of all human rights and is guaranteed by Article 22 of the Constitution. Whereas Article 22 recognises that the right to life may be limited in order to execute a sentence passed in a fair trial by a competent court, in 2009, the Supreme Court in Attorney-General Vs. Susan Kigula and 417 Others declared mandatory death sentences unconstitutional and commuted all death sentences that were not executed for three years or more into life imprisonment.

So it is upon that basis that we seek leave of this House to introduce a Private Members Bill. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. OdoiOywelowo. As he comes, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Divine Grace Primary School in Kyotera – I think there is a mistake here. Hon. Kasamba is from Kakuuto - but they come from Rakai. Hon. Mathias Kasamba and hon. Maria Mutagamba are here. You are welcome children. (Applause) Also, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Iganga Progressive Secondary School represented here by hon. Peter Mugema and hon. Olivia Kabaale. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also welcome sub-county chairpersons and councilors from Jonam Constituency led by Mr Ben Okumu and are represented by hon. Jachan Omach, the Minister of State for Finance and hon. Christine Achaye of Nebbi. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.06
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Rt. Hon. Speaker, I rise to second the motion to seek leave of this House to introduce a Private Members Bill known as the Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2013.

We have looked at the development in the jurisprudence of Uganda and as has been stated by hon. Alice Alaso, the Supreme Court of Uganda in a landmark decision in the Susan Kigula case pronounced itself emphatically and declared mandatory death penalty unconstitutional.

Unfortunately, our statute books still contain reference to the mandatory death sentence. This needs redress and it is a matter that we cannot run away from for a long period of time. It is a matter that we requ3est that this House permits us to tackle and to tackle right now.

The Supreme Court of Uganda also in the Tigo case basically stated that imprisonment for life means imprisonment for the natural life of a person. So what we come to request the House to allow us to do is to replace or substitute any reference to  themandatory death sentence with imprisonment for life which we think will meet the Constitutional and Supreme court decision. 

But Rt. Hon. Speaker, we also hold the view that every good penal system must meet some standards and must have a purpose. The first purpose of any punishment is to reform and it is our argument that the death penalty does not in any way present and opportunity to the perpetuator of a crime to reform. There is absolutely no way that you can argue that after a person has been hanged, he will have an opportunity to reform. He is dead and that is it. I am told there is the opportunity to reform in Heaven but I am not competent to comment on what happens in Heaven.

The second - is restitution. The law presupposes that if you have offended or wronged another, the reason for punishing you must be to restore the other party to where you got it before the offence. We are absolutely certain that the death penalty does not in any way meet this standard.

The third is deterrent. The national argument is that you punish a person so that you deter others from committing the same offence. There is a lot of scientific research already carried out and the finding only points to one thing; that there is no connection between the existence of a death penalty and the rate of crime. I will give you an example of this region. Rwanda for example does not have the death penalty in its statute books but it has the lowest crime rate in the region, much more than Uganda that still maintains the death penalty, more lower that Kenya and much lower than –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are going into the substance of the debate that will come when the Bill is here. (Laughter)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Rt. Hon. Speaker, it is for that reason that we seek leave of this House to allow us introduce this Private Member’s Bill. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, this motion is just to request for leave of this House so that they can proceed with the Bill. I will put the question that this House grants the leave.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to lay a copy of the Bill on Table. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the copies will come when we have the first reading of the Bill. This was just about asking for leave. Yes, next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

    I) ON THE PAYMENT OF EMOLUMENTS AND BENEFITS OF FORMER VICE- PRESIDENTS AND FORMER PRIME MINISTERS

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Public Service. Okay, next item. 

    II) ON THE AWARD OF UGANDA SHILLINGS 13 BILLION TO SEVERINO TWINOBUSINGYE IN THE CONSTITUTIONAL CASE NO. 47 OF 2011

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Attorney-General -

3.11
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): The Attorney-General is I think still working very hard on the instructions of yesterday – (Interjections) – yes, we tried to get him this morning through telephone, but we were unable to. So, I pray that we stand over this item and carry it forward –(Interjections)– the deputy travelled to represent Government in the Caribbean. So, I pray that we carry this forward until such a time when they will be available.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, Parliament is interested in this matter and please, inform the Attorney-General that he will not escape from this House. He must present this statement. We expect it on Tuesday. (Applause)

STATEMENT ON THE CENTENNIAL CELEBRATIONS OF THE COOPERATIVES MOVEMENT IN UGANDA

MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The copies of the statement are coming; they are just delayed. This is the Statement on the Celebration of the Cooperative Movement in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, tomorrow, 27 September 2013, will be a special day in the cooperative movement. Uganda will be marking 100 years of cooperatives in Uganda to be held in Masindi District.

As a Parliamentarians SACCO, we will be marking 10 years of existence in our very own Parliamentary Conference Hall. The theme of this year’s celebrations is: “Cooperative Enterprises Remain Strong in Times of Crisis.”

Once again, this is to call upon us to recognise the viability of the cooperative enterprise in uplifting the quality of the lives of the people. It enjoins us to reflect and embrace the cooperative enterprise in the quest for economic, social and cultural development.
Cooperatives play a significant role in creating market opportunities and jobs thus ensuring better incomes for members. They are also active in social services such as the health, education, housing and water provision. They contribute significantly towards the promotion of food security through the distribution of production and productivity, enhancing technologies and skills and waste minimisation through post-harvest handling and value chain services.

The degree, to which cooperatives have been able to respond to the needs of the Members and the community at large, regardless of the prevailing circumstances, explains their strengths in comparison to other organizations.

The cooperative model derives its strength from the fact that the enterprise is member-owned; member-managed; and member-controlled. The inherent democratic nature ensures that it remains relevant at all times and engenders flexibility that enables to transcend different circumstances.

The prime motivation of any cooperative is service maximisation, as opposed to profit motivation although they are expected to operate in a sustainable manner if they are to survive. 

The Government of Uganda is committed to ensuring continuous improvement in the operations of the SACCOs on issues to do with Members’ protection and governance, which are vital for trust, confidence and safety and soundness.

This year we are celebrating resilience as we mark 100 years of the cooperative movement in Uganda. I wish to extend congratulations to all Ugandans for this achievement. Let us draw inspirations from the founders of the cooperative movement especially the commitment and the resolve with which they initiated the cooperative movement despite all the odds at that time.
Let us recommit ourselves to the cooperative ideals if we are to continue enjoying the benefits of cooperation.

In a special way, Madam Speaker, our very own Parliamentary SACCO, which is celebrating 10 years of sound existence was incorporated in March 2003. The SACCO is registered as a savings and credit cooperative society under the Cooperative Statute of 1992. Clients are all the sitting Members of Parliament of Uganda, current and former staff of Parliament, ex-officio members and Members of the East African Legislative Assembly and immediate family members.

The SACCO has played a great role in supporting as well as providing services to Members and defeated the thinking by many that as politicians, we cannot save for development.

I thank you for the support and hereby extend an invitation to be part of the 10th Annual General Meeting slated for tomorrow, 27 September 2013 beginning at 10.00 a.m. in the Parliamentary Conference Hall and a dinner in the Parliamentary Canteen. I wish you wonderful celebrations. For God and My Country. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member. Please, ensure you not only go for the AGM but also attend the meeting and the dinner in the evening to celebrate the 10 years of the Parliamentarian SACCO.

May I now invite hon. John Mulimba to present a petition on the sugar industry?

PETITION OF THE UGANDA SUGAR MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION

3.18
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I present this petition under Rule 29 of our Rules of Procedures. This is a humble petition of the Uganda Sugar Manufacturers Association. The petition states as hereunder. Let me just go direct to the prayers as follows:

“Wherefore the petitioners pray that Parliament:
    1. Urges Government to honour and implement the National Sugar Policy; and
    2. Urges Government to expeditiously formulate a Bill to operationalize the National Sugar Policy into law. 

Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray. Hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. The signatures are from Kinyara Sugar Ltd, signed by MrMitharamadah PV; from Kakira Sugar Ltd, it is signed by Ms Christian Vicky; Sugar Cooperation of Uganda, it is signed by Mr Sharma SC; and Sugar and Allied Industries by MrAbdiAlam.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to present and I lay it on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the petition is sent to the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE COMPENSATION AND SETTLEMENT OF THE WOMEN AFFECTED BY THE PROPOSED GOVERNMENT’S PLANS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE OIL REFINERY IN BUSERUKA COUNTY, HOIMA DISTRICT

3.12
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, UWOPA (Ms Rosemary Nyakikongoro): Madam Speaker, I beg to present a motion for a Resolution of Parliament on the Compensation and Settlement of the women affected by the Government’s proposed Construction of the Oil Refinery in Buseruka County, Hoima District. The petition is moved under rules 47 and 50 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament:

“WHEREAS on 17 August 2013, Uganda Women Parliamentary Association, on the directive of the Speaker of Parliament, in collaboration with the Woman Representative for Hoima District were requested to go on the ground to ascertain the issues that had been raised in the women’s petition to the Speaker of Parliament;

WHEREAS the UWOPA team was led by I, as the Vice-Chairperson of the UWOPA, hon. TophaceKaahwa, Woman Representative, Hoima District, and hon. Helen Kahunde, the Woman Representative of Kiryandongo District, had a dialogue with the rural women affected by the plan of the construction of the proposed refinery in the villages of Kyapuloni, Ihara, Nyakasenene, Bukona, Kabaale, in Buseruka Sub County of Hoima District;

FURTHER, whereas the discovery of oil in Uganda presents an opportunity to the country to earn revenues to uplift millions of Ugandans from poverty to better life with improved access to basic human needs and rights, for this to happen, good governance, transparency and accountability should be principles governing the management of this nascent sector. In the absence of the above principles, conflicts, insecurity, corruption and neglect of vulnerable groups and violation of human rights disrupting livelihood, will occur;

NOTING that since the discovery of commercial and gas deposits in the Albertine Region in 2006, the Government of Uganda has undertaken various measures to grow the oil and gas sector including the proposed construction of the oil refinery and technical and scientific works in the Albertine Region related to exploration of oil and gas reserves, legislation and policy development for exploration and discovery of oil, surveying, valuation of land for establishment of the oil refinery and related issues of compulsory land acquisition by Government and the obligation to provide resettlement and compensation for the affected communities. With the private companies and the civil society playing different roles in shaping the sector ranging from education, sensitization, corporate social responsibility, capacity, consultation on oil legislation, research and advocacy, among others, were conducted;

NOTING FURTHER that amidst this host of activities, there are a number of challenges that the sector is faced with is redressing the issues of oil refinery, affected communities including the rights of women, men and children, in particular, among others. There are challenges in the land and property valuations. The community, particularly women claim that the valuation results are wanting and have many errors. For example, the resettlement action plan provides that there will be buyer-willing seller model for customary land and that the value of compensation should be more than the value of the land and development thereon. This is contrary to the current practice in the affected areas in Hoima District, particularly Buseruka Sub County and the above named villages. There are alleged fraudulent actions by the Resettlement Action Plan implementing agency and some Government officials. For example, the beneficiaries being made to sign agreements indicating that they have received the compensation –“ (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure pursuant to the presentation, which I find outrageous. Our Rules of Procedure dictate that when one is presenting a motion, it is seconded. I have not seen any sign – whether she is presenting a motion or not.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, why don’t you allow her to complete the presentation? She is still moving the motion. Why are you in a hurry? (Laughter)

MR NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought I was still moving the motion. Anyway, as I was saying, “…there are alleged fraudulent actions by the Resettlement Action Plan implementing agencies and some Government officials. For example, the beneficiaries are being made to sign agreements indicating that they have received their compensation and handed over their land to Government when in the actual sense they have not been paid.

Discrimination is apparent on the part of handling the compensation process as they are dealing with the men and ignoring the women who are utilising the land for family sustenance. There is a possibility that women-headed households are being ignored in the decision making process.

The affected communities are disadvantaged by the fact that the land they occupy is unregistered and owners are totally unaware of the values and have not got a chance to seek a second opinion, where, for example, Government valuation has been unaccepted by the people.

There is lack of preparation of the communities for the transition process to avoid disrupting their livelihood thus causing anxiety and uncertainty to women who are traditional main users of the land and the ones that provide food and basic household needs for the families.

As the communities wait to receive their compensation packages, there are no concrete steps and actions taken to equip them with skills on how to utilise the monies effectively to facilitate their survival and development.

The Resettlement Plan is not understood by various actors and affected communities. There has been inadequate dissemination and engagement by the responsible Government agencies in the case, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and Ministry of Lands, among others.

The importance of disposal consent and participation is a serious facet of the Constitution of Uganda and other laws. The implementing agency seem not to have given its priority in the Resettlement Action Plan, documentation and in practice, it is not seen anywhere;

APPRECIATING that the women of the affected communities are concerned for their welfare and rights under the RAP and the Compensation and Resettlement as a whole;

NOW THEREFORE, be resolved that Parliament urges:
    1. Government of Uganda to halt the exercise and urgently reviews the ongoing compensation and resettlement of the people to be affected by the proposed construction of the oil refinery in Buseruka Sub County, Hoima District.
    2. The Government of Uganda to review the existing legal framework governing compulsory land acquisition with a view to adequately protect the rights of the citizens from unscrupulous projects and potential abuse of the right to property.
    3. Government of Uganda to report to Parliament on the action taken to implement the resolution of Parliament on this matter within 30 days.” I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, is it seconded? Okay, it is. You now speak to the motion.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, can you stand to second? (Laughter)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Madam Speaker, we all agree that we need an oil refinery. We are also proud of that project. However, there are certain things that have not been done in the correct way and that is why the women of Hoima petitioned your office. They appreciated that when they petitioned your office, you directed the ministries of Energy and the Minister in Charge of Bunyoro Affairs to go and meet the people.

When they went there in February, they waited until May with nothing being done. In August they came back to you before you directed us to go on the ground. There are various issues that remain unresolved particularly, when you look at the issue of food security, women have been stopped from growing crops that take more than three months yet such crops have been a source of their income to get money to pay school fees for their children but also as a source of food security. So, they are now left in suspense and don’t have a time frame as to when they will be compensated and when they will go away.

Additionally, women preferred resettlement, but accordingly they have not been told where they are going to resettle. The implementing agency, which is Strategic Friends International, instead is forcing people to sign valuation of property and they pay them such that they do not opt for resettlement. They were told that if they opt for resettlement, they are going to take them to Bududaand Karamoja; those people actually feel that if they go to those areas they will not easily fit within those communities. 

Madam Speaker, one of the issues that the women brought up was that the same agency that was hired by the Ministry of Energy to go and do valuation, compensation and resettlement, doesn’t involve women. First of all, when women are called to attend the meetings they are chased away, they say, ”No, this business is for men and you don’t have anywhere to sign.” And with regard to that, they have gone further to open accounts in banks where men are the major signatories. So women fear that if that money comes, who is going to take charge of it? Are they going to buy land? Or they are going to run away to trading centres to raise houses, get married to more women and that is a major concern on the ground. 

This was ascertained by the chairperson LC1 of Chapron where we visited and he said this is a big problem that Government should look into otherwise the women are going to continue suffering. 

On the issue of surveying land, honourable members, I want you to listen to this because some of us who went on the ground were actually affected by the presentations and we almost cried. When it comes to surveying the land that belongs to a woman, a widow, these women-headed households, the surveyor who is known as a one Bashir does not involve them. He just goes and does his work and when they petitioned the RDC he promised that he was going back to resurvey, up to now their land has never been resurveyed.

When it comes to compensation, when women have permanent houses, they are valued differently from grass-thatched houses. Actually, grass-thatched houses are paid more than permanent houses that belong to the women. So, they find it unfair in terms of compensation.

Madam Speaker, issues of widows, orphans were not considered because even on that very day, there was an elderly woman who came to us and said, ”Now Members of Parliament that you are here, help me.” Her land is not captured anywhere in the report, not even on the map, and yet that woman is known so that means that even if Government comes to compensate, that elderly woman will not be compensated. 

So, these are matters of agency honourable Speaker, the women are worried; I want to lay on Table the forms these people were made to sign. They have signed that they have received money but in actual sense they haven’t, so they are wondering, what will happen! 

The form says that they have received money but the money isn’t yet there. 

This is what the form says: “Payments of approved compensation to project affected persons. Consultant services to implement the resettlement action plan for the oil refinery land in Kabale, Buseruka Sub county Hoima” they put the contract reference, the serial number, the bank, and everything but they are not paid. I beg to lay on Table. 

I have another copy where the items are not valued. They just come and write a, b, c and d, they don’t put the rate they do not value those items and they make the people sign. So, people are wondering why they are signing for items whose payment rates they don’t know. These items include avocado, coffee, rice, beans and all crops. The rates are not there but they are making people sign. I beg to lay it on Table. 

I pray that this Parliament helps the people of Buseruka sub county more especially the women and other vulnerable groups who are not sure of their next future, and yet we are proud of this oil resource we are proud of the refinery we are proud that it is going to boost us -
(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way for this clarification. Much as I support the motion, the clarification I am seeking is when they went out in the field, did they find out whether the local councils are involved in these valuations?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are smuggling, why don’t you allow the mover to complete her motion?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Madam Speaker, I had actually concluded. I beg to move, to allow seconder to add on because she also participated.

3.37
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion as moved by hon. Nyakikongoro Rosemary, the vice-chairperson UWOPA. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for accepting the petition from the rural women of Buseruka Hoima District and for giving the mandate to UWOPA to look into the issue and I believe they have handled it very well. 

I want to appreciate Government for the efforts put in to resettle and compensate the people of Buseruka and above all for taking a wise decision to have our own refinery in this country and where Bunyoro is the host. 

I want to confirm to this House and to this country that we are in total support of the project. However, we have some issues that are affecting our people in the area. As the area Member of Parliament, I have been carrying a very heavy load on my head and today, I want to offload it to Parliament for a resolution. I have been faced with problems from women, men, and children that are affected by the proposed refinery in this area. 

I have visited this area several times and three times with ministers. We visited the area with hon. Kiiza Earnest the State Minister for Bunyoro Affairs, hon. Lokeris State Minister for Energy and hon. D’Ujanga State Minister for Mineral Development. Again we visited that area with the Parliamentary Forum on Oil.

Madam Speaker, the same issues were raised several times as we have been meeting these people. As women we found it very hard and have had many problems. They express their discrimination in the process of compensation. Women are not considered, they only look at men and when they are looking at land they do not consider women who have their pieces of land, they take it to men. As the mover of the motion has cited, for the widows, they are asked many questions from the clan members such as, “Do you belong to our clan” and yet they were neglected long time. You know, Buseruka for long has been a remote area, men used to dump women there and they have been keeping the land. 

So, when the land is grabbed taken if we do not take it seriously, we are going to have homeless people, people who will be loitering because the money will be taken by one group. 

There is a problem of sensitisation. Our people were not sensitized, more especially women, to take the right option of either being compensated or resettled. Men are pushing for compensation. As a requirement, all people to be compensated were requested to open bank accounts with our local banks in Hoima.

Women were denied the chance of being co-signatories. This has created a very big worry among the women because they are compensating land. Land is totally used by women; they depend on land for food and income. So if land is put in the hands of men, women will be hanging with their children.

This is a very serious issue and I want to support the resolution that said that this process be halted and be corrected before problems happen. There is food insecurity, our people are suffering. In May 2013, they were stopped from growing crops that take three months and above. Today, parents and the whole country people are planning for their children, they are growing coffee, trees, but our people cannot even grow crops that can take three months. The area is suffering because their children have no food. We need Government through the ministry of disaster preparedness to come and rescue our people before they die. 

I want to recommend that this process be halted for a while so that our women may also be put on board. I rest my case, hon. Speaker.

3.43
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to give information that will qualitatively enhance the debate on this matter. Just this morning, in our ordinary course of duties as members of the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas, we were meeting the directors of strategic friends international who are handling the resettlement programme and the information I wanted to give this House includes the following:

    1. The project affects over 24,00 land owners. Of course, the data does not capture the number of women and children. And the land owners’ bracket excludes the licensees (those who utilise the land temporarily). Out of those so called land owners more than 400 have not yet signed the prepared forms, which indicate that individuals have received the money whereas not.

    2. When you look at the sample of the forms given out to the people to sign, there is no provision for spousal consent. So literally no woman has signed unless she has signed in her individual capacity as a land owner.

    3. The rates for compensation being used are those determined by the Hoima District Council, the financial year 2011/12. And there is credible doubt as to whether Hoima district council has a competent valuer. I even wonder whether almost all our districts have valuers for purposes of assessing evaluation for compensation purposes of our people. 

    4. The other issue I wanted to bring out is that although the process is now on implementation stage, the condition by Government was that they would employ an NGO to monitor the implementation, but there is none so far. 

    5. The other information I wanted to give is that these people who want to receive cash, are likely to receive their cash in the next three to four weeks. And the information we got, there is a lady I am told who asked that will the 50 million be able to buy her grandson a bodaboda? So, you realise that people will get money not knowing how to utilise it. And the others who have opted for resettlement though few in numbers are likely to leave the land in three to five months whereas the land where they are supposed to be resettled is yet to be purchased by Government. 

So, there is generally lack of knowledge by the people affected on what is exactly happening. So it falls upon this institution to intervene before we create a social and economic catastrophe. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.47
MR JOHN BAGOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I look at the motion it holds some water but I would like to say that I support it 50 percent and oppose it 50 percent. The group which went to the site to verify what was taking place on the ground is over emphasising about the issue of women all the time. When I analyse what is on the report, I always realise that as a family man, that what we are debating here right now, some issues could be family issues.

When I looked at that I asked myself, at that place don’t they have men who lost their wives and they own land? Why is the report not saying anything about them? That is my worry, and that is why am saying that I am supporting it 50 percent and oppose it 50 percent. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion. I will make amendment to that motion as I wind up. As shadow minister for this sector, we have been interacting with people and receiving some information concerning the compensation in this area. I would also like to thank one NGO called FIEGO which has been meeting people and documenting a lot of facts surrounding the compensation, however they are being threatened by the local leadership. 

If I knew this motion was going to be on, I would have brought more documents where the particular list of people who have been forced to sign for the funds and they are not given is. And if, Madam Speaker, you will allow even tomorrow I can bring them for supplementing this motion, but I want to state that it is true that people have been forced to sign.

MR KAKOOBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give is that actually this practice is not only beginning in Hoima now. We had a similar incident when we had the project at Bujagali. All that has been talked about here was happening there people were being forced to sign forms for the money they had not received, there was undervaluation, the rates at the district were quite different, they kept on changing them all the time. So it looks like it is the system. Therefore, I do agree with the motion that this programme should be halted until everything is sorted out. Otherwise, it looks like the system is embedded within eternally.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, for that information, my colleague. Madam Speaker, primarily, we need to overhaul this process, so that maybe the inter-ministerial committee of Government can come up and bring to Parliament evidence of how they have aligned their procedure of compensating the victims, including the spouses as the colleagues has stated. This will enable us know that the women are really protected.

However, Madam Speaker, the amendment I also wanted to put to this motion is that: It is true we are talking about the women in the family and should it appear that we are now one-sided, we risk having men also coming up with a group and then petitioning Parliament. I would want this motion to be amended so that it includes everybody who has been cheated in that way so that we also have an emphasis that the women, their spouses, are also part and parcel of the process. I know that there are many families which are now breaking – men receiving the funds and they decide to go with the “new catch” to another place. And this should also be avoided.

Madam Speaker, I would also want to say that the government should quickly come up to tell this country where they have found land to relocate those who have been compensated. You know, that the value of money keeps on falling and the money they are giving people cannot buy an equivalent land nearby or a more viable area. That one is still pending, leave alone to say that once the project has ended, what happens to that land? Is Government taking it over? Are those people leaving it? What are other details pertaining to the land which has been given, let us say, in a more viable area of business, with the coming on board of the refinery in that area? This needs to be brought by Government. And, therefore, my humble appeal is that we ask the government to come with a comprehensive statement on how they are going to ensure that the people who have their land are compensated value-for-money but not basing on the assessment they made several years ago. Now that the value has risen with the prospect of oil and gas, it should be ensured that the spouses, particularly the women, and children are catered for so that they are not taken advantage of.

3.53
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I strongly support the motion, save that if I were the draft person of that motion, I would have shortened the story to concretise the focus in the objectives of the Bill.

Madam Speaker, as Shadow Minister of Environment, I would like Government to assist in answering this query, which I think has relevance to this motion. During the State of the Nation Address by the President, he said that oil investors are still reluctant to invest in the refinery. I would like to know whether the President’s statement will not affect the oil refinery planned in Buseruka. That is a very important point in terms of policy because we cannot plan something and all of a sudden, divert away from it. 

Lastly, I would like to prevail over the government to make sure that they do not tamper with any construction until they have fully paid those people who are affected. Otherwise, you will render them homeless and they could do all sorts of things. So I would like the government to respond to the Shadow Minister’s concern along those lines. 

3.55
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member who has brought this motion and for the work they have tried to do. But as the shadow minister for Bunyoro Affairs, the problems of Bunyoro –(Laughter)– Yes, I am the Shadow Minister for Special Regions and Bunyoro is one of them. Bunyoro’s problems are more than what this motion is bringing. And I want to ask Government once again – because I brought it in this year’s response – that Government should come with a comprehensive plan; one for the acquisition of this land, the compensation and also the settlement of the affected persons in the Albertine Region. If we do not do that, it is going to be a big problem.

Madam Speaker, you have seen the issue of “willing buyer, willing seller”. If the government does not come with a proper plan, you can go today to value this land but one year or two years down the road, by that time if you have not yet compensated the seller of the land, the value will have definitely gone up. And by the time you come and compensate this person, the value would have gone up and he would want you to re-value it. He will say, “No, this money is little and I want something more than this.” So we must have, first of all, money in place such that by the time we go to evaluate, we also pay these people and place a timeframe when they should be leaving. For example, if it is eight months, they should leave strictly within the eight months; whoever goes beyond that will be treated differently. This is because if somebody does not have a permanent house in that place, he can easily build again. So Government should do something and we have these people compensated.

Moving to the issue of forgeries and forcing people to sign agreements – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: I will give you half a minute to conclude.

MR OCHOLA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of the agreements, which we are forcing the people to sign – it is a big shame and I hope Government will come up clearly to inform this august House and Ugandans at large that this is not happening. If indeed you are forcing people to sign agreements when they have not received money, it is a big shame to the government because it is not expected of it. If there are some people who are using Government to do this, it should be stopped immediately –(Interruption)

MS OKWENYE: Thank you my brother for giving way. The clarification I would like to seek from you is that when I listened to my colleagues presenting, they said that it is actually some of the local leaders who were cheating the people who were supposed to be compensated; they did not mention that Government was directly cheating the people. So the clarification I would like to get from you is that: Was it clear from the presentation that Government was the one cheating the locals or their leaders?

MR OCHOLA: Madam Speaker, when you look at page 2. Part 4(b), it talks of “alleged fraudulent actions by the resettlement action plan implementing agencies and Government.” For example, the beneficiaries being made to sign agreements indicating that they have received their compensation and handed over their land to the government –(Member timed out_)

4.00
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. Before I came to Parliament, I used to watch on TV hon. Mukitale talking about land in Buliisa. And afterwards I learnt that people migrated to Buliisa and parts of Bunyoro because of oil. Now when it came to people benefitting from this oil, people have got different statements and even thinking that maybe this oil is going to benefit a few individuals while the majority lose out. This is because when you look at – even before they start the compensation, the local people who are supposed to enjoy and embrace the investors and their projects are crying foul. 

Madam Speaker, isn’t it high time for the Minister for Bunyoro Affair to bring up these issues squarely? They are serious matters; they concern land and the welfare of the people. People are going to start giving themselves land or killing each other if nothing is done. 

My people told me that I have no votes; this Parliament should give votes by solving the land problems and compensation especially for women and widows of Bunyoro. You even have more work to do – ask this Parliament for the money, we will give it to you so that our people can benefit from this oil; so that we do not look at this oil as a curse as some people have said. Thank you.  

4.02
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also support the motion. The fact is that in African culture, land often belongs to the men. But men do not live alone. A man marries a wife and they have children. Many times, men take over the children claiming that they own them. However, when it comes to provisions, it is mainly the women who provide for them, much as the men claim ownership as the fathers – (Interjections)– it may not be an empty claim, but that is what is on the ground. 

Many times women suffer at the hands of greedy men. When it comes to land, the man owns it; and when it comes to tilling that land, it is often done by the women and children. When the produce is harvested, the man does not want the woman to touch the proceeds. He sells everything yet the woman and the children are the ones who worked for that produce. 

Therefore, I propose that matters of land in that area should concern both the man and the woman. Money should not be given out to men alone. If money is supposed to be given out, let them first identify an alternative place. Then the money should be paid in the presence of the two of them – first of all, they have to pay for that land because the woman –(Member timed out_)

4.04
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion and also express my sympathy to the women and men of Bunyoro. Development is taking place in Uganda and so many other areas in the country are going to be affected. I have heard of the same complaint when developing Masaka Road. Today, we are hearing a similar complaint on Bujagali and we are aware that the people of Karuma will also be affected. 

In Kasese, people were under paid when they wanted to give way land for the development of the international airport. For a plot of land, one would receive Shs 80,000. They petitioned the Minister of Land to send the Government Valuer and he valued it. I have talked to the Minister of Land, but he has been adamant. 

I propose that the Minister of Lands gets serious. Whenever there is a Government project or an investor doing a project, he should seriously guide the people on the social factors and produce compensation values and put them on paper so that we can access them and know how much people are going to get. They have done this in a hidden way and our people suffer at the end of the day. So, I request that issue of Kafu and Karuma be reconsidered; Bujagali should be looked at and the others that they have mentioned. 

If we get a comprehensive report on all these areas that have been affected, then it would give us a better position for us to debate and decide for the affected people. We are going to discuss these areas potion by potion as they arise. We know there are so many other developments that are going to take place –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before hon. Mukitale comes in, join me in welcoming leaders from Nankoma Sub County in Bukooli Central Bugiri. They are here, represented by hon. Wafula and the Government Chief Whip. (Applause)

4.07
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the movers of this motion, which I fully support. We are discussing a symptom of a very big problem. The refinery site is not even one percent of the land problem in oil and gas. We have heard of other problems in other areas. We have over 100 oil wells and we have to do a pipeline; the industrial areas and so forth. Nobody has funded the Ministry of Lands to deal with this problem. In the end, we are only dealing with a symptom or mere consequences. 
I condemn in the strongest terms possible the so-called buyer and seller syndrome of laissez faire. 

The resettlement plan should be primary and compensation should be secondly. You cannot tell a peasant to access Shs 3 million without knowing where they will go next. That is not the role of the peasants; it should be the role of Government. The oil is not theirs, it is a national resource. 

We give a lot of time to investors to plan; but we have not given time to the communities. We have not even talked to them. I come from a very sensitive area and we have not even had debates with the industry. So until we decide to make it a priority, like Austria; they found out after they had almost caused genocide that it was wrong to give investors mining licences without talking to the communities. We may have to end up there. 

I request that Parliament acts now by funding all ministries of Government in the inter-ministerial working teams and give them the resources to enable them plan for this country – (Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: I give you half a minute. You know, he has been fighting for that land for a long time. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raised an alarm in 2007 up to now, Ministry of Lands has not got the money. In 2009, I demanded an inter-ministerial committee to be put in place. To date, they have no resources or budget for it. Even when we got the first money for the capital gain of oil, we ring fenced it for Karuma. We could not even plough back money in these communities to prepare them in terms of land demarcation; prepare NEEMA – and this is an area where we should put much thought. 

In absence of Government planning and cater for the multipurpose use of the land, by the Central Government working with local Government, speculators take the upper hand. And once that happens, you would be saying that peasants should suffer; that is the policy you have put in place. 

So to revert this, let Government take the central role in making sure that our people do not end up with an oil curse; let it be a blessing; they are going to share from this resource. Short of that, all the land around those areas, apart from the refinery area, is being claimed by speculators as we speak. So by saying Government gets money –(Member timed out_)

4.11
MR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to say a few words. I want to associate myself with hon. Mukitale and what he has said. I want to add that there is a bigger problem than we see. I have always said and it is on the Hansard that regarding every project, if the local community does not own or welcome it then that project will have a problem regarding its sustenance.

In 2004, on this very Floor, I cautioned Government when they were privatizing Kinyara Sugar Works and I said if it is not handled well, we shall have a problem in future. Today, months do not pass without sugar cane in Kinyara being burnt because of a mishandled transaction. I am not saying that we cannot correct the situation. We can, if we have the feeling that we have gone wrong. Let us see how to go backwards and try to correct the situation.

When we were debating the Oil Bill, we made attempts to include provisions where aggrieved parties would appeal and so forth. I am not sure as to whether the Minister of Energy is now working around the clock to have the regulations in place so that we can have these Oil Acts – (Member timed out_)

4.13
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I stand to support the motion. Indeed I concur with my colleague, hon. Mukitale that we are dealing with symptoms and impacts and not actually dealing with the main problem. Why am I saying this? These affected people are peasants; both men and women. They do not have bargaining power and they have not been sensitised. Many of them do not even know the value of money. I read in one of the papers of a home that was given Shs 50 million. The lady actually asked whether the Shs 50 million could buy her son a bodaboda. These are people we are talking about.

I feel that as Government, we have let the people down because we have gone on the side of the investor and miner and forgotten our own people. Indeed, as Government, we should have first gone to the area to sensitise these people and to tell them about the impacts, the effects and the challenges and to show them what would be in for them.

As Government, we should have negotiated with the oil companies and asked them, “If you take over these people’s lands, what are you going to give in return?” Much as they may get land and construct houses for these people, we should look at a bigger picture of say, provision of social services for these communities. We should have ring-fenced the children who are educated to be the first ones to benefit in terms of job placement. But what have we done? It is like there is no government to protect these people who are affected by the mining –(Member timed out_)

4.15
REV. PETER BAKALUBA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I join the rest of the Members in thanking UWOPA for coming up with this important report. I have visited Buseruka several times through the Parliamentary Forum for Oil and Gas and my president is there. I have also visited the same area with the natural resources committee of Parliament and we have actually received the concerns of the people of the Bunyoro area.

My only call and plea goes to Cabinet, Government and the ministers to really think about this area. The issue of oil did not come today; it has been on for some time but we need to plan for these people. This area is going to be affected in many ways. Schools, health centres and homesteads are going to be removed and it means the entire community is going to suffer. It is not only women who are going to suffer as the report presents but men, children and everybody else.

If we are thinking of giving money to these people, it will not help. They will eat this money and it will get finished. A good government plans for its people. We just need to plan for a better resettlement programme for these people where we can put good schools and health centres so that we can shift these communities to a better environment and so that they become appreciative of this programme. These are our voters from Bunyoro. We know how they vote for this country; for His Excellency and the leadership –(Member timed out­_)

4.17
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would also like to stand and support the motion. I believe that there is still more than we can see in this motion in regard to the situation of the people in that area. 

I would like to assume that as a government, we would have taken into consideration the interests of the people. It is not a matter of just compensating these people. It would have been very imperative to sensitise them and get their opinion on what they prefer. This is because I cannot be given money when I do not have a plan. If I am, I will take all the money to a boutique and buy shoes and suits.

How about a rural person in Hoima? What happens? So, Madam Speaker, there is need for us, as Parliament of Uganda, to take this as a serious matter and the process be halted. We should get the opinion of these local people who are suffering and then plan a resettlement area; that is if it comes from them.

After that process is done, it would be good to give compensation to whoever has gone to that area, which has already been reserved for those people because as a matter of fact, I come from Aguu and you cannot come and tell me, today you are leaving. Where would I go? I am already attached to that area and I would not be able to leave. 

Being a gender activist, I am not going to be biased regarding this motion. It is not about a woman only; it is about a man, a child and a woman –(Member timed out_)

4.20
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues of UWOPA in giving thanks for this very good motion. Whereas this intervention by Government is very good, strategic and important, I also wanted to remind the ministry responsible that usually when you have such an intervention, there are a host of other social factors that need to be addressed and which UWOPA has raised here.

One of the issues, which I had an opportunity to interface with the youths of the region - we had a consultative meeting together with hon. Karuhanga in Bunyoro sub-region and again the youths raised this issue to us to come and also present it to the House. They did note that one of the challenges that people are facing in that region is where the government agencies are forcing them to sign what they do not know; and they did raise that similar name - Bashir- in the intervention and they were blaming him and asking Government to take note of that person because they think he is doing fraudulent engagements. 

So, Madam Speaker, I wanted to support this motion to say that really the process should be halted but also engage by highlighting some of the social issues. They noted, for example, that in one of the schools in Buseruka sub-county there was a school were girls were 47 when they joined senior one but by senior three all of them had dropped out of school due to teenage pregnancies. And so they are also faulting the whole host of activities happening in that sub-county which are exposing the people. 

So, one of the issues this motion did not highlight is the effect of the other social activities that are happening around the oil refinery construction and the oil issues in the region. I wanted to bring that to the attention of the House and also highlight it to this committee and whichever committee will be handling this that there is also a direct effect on the young women that are in that sub-county. I think by the end of the construction of the oil refinery, there will be no girl- (Member timed out_)

4.22
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the mover of the motion and the one who supported the motion, the hon. Tophace Kaahwa. Madam Speaker, when you talk about women you are actually talking about a flood of children because under normal circumstances no woman has only one child. They have a number of them. I have been here remembering that what we are doing here, all the lamentations we are talking about, is actually the mandate of the Commission on Equal Opportunities. The Equal Opportunities Commission was established by an Act of this honourable Parliament in 2010 and it is mandated to establish and scrutinise every policy and every engagement to ensure equity and equality.

Madam Speaker, can I know from the Leader of Government Business whether it is not deliberate to keep the Commission on Equal Opportunities perennially underfunded, subjugated under the Ministry of Gender even which it is supposed to oversee? No space for it to execute mandate. It is understaffed and whether it is not deliberate that it becomes irrelevant to the communities and that it closes up like that because you remember this very commission came to this Parliament after a strike. So maybe it is deliberate that it does not function and we are here now trying to do its work. 

Can I get that from the Leader of Government Business and then I will maybe find another thing after that. But for now I want to believe that what we are in and also the attempt to have a certificate of gender and equity is all a mandate of the Commission on Equal Opportunities - (Member timed out_)

4.25
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am one of the few Ugandans or many Ugandans who have been brought up by women - my mother. When I read hon. Nyakikongoro’s submission and I saw how men are just taking money for land and abandoning women with their children and going to get married to other women, I was almost bleeding internally here. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, when I draw you back to Article 32 of the Constitution on affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups - and these are children, people with disabilities plus the women- they are saying that we should never - that Parliament shall make laws for the purpose of giving full effect to this Article, the Article of giving women equal opportunities. When you go to Article 33(4), rights of women, “Women shall have the right to equal treatment with men and that right shall include equal opportunities in political, economic and social activities.”

Madam Speaker, if this Parliament is going to sit here and we see women being kicked off their land and they are just completely going with children, even have nowhere to go - I wanted us to actually add something that this Parliament should resolve to add another Bill on the resolutions of Parliament that let us now task the Office of the Prime Minister to urgently formulate a committee that is going to go to Buseruka and sensitise the people on how they should use the money before they start giving them money to be drunk. 

Madam Speaker, I can assure you, very manypeople who shifted from where we were born went to Buseruka - plus even Rwandese. The people are voting for the Movement 100 percent in Buseruka; you cannot get there anybody who is opposing us. We have decided to liaise with investors from Tullow everywhere because we want money and we have abandoned the Ugandans –(Member timed out_)

4.27
MS ANIFA BANGIRANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we debate such issues which are very pertinent and issues of this nature I have a problem that at times when we pronounce ourselves the Executive does not take this august House seriously. (Applause) I want to thank UWOPA and the mover and I want to thank you in person for the initiative you have taken; you have kept on talking to ensure the rights of the disadvantaged particularly the women and the children. 

The issue of resettlement, the issue of compensation, does not only fall under the oil sector. I vividly recall that in this august House when we were debating the construction and the policy of Ministry of Works, especially the construction of the Kampala-Masaka Road, the issue of compensation by the people who are supposed to compensate- coming out with forged forms making the beneficiaries to sign for what they have not accepted and we said it was criminality. I vividly recall we moved and asked Government to look into this and report back to this august House. I have never heard of or seen any reports to that effect. Now it is coming back again. 

Now when you are talking about resettlement I vividly recall the Vice-Chairperson of UWOPA appeared before the Committee on Natural Resources and brought the issues of resettlement of those who are affected in the Albertine area, and we put it to the minister of the line sector. She promised us that it is packaged within when they are giving licenses. 

I call upon this august House that we should pronounce ourselves. We should make it clear that Government should bring to this august House a comprehensive report- plan with mechanisms of how it intends to implement to ensure –(Member timed out_)

4.30
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion but I want to start by thanking very much all our male colleagues seated in this august House now as we debate this motion, except  hon. Bagole –(Laughter) For hon. Bagole to get up in this Parliament - I did not want to put him on order but he was so- I want to even rule on your behalf –(Laughter) – he was out of order to get up in this House and say this motion is speaking about women only and yet, Madam Speaker, on page 2 of the motion, it was stated very clearly in the second paragraph, “Noting further that amidst the host of activities, there are a number of challenges the sector is faced with in redressing the issues of the oil refinery affecting communities, including the rights of women, men and children in particular.” So, for hon. Bagoole to get up in this House and even tell us that he is supporting the motion 50 percent; what does that mean? You are standing on a river with one leg on one side and another on the other side, what does that mean?

Madam Speaker, I really want to thank hon. Nyakikongoro and hon. TophaceKaahwa for moving this motion but the rights of women and children on this issue of oil should not be looked at in a very simple way. 

When you look at our land laws, there is a very big loophole. I want to suggest that we make an amendment in our land laws to cater for –(Member timed out_)

4.32
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
There are certain things that we all need to remember; even those who pretend were at least born by women and particularly, I want to inform this House that I can have other wars to fight but I do not want to fight women because I know what a woman means to me. I happen to have been brought up by a single parent and it was a mother. My father died when I was just six months and I know what it means to be raised by a woman and what women can do. 

I also had the privileged to work with the civil society and we did carry out some research work in a number of districts of Uganda and we realised that actually, women spend more time with their children than the men because most men spend about six hours in their homes and are outside their homes for the rest of the time. So, that means the status quo of women must be protected, but what is perturbing is the manner in which we are actually insinuating what “Government” means. 

In my opinion, Government in this case is such an ambiguous thing that we must define properly. This House is privileged and the people of Bunyoro are privileged to have a minister in charge of Bunyoro affairs who is also a born of Bunyoro, and I think even if this Parliament did not appropriate money for him, he would still get down to Bunyoro and organise and coordinate the activities in Bunyoro.

 I want to move an amendment on this motion that in fact the Minister in charge of Bunyoro Affairs should resign because he has failed to conduct these activities –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Wafula-Oguttu comes, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Vienna Primary School in Gulu, represented by hon. Achile and hon. Betty AolOchan. They are up here. You are welcome. (Applause)

4.35
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I am also a child of a woman and I was brought up by a woman. But the issue of displacing our people in favour of investors should be reviewed. I have been to Kabale and I have talked to the peasants there. Actually, we were there with the Minister in charge of Bunyoro Affairs and they were complaining that their land had been undervalued. Why do we displace peasants to remain peasants when peasants have got a chance like this and a factory has come to their area? Why don’t we help them to become industrialists? 

In some countries, a peasant who owns a big chunk of land where they are going to build a factory is given chance to use the land for shareholding in that factory but in Uganda, we displace them so that they become peasants or workers in the factories. When will they ever become owners? So, the policy should be reviewed so that if you are going to build a factory on my land, for instance, of 100 acres, then give me an option whether I want the money or equity in the factory that you are building. 

Madam Speaker, I have read that this Kabale refinery is going to be owned 40 percent by the public. Why couldn’t these peasants be given that chance possibly to be part of the owners?

Secondly, I have been to Texas in America and if you have a well on your land, it is your well. The companies come and buy and go and refine the oil and they pay you money. So, it would have been a chance for the people of Bunyoro who have oil on their land to at least have a share of this oil but they were not given that chance. So, we should think big and stop thinking like peasants forever. Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I call the minister, I just wanted to add that when I received the delegation of these peasant women plus their leaders, I was really alarmed. I was so alarmed that if I had the power, I would have stopped the exercise on that day but I did not have the power. So, I summoned the Minister of Energy, the Minister of Lands and the Minister of Finance and the members of Parliament from Bunyoro and I said, we have a crisis on our hands. Can you people work it out? It was so alarming but I did not hear from the team of ministers, which had left discussing that matter. 

The youth of the entire greater Bunyoro also came on the same issues and other delegations and I thought I should dispatch a small team. I said, UWOPA, please go to the field and find out what is happening. Leader of Government Business, the matter is very serious indeed and we cannot pretend that it is not there. We must find a solution before things get out of hand. It is really serious indeed.

4.39
THE LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd.) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to propose on behalf of Government that we are given time to discuss especially with the mover of this motion and other interested parties and also negotiate with them and therefore come back with a comprehensive report. Otherwise we need time. That is the request, Madam Speaker. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I seek procedural guidance arising from what the Leader of Government Business has just advanced on the Floor of this House. Knowing very well that this is a time-bound decision, the longer we delay we give opportunities for those already on the ground to evict these women.Can Government commit to the process of the eviction of these women until such a time that the honourable minister, together with the mover of the motion, agree; otherwise, you might take a long time and in the process these ladies are thrown out. I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker. 

MR STEPHEN MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, for some time now, we have been promised a report on matters regarding the preparedness of other ministries in oil and gas. The other time, the ruling was that the Prime Minister would bring it since it affects more than one ministry, but this report never came to the Floor of Parliament. Could this be the time to request, in response to this particular motion, that we also get to know the preparedness of other ministries. It is not only the land sector that is affected; even other sectors have problems. When are we getting a comprehensive inter-ministerial report on the preparedness of other sectors? As we delay, our people are fast becoming destitute. 

MRS JANEPHER EGUNYU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also want us to give the Prime Minister a timeframe. From what I have heard hon. Nyakikongoro saying, people have even been stopped from cultivating and yet this is the rainy season. So, can we please give him a timeframe?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that the timeframe is contained in the motion. Taking into account the time it has taken to resolve this matter, if we adopt the motion, we should have the report as soon as we return from recess, Prime Minister, which we are about to have – (Interjection)– We are going for a month’s recess after independence. 

THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have expressed your concern on this matter before, and you have repeated it here and now the Members have also come up with this motion. We appreciate the gravity of the matter, but I would like to say that we are all looking for a constructive way out of this situation, so that the transformation, which hon. Wafula Oguttu and others have talked about, is realised at the end of the day.

I would like to request that as per the request of the Leader of Government Business, before you pronounce yourselves on this motion, you give us three days so that we can sit down with the movers of the motion. Also, the interventions that will ensure that the situation improves on the ground will be put on record. I beg to request. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think it is necessary to negotiate with the movers of the motion. Our interest is in finding solutions to this problem. 

MR DAUDI MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, my prayer is that we would like this debate to end with clear solutions documented, so that when we get out of here we are all agreed on the solutions or benchmarks in terms of time, and we are all bound by the pronouncements that will be made.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you do not have to worry; if you look at the motion, they are requesting you to report back to this House after 30 days. So, if we adopt the motion, we will give you that time before you report. That is why I was saying that when we come back from the recess, you will report because this matter has taken long; it came to my office in February last year. 

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that the motion is good, and I thank its movers because they have concerns. 

Madam Speaker, there are many things we can state here; we have been in the field for a long time and there are certain issues which we will tell you in our response. However, in regard to the refinery, the prayers say, “Halt all compensation processes, review legislation and then report in 30 days.” At the same time, during our discussions, we have said this does not only concern the refinery; it also concerns land matters of the affected areas generally. 

In that light, I would like to request honourable members that since the movers of the motion have called for fair play and justice, a response is required before we take any resolution. This will enable us to come up with balanced resolutions. We have issues to highlight, which can benefit the debate. I beg to move.

PROF. BALTAZAR ATWOOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to be guided. This Parliament instituted an ad hoc committee on oil and gas, and this committee is supposed to have widely interfaced with many of the stakeholders in the Albertine Grabben, not only in Bunyoro but also in Acholi, West Nile and other areas of the grabben. When we were considering the oil Bills, I heard a Member say that it would have been better if we had debated the motion on the oil Bills after the ad hoc committee’s report. However, we have never got this report.

Secondly, the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas has moved to Bunyoro, West Nile and Acholi sub-region and they have a report. Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct, Madam Speaker, for them to present their report and the ad hoc committee also to present its report and then we consider these reports in depth and give guidance to Government? 

My problem has been that we keep talking, the frontbench makes promises, and we do not seem to be moving ahead. Some of us think that with time we could easily join the hon. Ssekikubo’s group because they may think we are becoming rebels. This is because we are going to get to a situation where we shall talk for our people and we shall be labelled “rebels” because problems are not sorted out. 

4.50
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to reiterate the concerns in the motion. When the motion refers to “urgent review”, it is because the situation is very bad and also very urgent. In 2012, I stood here when I was giving my response to the budget and I asked the Minister of Energy what was in the resettlement action plan for the oil areas. Hon. D’ujanga stood here and said, “We are developing a resettlement plan and it will be good and all stakeholders will be involved.” Now, do we see the stakeholders involved? Apparently, they are not. 

We even proposed in this House that the issue of giving cash to people would be problematic; if there were people with the option of land in kind, it would help. Now the Minister of Energy says they need more time to come here and present to us what they have. Madam Speaker, my view is that this House should support the position for a temporary halt. Once you halt, you can save something. Halt for a few days and first analyse the problem and give proper intervention. Now, if you want to continue as if we have not raised this problem, of what consequence is your intervention going to be? I think Government ought to take this matter seriously. 

We have repeatedly said, and Government has also repeatedly argued, that oil will not be a curse. Oil is not going to shout from heaven and be a curse from hell; it is going to be by the mistakes we make in managing the consequences, the exploration and the outcome to the people in the affected communities. We shall see destitute children from Bunyoro and Acholi flocking the streets of Kampala without a future. 

I pray that Government accepts this motion as it is and after 30 days, as you have guided, they come back here with a report and we move together. I thank you.

4.52
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to concur with hon. Alice Alaso. When we went there, people were uncertain of their next move. Given the fact that there are a few individuals who are terrorising them - forcing them to do the wrong things - they are helpless. We interacted with the representative of the RDC who also acknowledged those issues. 

For that matter, we pray that this Parliament takes this motion as it is and halts the process. I do not know whether the inter-ministerial committee that they were talking about is in place or not. The people of Bunyoro whom we met – even the men we talked to, although our mission was for the women – said, “The Government does not value us; they simply sent state ministers and when they got here, they did not give us a solution.” They were looking forward to meeting the Minister of Energy, the Minister of Lands and other ministers. We told them that even the state ministers are ministers but they argued and said, “No; why are they sending us junior ministers knowing that the issue is very critical?”

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give the House is that incidentally, the junior ministers are more mobile than the seniors. We are supposed to help them where possible. We are always in the field. When we come back, we report. So, I want to assure the House that the issue should not be which minister goes on the ground; the issue should be whether the matters on the ground are captured and worked on. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, honourable minister. I am not denying that, but we are dealing with peasants and they have their own perception. When they have a problem, they expect the top people to come in and help them –(Interruption)

MR LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, in terms of duration, I am a senior minister - I have been here for 17 years. I would like to inform my colleague that when you are given authority to go somewhere, you put on the shoes of the sender. So when you get there, you are a minister and you are supposed to come back and report to the sender. Whatever you say, you say it in ministerial capacity. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you for the information. I am just reporting what the people told us. I request that the whole process be halted for some time and Government swings in - (Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The tone of the motion initially seemed to be a plea for the marginalised women in Bunyoro. Now, according to the mover of the motion, we are talking of halting the whole process of what is going on there without giving this House the meaning of that move. 

I want the House to know that we have many processes going on in the area and if we just sit here and say “halt”, we must weigh how much that means for this country. So, is she in order to speak as if she is not aware of the implication of that kind of proposal?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is about compensation and resettlement; it is not dealing with other issues. It is not dealing with exploration, drilling, licencing or any of those things. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a procedural matter. I think the point of order the professor is raising is just making us sick. In 2009, an oil pipeline survey was done from the border up to somewhere in Mukono. This pipeline was supposed to go through people’s houses and land. Government held people hostage up to date. 

We asked Government to explain its position and the status of these people but up to now, there is nothing going on. People’s houses have stalled and no cultivation is going on. They were told to remain at that level. I wonder what it costs Government to heed the prayers of the House to halt for a while, so that the other people also get justice in their country. We should not always just look at how Government can get an edge over others, especially the citizens. 

I would like to propose that Government should consider bringing a comprehensive report, like the Leader of Government Business proposed. Members have proposed 30 days but my senior was talking about three days, which would divert from the intention or motive of the motion. So I want­ –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you, hon. Muwuma. Madam Speaker, I want to give Government information. In Tororo, if the Minister of Lands, the Minister of Energy and Minerals and the Minister of Finance do not constitute a committee, we are going to have a similar problem with the investment. We took Government to court with the investor – seven years - on the matter of phosphates. We actually leased our land 

I request Government; foreigners are supposed to only be leased land but we are now processing titles. The law is very clear. We are supposed to lease at the market rate and the resettlement must be clear; when the investor leaves, the property remains ours. That is the law. The Minister of Lands, the Minister of Energy and Minerals and the Minister of Finance, if you do not come to Tororo, your new investor is in trouble. 

MR ACHIA: I would like to give information, colleagues. In 2007, Madam Speaker, I came to your office because a team of players had been asked to go and study how to manage the oil and what the issues are in oil revenue management in this country. Madam Speaker, you gave me permission that time and we went and spent three months studying. There was a team from Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Energy and I was incorporated as a consultant on that team. When I came back - I have just extracted this from my iPad - I prepared a big report, which I sent to the Leader of Government Business then, hon. Apolo Nsibambi, dated 15 June 2007 and I gave a copy to my brother here, I remember. 

One of the issues raised in that report, which was very clear, was that there was already grabbing of land going on in Bunyoro; it is point No.9. We went into the details of what was happening; some people were positioning themselves and grabbing people’s lands, some were buying land cheaply and hoodwinking the poor women and men in that area. We were very clear in the report and we requested Ministry of Lands, Ministry of Energy and other relevant ministries to go to Bunyoro and start surveying and educating people. 

The Government has this report, so what more information is Government going to discuss? This was June 2007 and I even have the email showing the date when I sent the report. What more information are we going to discuss instead of coming up with solutions to this House, Madam Speaker? –(Interjection)– I am actually giving information.

What we want are solutions and a strategy. How far have you gone since 2007 regarding issues to do with security, environment, our relations with Congo, the land, communities, resource sharing - there are about 14 points in that report. Madam Speaker, there is enough information for this Executive to give us solutions now not tomorrow.

5.03
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of my brother. He had actually shared with me that he had undertaken that comprehensive research in the last Parliament. Nevertheless, it is not yesterday that we discovered oil in this country. Reports from some people state that we discovered this oil long ago, even before I was born. So, I would expect that we are not just preparing ourselves now. We were fully aware that we would need to resettle the people living in that area.

Madam Speaker, what moved me so much was the way you communicated to the House before asking the Leader of Government Business to speak. You said your concern is the rural women who do not have a voice. We are the voice for the rural woman. That is the reason why they brought affirmative action by providing for a woman MP for each district. The reason is very clear; it is so that a woman can speak for a woman.

Madam Speaker, you said the women came out in desperation as they cannot go to the sub county or the district councils to raise these issues. They have a lot of hope in this Parliament and in you as a woman Speaker, and that is why they came to you. I am in government and I am not shooting my government down, but the Speaker has simply said that they are giving you 30 days to give us a comprehensive response. What is hard there? Thirty days is a lot of time, given the fact that we did not discover oil yesterday –(Member timed out_)

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR BUNYORO AFFAIRS (Mr Ernest Kiiza): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the issues raised in this petition, many of which we saw when we went to the field. As Government, we have made some interventions regarding some of them. What we are requesting for is time for us to come and give a report on what we have done and what we intend to do. Therefore, I request that we come here next week to give you a report on what we have done and then we can take a decision on this motion.

Secondly, when we halt the compensation and resettlement exercise, it is going to send a wrong signal to those who are interested in investing in the refinery. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.06
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the hon. Minister for Bunyoro Affairs has said, Government is already doing something about the issues the committee has raised. Halting compensation and resettlement cannot be a standalone decision. It definitely has implications for the development of the refinery as well as other implications, and those implications would certainly not be good for the oil industry in Uganda and also for the investment climate of our country.

Madam Speaker, asking Government to come back with –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have been here the whole afternoon talking about pertinent issues and the motion of the honourable colleague, with the prayers therein, is quite clear. We are mindful that as a country we have gone into oil and gas development and we are aware that this is where our future lies. Conscious of this, the mover of the motion in her prayers has not alluded to the fact that the effects of this motion would bring to a standstill the activities of oil and gas. Is the honourable minister in order to mislead this House that the motion on the Floor is going to tamper with the long-term programme and process of developing oil and gas? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the context may be understood within the House but it may not be understood within the public. I think let us have a win-win situation and defer the vote until Tuesday next week. Let us ask the Government to come back with a response before we take the vote. Thank you very much.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance. Whereas it is okay – (Interruption)

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, is the former shadow Minister of Finance in order to challenge the ruling of the Speaker when you have already ruled on the subject and he is bringing it back? Are you in order to challenge the Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Speaker’s ruling should not be challenged. We want an answer on Tuesday. Today is Thursday and you have tomorrow, Friday, Saturday, Sunday and Monday. On Tuesday, we want serious answers and then we shall take the vote.

In the meantime, honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of St Clare Nursery and Primary school represented by hon. Amongin Jacquiline and the honourable Dr Epetait. They are here and they are welcome.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION, JULY 2013

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report was presented yesterday and Members said they wanted to go and review the report before they debate it, so here we are.

5.10
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Rt Hon. Speaker, I must first and foremost thank the committee for doing a commendable job. I wish the front bench and Cabinet could read and comprehend this report and adopt it fully. This report has amazed me a lot.

We can only re-echo some of the recommendations of the committee, and I fully touched by a couple of them, but of utmost interest to me is the question of electoral democracy in Uganda. For a long time in this country, we have heard an outcry for a transparent electoral commission that can inspire trust and confidence in the country. Last year, after the last general elections, some events inspired the so-called walk to work. I am aware about this because I was the chief organiser of walk to work, I must confess. Part of the reason as to why we had a robust uprising in this country was that the Electoral Commission we have and the electoral system we have in this country leave a lot to be desired. 

As a country, we were saying we deserve a better electoral commission. The one we have is a residue of the movement system of Government. This country long moved away from a monolithic dictatorial movement system of governance. For us to continue to have an electoral commission which is partisan in nature and for the government of the day to refuse to reconstitute the Electoral Commission to inspire confidence in the county leaves so much to be desired. (Member timed out_)

5.13
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I read through the report of the committee and I captured particular issues, which I would like to raise. 

The first issue is about the barbaric acts such as female genital mutilation and child sacrifice that are being tolerated in society today. As you all know, this infringes highly on the rights of especially the minority, and by this I mean the children and the women. I strongly support the committee’s recommendation that Government makes public cases of child abuse and cases of child sacrifice and brings to book the people who are engaged in these acts with heavy punishments. I also support the recommendation that government allocates sufficient funding for people to be sensitised about issues of genital mutilation. 

The second issue I want to raise is about the condition of our places of detention, which was also raised in the committee report. There is overcrowding in our prisons. I will give an example; a few months ago, there was a serious issue in my district where many of our people were arrested over a land issue. They confessed to me that in prison they were forced to sleep on top of each other. You sleep in turns; one person sleeps down and the other sleeps on top and you keep changing like that. (Laughter) For those of us who believe in certain moral values, I highly believe that this can encourage certain values that we as Christians or majority of us would not like to encourage in this –(Member timed out_)

5.15
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. 

I have had the opportunity to look through the report. I want to address my mind to Uganda Prisons Services, particularly on the aspect of congestion and overcrowding in dilapidated buildings as shown on page 65 and shortage of food for detainees. It has become apparent that the strength of prisons nationally, is efficient and effective utilisation of the available labour force against the background that inadequate funding has made it a bit impossible for them to meet some of their demands. This proactive approach has led to improved productivity, especially for crops like maize, millet and cassava. 

While I agree that there is need to support the construction of new buildings and renovate old buildings, in my considered opinion I would like to propose that Uganda Prisons Services should also consider construction of food stores, especially in districts where food stores are lacking like in Amolatar. The last time I visited prisons in Amolatar, I found that women prisoners where sharing the same rooms with millet, cassava, sorghum and maize. This is not acceptable; it could tantamount to abuse of human rights. So, it is my humble appeal that places for storage of food should be separated from where human beings sleep. (Member timed out_)

5.18
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Madam Speaker, thank you so much. I want raise the issue of accessibility to justice and especially by people with disabilities. When you go to Uganda Prisons, especially Luzira where I have visited, it is very inaccessible. Our people are kept in prison because courts do not have sign language interpreters, for example, and they do not get justice. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that the Evidence Act does not allow people to give witness by touch; you can imagine a person who is blind being in court and the court does not accept this. Today I read in the newspaper that a state attorney who has a disability was carried to the second floor of the High Court. That is somebody who is going to provide a service for Government, now you can imagine the culprit. 

The issue of rights really affects us when it comes to accessibility to courts, accessibility to prisons and accessibility to the Police. Look at CPS, there are so many stairs but then when you have a case to report, people always have to give apologies. 

Hospitals are also very inaccessible. The beds are not for us who crawl down. You find the nurses asking, “Why did you get pregnant if you knew that you would not climb on this bed?” I think this is very unfair. We have a right to bring children into the world but such questions are not very good. I want to thank the committee for bringing out such issues and they need to be handled.  

In the area of education, secondary education is out of government’s programmes. The little money which is given is not enough to support special needs education. Madam Speaker, the textbooks which are printed are taken to schools of visually impaired children instead of taking braille copies. I think this is a very big challenge because these children cannot read these printed materials because of their disability. (Member timed out_)

5.20
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

I would like to talk about disaster management. Article 249 of the Constitution is about disaster preparedness and management. Honourable colleagues also know that Uganda is a signatory to the Hyogo Framework for Action, which was signed in 2005 in Japan. It has good recommendations on risk identification, early warnings, public awareness, hazard mapping. However, up to today, there are still people who are suffering in this country. 

On Monday 23rd this week, in my district, Bududa, landslides destroyed 40 households and five villages. That was in Bumayoka, which is actually my home county. Hon. Nyakikongoro talked about the women of Buseruka moving to Bududa; I actually advise them not to risk because we are still living by the mercies of God. As a way forward, I would like to advise Government to shift from relief and rehabilitation to disaster risk reduction. That would be a better option. 

Secondly, the committee notes that the right to health is one of the rights which are abused most in this country. As we know, colleagues, access to timely, accessible and affordable treatment in this nation is still a challenge in many parts of our country. Uganda is a signatory to many conventions like the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and we also have the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights where it is a state’s obligation to respect, protect and fulfil the right to health. However, in this nation, you find that there are places which do not access these services; some places are hard to reach, for example Bududa and Buvuma Islands, because of their terrain. So, I agree with the committee’s recommendation that indeed, Government needs to put more effort in the area of health –(Member timed out.)

5.22
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done. 

I will restrict myself to the Uganda Police Force. There is massive violation of human rights, especially in hard-to-reach areas, specifically the islands. The Police Force is not equipped to deliver suspects to where they are supposed to go. So, people are held on different islands almost for a week because the Police are still looking for fuel to deliver these suspects to the centre. To make matters worse, the magistrates sit only on Fridays. This means that if someone is arrested on Sunday, that person has to stay in prison up to Friday when the magistrate sits. So, when you are arrested but not delivered to where the magistrate is on Friday, you will wait for the next Friday to get justice. 

Also, because of the difficulty in transport, the accuser has to foot the fuel cost because the Police will say, “We do not have fuel; if you are ready to bring fuel we shall take the suspect to the Police headquarters.” We call upon Government to have a resident magistrate in the hard-to-reach areas like Buvuma because our people are suffering. As politicians and leaders, we do not have the means to help them out. That is my humble request. If we do that, then we shall go a long way in addressing the rights and human rights of these different people. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.24
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for a job well done. 

I want to address my mind to recommendation No.1, that government should urgently appoint judicial officials and staff to clear the case bulk. This has not only come from the committee but it was also raised by the public relations officer of the High Court. They tell us always that they have case backlog and these cases have not been disposed of because of lack of enough judicial staff and officers. That means that so many Ugandans have been denied justice, and you know that justice delayed is justice denied. 

People are not being denied this justice to appear before court when they are coming from their houses or somewhere; they are actually behind bars, Madam Speaker. The majority of the people who are supposed to be arraigned before the courts of law in Uganda are behind bars but because of the bulk of cases, they cannot be produced to court as urgently as they are supposed to be. People are therefore suffering. Some of them are behind bars yet they have not committed those offences; they are innocent. Therefore, I really want to urge my government to take this recommendation very seriously and urgently try to address this issue.

Madam Speaker, the next issue that I would like to raise is about access to justice for vulnerable and poor people. It is very unfortunate that it is only in this country that justice is not given to the right people. Justice is being bought. You can buy your way through. As long as you have the money, you will win the case and the poor person –(Member timed out.)

5.27
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the committee for the report. 

I will start with the issue of national disaster preparedness and human rights. I think I am unfortunate or am just unlucky because of the way this ministry operates. I would have wished to say this in the presence of the minister. Early this year, my constituency was hit by serious disasters and I raised this as a matter of national importance here. Madam Speaker, you directed different ministries to come to the rescue of the people of Iganga. 

I was even given information by a colleague from Kibuku who had also gotten similar problems. Fortunately, she managed to get some relief supplies. She rose and gave information but I, who moved a substantial concern, never got anything and yet I have been complaining for some time. The minister seems to think that this is a favour that should be given to people after pleading. I think this this is not good for the country.

Madam Speaker, the other issue I would like to raise is about the Police. There is a recommendation of 48 hours. It is true that the Constitution demands so, but there are special cases that should be considered. Recently, we had cases of armed robberies and murders going on in the country; if a suspect is kept in the police cells for at least 48 hours and then you say he should be released, you know that we shall have a challenge with state attorneys and DPP officers. 

We have a challenge with manpower. If we release them the way we are recommending, - full blast - I feel we shall have a problem with criminals taking over the country. So, we need to separate the cases. We need to handle the capital offenders separately. We should not follow this recommendation that is –(Member timed out.)

5.30
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Madam Speaker, thank you. I would like to thank the committee for their report. One of the observations that the committee made was on birth registration. This is a human right because everybody has a right to nationality. However, for our case, you will realise that there is a fee that is attached to this registration and most of the rural people cannot afford that Shs 5,000 to have themselves registered. So, I call upon Government to drop this fee. I know of a child who missed an opportunity with the quota system because of lack of a birth certificate. So, if this fee could be dropped, many Ugandans would have their births registered. 

On FGM, Madam Speaker, this practise as observed by the committee is still going on. It is true Government is trying to make the people understand the anti FGM law, but the money given to sensitize the people is very little. It is done once a year and because of that, many people do not yet know about that law. 

The issue of inspection of schools is a very serious one. The committee tells us that most of these schools, especially the secondary and tertiary institutions, are inspected once in a year. This is very inadequate and it leaves the children at the mercy of the head teachers and the teachers. There is need to increase funding for inspection of schools if we have to realise quality in our education system. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before hon. Namoe comes in, I want to give you information about the burial of hon. Freda Mubanda’s daughter. The body will arrive on Saturday, 28 September 2013. There will be a vigil at Ambassador Wapenyi’s house in Muyenga, opposite International Hotel on the night of Sunday. The casket will depart on Monday for another vigil at their ancestral residence in Namyoya, three kilometres beyond Nakifuuma on Kayunga Road. There will be a memorial service there and burial on Tuesday, 1st October starting at 10:00 hours. Honourable members, keep that in mind and support hon. Freda Mubanda. Also, do not forget to support the honourable Dr Lyomoki.

5.32
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. 

On page 39, an observation was made that some teachers and civil servants join the civil service just because of the hardship allowance. Karamoja has fallen victim of this particular practice, and that is why service delivery is very low. Our people are still suffering. In Napak, the science teachers were posted to Kangole Girls’ S.S and they reported just for one week and left. This has affected the students who were taking sciences; they have now resorted to doing Arts subjects. This has also continued to affect the students’ performance. 

This is not only happening in secondary schools but also in primary schools. I expect this committee to come up with a strong recommendation to the effect that such teachers who take government’s money without doing anything should be punished. Teachers and health workers have in the past been saying that their absence in Karamoja was because of insecurity. Now we have peace and I do not know what reason they will now give for not providing services to our people. 

There are a lot of difficulties; when you go to health centres, you will find mothers waiting for help but there are no health workers. Some of them end up with ruptured uteruses while some babies die just because there is nobody to attend to the mothers. This is a very serious issue, Madam Speaker, and I expect the committee to come up with some penalties for such people.

On hunger and the right to food, I am also aware that a Member in this august House made a statement that the people of Karamoja are lazy –(Member timed out.)

5.35
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good work they have done. 

I just want to comment on the right to work and the rights of workers. The committee recommended that the Industrial Court be operationalised; I do support that. 

Madam Speaker, every time I sit in Parliament or I move around, I have seen bus drivers, taxi drivers and drivers of trucks in Uganda dying or getting involved in accidents and all that is given is a coffin for their burial. This man or woman has been dedicated to their work of driving this vehicle for 10 or 20 years and yet they will not get any gratuity or pension. There is nowhere his or her family can go to seek redress. 

Parliament should encourage Government to adopt the proposal brought to this Parliament to help these young ladies who are also working in our homes as maids. Some of them are being harassed. She wakes up very early to prepare children for school and later goes to bed past midnight and then all of a sudden, someone wakes up, after paying them Shs 30,000, and says, “I do not need your services anymore.” Unless we have serious laws in place, we may not protect our people. 

You are aware that government policy is to encourage investors to industrialise Uganda. We all appreciate this, but this must go hand in hand with laws that will govern workers. That is why I would encourage that the wage bills be considered. Some investors are harassing people. I will give one example from Kasese –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: We have not heard that example; use half a minute to complete that example.

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. One hundred and twenty-five people were laid off by Kasese Cobalt Company towards the closure of the project because the company is being de-commissioned. The workers have gone to court but the Industrial Court is not there to address their plight. In a period of one or two months, this company will be closing; so, what is their fate? They have gone to court but no one can listen to them and yet they believe they would be compensated if they went to court. 

My question to the ministers, especially the Leader of Government Business, is: What is the fate of these people? Their plight has to be listened to since they are just languishing. Thank you.

5.37
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I commend the committee for producing this report.

I have issues to raise as regards the right to food, right to work and right to justice. On the right to food, it is very important that we revamp the silos or granaries. Those days when we had granaries, it was very easy for people to keep food. Today, only little food is kept in people’s homesteads and so they no longer have food. That is a very big challenge. As a government, we need to tackle that challenge.

We also need to put in place technology which would aid us in collecting water during floods, so that it is used during the dry season, especially in areas like Teso, where I come from. When it rains, the whole of Ngora District gets flooded and yet this water could be useful during the dry season.

On the right to justice, as we speak now, very many people are loitering in various prisons across the country. We used to go and visit hon. Mukula in Luzira Prisons and we would get to know several cases of people who are innocently imprisoned. I think we need to do something, as Parliament, because most of the people are in jail sometimes due to intrigue. The right to justice is being denied to our people.

We have talked about the right to work. This committee has come up with a very good report, and I want to talk about two categories of people. There are those who work at home, our maids; they are harassed left, right and centre and there is nothing protecting them. Some people abuse them without pay or even rape them – (Member timed out.)

5.39
MS SANTA ALUM OGWANG (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. 

I will address myself to page 20, where the committee noted that there is need for electoral reforms and the Electoral Commission submitted a proposal to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs covering the prisoners. If it is true that we need electoral reforms, and 2016 is not far and the minister in charge of constitutional affairs has up to now not brought to this Parliament these reforms, I wonder how far we are moving towards 2016. 

The committee recommended that Ugandans in the diaspora should also be given a chance to vote. Without the electoral reforms, those people will not get the opportunity to vote yet countries like Kenya and younger countries like Rwanda have given their citizens abroad an opportunity to vote. In the fourth recommendation, on page 20, the committee states that the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs should speed up the process of bringing these electoral reforms if we are to do justice as far as elections are concerned. 

I serve on the Committee of Equal Opportunities and on this note I would like to address the issue of people with disability, especially the blind and deaf. I have read through this document but I have not seen these people being mentioned. These people also have a right to vote. They say that democracy is expensive. If they have a right to vote, I expected the committee to have mentioned something about these people. Many times, these people are left out and their rights are left in the hands of other people –(Member timed out.)

5.42
MS JUDITH AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 4, the committee notes that Uganda Human Rights Commission mainly depends on money from donors. This is very appalling. In the Eighth Parliament, I was on the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs and we had this same challenge. I am surprised that six or seven years down the road, it is still the same challenge they are facing. 

What agenda does this government have for the people of Uganda that they should deny Uganda Human Rights Commission money to sensitise our citizens on their own rights? No wonder, it is Government that is actually abusing the rights of Ugandans because they do not want Uganda Human Rights Commission to sensitise Ugandans on their rights. It is important for this Parliament to take thisas a very serious issue. I wonder why recommendations of Parliament are not taken seriously. In the Eighth Parliament, many recommendations were made on this Floor urging the Government to give Uganda Human Rights Commission enough money.

Secondly, the committee notes on page 5 that there is violation of citizens’ rights by unprofessional security operatives, including our own Police Force. Let me give you a scenario of a man in my district, Mr Oyugi Matthew, who was shot and killed mistakenly by Uganda Police in 2011. Mr Oyugi was shot by the Uganda Police and I reported the case but up to now, since 2011, nothing has been done. Mr Oyugi’s children have been following up this matter with Uganda Human Rights Commission and I have also followed up the matter with the ministry but nobody has paid attention to this issue. Government is actually participating in abusing human rights –(Member timed out.)

5.45
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Allow me to extend my thanks to the committee for this wonderful report. 

I want to address myself to two issues. The first one is the right to food, especially when it comes to Uganda Prisons Service.When I move around my constituency and other parts of Uganda, I meet in-mates engaged in a number of activities like digging on people’s private farms. Why doesn’t Parliament advise the Prisons Services to own gardens where in-mates can grow their own crops and save us the cost of feeding them? This is our responsibility. I believe if we equip them well, they can even benefit from government programmes like the NAADS programme. That will help to ensure that our in-mates are fed well and do not suffer while in prison. 

I also urge Government to invest in silos to safeguard the nation from seasonal scarcity of food which affects our people. Recently, we had a drought across the country. In Mawokota, areas of Kituntu and Buwama, we experienced severe effects of that drought. I believe if Government invests in silos and empowers the different groups to work actively in producing cereals, which we can store, that will safeguard our country and equip us from seasonal scarcity of food. 

Lastly, on child offenders, I did not see this addressed in the report –(Member timed out.)

5.47
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I address myself first of all to page 79 of the report of the committee. When we were discussing the ministerial policy statement this year, we captured the issue of the rights of children to have food and to be protected. It is not children who have been arrested but their mothers. So, I am sure that this time round, the minister will ensure that the issue of good food for the children whose mothers are in custody is addressed, and we will closely monitor this too. 

The other thing is the issue of sanitary towels for the female prisoners. We are going to monitor this closely and we urge hon. Baba and his colleague that we will be right on your back all year round. We gave you money this financial year, so be warned and ensure that this is provided for. 

The other issue is on the right to work. I want this House to agree with me that you cannot milk a cow that you do not feed. We cannot pretend – The minister for information is looking at me with intimidating eyes. I am not going to talk about the teachers in particular, but when it comes to housing, it is poor across the board; look at the prisons officers, the police,the teachers, the nurses and other medical personnel. Uganda is deceiving itself; we cannot get good services out of the workers of this country if we do not care for them. 

On the issue of a minimum wage, on Labour Day this financial year, I was flabbergasted by the statement made by the President, protecting investors at the expense of the workers of this country –(Member timed out.)

5.49
DR MICHEAL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for the opportunity. I thank the committee for the report. I want to address myself to two issues, not because I believe that Government will take this report seriously, but because we want to refer to the Hansard in future to prove that some of these things were mentioned. 

The rights of the people living with HIV and the rights of the prisoners are my concern now. I am very grateful for the report, which mentions a number of issues related to this. When you have a government that outsources treatment for its HIV positive people from external agencies and international organisations, when they do not get enough funding they withdraw. The people who have been put on treatment then remain without drugs and therefore there is a breach in the strict adherence to treatment, which kills them in the long-run. 

I have put this across in the alternative ministerial statement of health but I do not know if Government will take it seriously at all. I know, for sure, that many people do not have access to their medicines because international agencies, which supply them, sometimes withdraw without having controls from government. This is a very big human rights issue. I hope the Government can take this seriously.

The second issue is about prisoners. I am mentioning these two things because everybody is a potential prisoner and everybody here can be a potential HIV victim. I saw prisoners bathing in a pond, which I would hesitate to allow pigs to go and wash in. With my eyes, I saw them wash their yellow linen and then they put it on when it is not dry; in other words, they are pretending to be bathing and then they go back to the cells with wet clothes.

The health of the prisoners is in question. I doubt whether the Front Bench here is taking notes. I am generally observing –(Member timed out.)

5.53
MR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Madam Speaker, I must thank the committee for the thorough report they have made. I would like to comment on two issues especially on the rights of workers. 

The committee has observed that the Government has not come up with a minimum wage.I am personally convinced that as Parliament, we should not focus on a minimum wage but on a just wage or salary. This is because a minimum wage is not necessarily a legitimate fruit of work; it is a just pay or salary, which is really a legitimate fruit of work. When any company, organisation, government or individual refuses to pay a legitimate wage or a just wage, then that organisation or individual commits a very grave injustice.

I firmly believe that as leaders of this country, we should begin to refocus. We should not gloss over issues; my experience of almost two years in this House is that we take so many issues and problems and we quickly gloss over them without solving them. I do not think we are doing a service to this nation –(Member timed out.)

5.55
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I did read the report and I was happy. Although I had earlier on wanted this committee to be chaired by the Opposition, I found the chairperson and his members good in presenting their facts.I therefore thank him very much for having done a good job.

Secondly, I find this report to be in conformity with our //National Objectives and Directives of the Principles of State Policy.So, if you can continue in that direction, I think we shall be doing some work.

However, I am not happy with one area - the inaccessibility of the poor to higher education. If we continue the way we are moving, the rich are going to access higher education and the poor are going to be let down.So, this area needs to be improved.

Regarding the enactment of the Public Order and Management Bill, in my view it should be reviewed by this committee to try to make sure that it is amended so that political parties, independent Members and other people of different thinking have access in terms of airing out their views –(Member timed out.)

5.57
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the chairperson for the good work done.

I would like to restrict myself to human rights. We have so many people who have not faced justice in prisons. There are cases concocted against them especially by rich people who want to evict them from their land. They concoct cases, put them in prison and they are not tried. I would like clarification from the Government on what efforts they are making in this regard. There are many prisoners in Luzira and elsewhere. 

Secondly, we passed a law here over a government deal - I think it concerned the transfer of convicted offenders. Has it been assented to? If it has, has it been operationalised?Madam Speaker, we have so many people imprisoned in South Sudan. Some of them are not tried but they are in prisons and some will die there. What is our government doing to have them tried here or to transfer these convicts to their home countries so that our people can have justice? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.59
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. My concern is from page 10. I want to thank the committee for this very good report. However, I would like to request them, if they do not mind, to kindly include the right to clean water as one of the principles of human rights that we should be observing. 

I have cried and shouted my lungs out about the fate and problems faced by the people of Isingiro South.Madam Speaker, you have had an opportunity to go to Isingiro. Isingiro South is a place that has, on paper, 11 percent coverage of clean water as opposed to the 65 percent national coverage. You have had an opportunity to visit that area but you only visited the lower lands. The majority of the people live in the highlands and they have never tasted clean water. They do not even know dirty water.

My parents and I live 10 miles away from the nearest source of water, and that is River Kagera. How am I supposed to cry out, for goodness’ sake! Those of you who have had an opportunity to visit my place- Madam Speaker, next time I will make it a point to take you to those highlands and you will see women of my mother’s age -Our children no longer go to school. I want to tell you that people spend half the day collecting water. I have done it myself. It is so painful. 

Madam Speaker, I want you to help me. I want everybody who knows the plight of having no water to come to my aid in pushing Government to come to their senses and realise that the people of Isingiro- Isingiro South in particular- need this facility. (Member timed out.)

6.01
MS SARAH KAYAGI NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. 

I want to comment on privacy during counselling and testing. We toured health centres, and I will give an example of Moyo Hospital. We arrived at Moyo Hospital when it was time for counselling and testing. We found the health workers counselling people in the corridors. Mothers were moving, going to the maternity ward, and these clients were being counselled in the corridors. Surprisingly, one of these people was disabled and he was on the floor; after he had gone through the counselling, his results were given to him in the corridors when everybody was watching. People were there peeping and looking at what they had written on the paper. It is not only in Moyo Hospital that this happens. In very many of our health centres we do not have space to carry out counselling and testing.  

I want to thank the committee for coming up with the recommendationof testing pregnant mothers. Madam Speaker, you may be aware that in Uganda everyday, 65 babies are born with HIV/AIDS. As we speak of the rights of these mothers being asked to consent before they are tested, we need to think about the rights of the 65 babies who are innocent and are coming into this world and have the opportunity to live free from HIV. So, I want to thank the committee that confirmed and recommended that as we promote the PMTCT programme, we encourage this programme of testing all expectant mothers to continue. (Member timed out.)

6.04
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda guarantees, under chapter 4, the right to life.Any institution, government or individual that terminates, either intentionally or unintentionally, the life of a person, commits an offence. 

Madam Speaker, it is the duty and responsibility of Government to provide health services equally in the country. However, if you look at the way health services are distributed in the country, it is very uneven. I represent a constituency that does not have even a bicycle for an ambulance. I have islands in my constituency, and you can imagine how expectant mothers move all the way from the borders of Kenya to come and deliver so many kilometres away, where they can get access to these health services. Madam Speaker, you have visited one of the areas in my constituency, and this is Bwonda Landing Site, which is over populated. There is no health service in that place, which could show that the government is caring for these people. I want to call upon Government because this is not a courtesy but it is a duty –(Member timed out.)

6.06
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report. 

There is a very big problem of congestion in our prisons. We find many inmates sleeping in one room, which deters them from enjoying their human rights. I want to suggest, and I also want to concur with the committee recommendation, that the petty offenders should be given community service; they should not be detained in the prisons since the government lacks resources to put up enough houses for these inmates. This has been possible in many countries. They have been able to use prisoners to do community work without them staying in prisons. This has been successful in Rwanda and also in Zambia. I think we can borrow a leaf from those countries so that the human rights of the prisoners are not encroached on. 

In some districts, there are not even houses for prisons and they do not even have capacity to transfer these prisoners to where they are supposed to go. Madam Speaker – (Member timed out.)

6.08 
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for a very good and comprehensive report. As you will note, most of the areas touched cut across the mandate of the Committee on Equal Opportunities’ and in our report, we shall come up to supplement some of these issues.

I was touched by the Constitution obligation in Article 34,on the rights of the children, and I want to read it verbatim:“(1) Subject to laws enacted in their best interests, children shall have the right to know and be cared for by their parents or those entitled by law to bring them up.”

I was touched when I read in the DailyMonitor this week about a lady who was complaining about paternity care.Two men emerged and the case was taken to court and the magistrate, or the officer, in his rightful mind said both men should continue taking care of the child. I felt so bad. I tried to look for this magistrate and the woman and these men because the child must belong to one man. He then said at the time when a DNA test is carried out, then the fake father- You can imagine this child will grow up with a record that one of the parents was a fake father.

There is a lot of trauma involved in going through a DNA test. There are some cases where you find a person growing up and at the time of her wedding or his marriage, somebody comes and says, “I am the true father”. Now, I wantto see much of this being brought out- (Mr Wadri rose_) - Madam Speaker, I will accept because he was in charge of the children’s department at the Ministry of Gender.  

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, my sister, hon. Kawooya, for accepting this information. In the case that you quoted, which dismayed many of us, the rootcause was not the two gentlemen but the mother of the child who kept playing the two men.On one side, she would say it is Mr A and then on another it would be Mr B. So, the court in its own wisdom decided to say, let the two men continue to give support to this child because it is the right of the child to receive support until when the DNA results prove as to who the father of the child is. That is the information I wantto give.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you so much. Madam Speaker, it doesnot matter – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the government to respond.

6.12
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, ordinarily this report should have been handled by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs but he is unable to be here. So, I will hold brief for him. I managed to capture some of the fundamental issues, which the honourable members raised. 

I would like to join Members in thanking the committee for scrutinising the report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. In the last Parliament, reports of the Uganda Human Rights Commission were not being discussed by this House. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for making it possible for these reports to be discussed because that is what the law commands us to do as a Parliament. 

Some issues were raised to do with electoral reforms. I would like to say that Government is committed to effecting those reforms that are relevant and necessary.Definitely, before the next elections, there is every possibility that Government will bring proposals to this House for discussion and there is no reform that can be passed without the input and consideration by this House. 

I noted the point raised on persons with disabilities. I would like to share the concerns of Members about the need for persons with disabilities to access public places. It is a legitimate point. The problem is not lack of guidelines; the guidelines are actually there.The government has issued strict guidelines to people who are putting up public structures to make sure that there is provision for our sisters and brothers who are handicapped by disability. I think we should all join hands to make sure that these are implemented.

The Industrial Court is in place; the only problem is that the judges to fill it have not yet been appointed. Government has now advertised for competent Ugandans to apply and fill the position of the judges of the Industrial Court. The adverts have been run, people have applied and very soon, the Industrial Court will be filled to enforce the rights of workers. 

I would like to say that Uganda as a country is not short of labour laws. We have so many labour laws, Madam Speaker. I recall that in 2007 alone, we passed about five sets of labour laws to do with protection of workers. So, the labour laws are there and they are not a problem. I think the problem has been the absence of judges in the Industrial Court to enforce these rights and also the mechanism to have these laws implemented. But the labour laws are available and they can be accessed by Members and they fully protect the rights of workers. 

On the question of a minimum wage, I think the President was right because we have to understand that as a poor country, our biggest challenge now is to attract investment into our country.We are competing with other countries and other economies to attract as many investors as we can. So, we have got to balance between the need to protect the rights of workers’ adequate pay as well as the need to attract as many investors in Uganda. The choice is ours to fix a minimum wage by law and scare investors or leave it open, attract the investors, develop the economy and when the economy develops, we can address the question of the minimum wage. I donot think at the moment, this economy can afford to fix the minimum wage by law.

I totally welcome the recommendation of putting in place silos so that we can guarantee the right of our people to food. I also agree with Members who have raised concerns on the right to justice. I think the Committee on Human Rights together with the Ministry of Justice and Internal Affairs should intensify monitoring of prisons to make sure that innocent people are not unfairly remanded beyond hours prescribed by law or are tried and the courts pronounce themselves on their fate. This is a legitimate point. 

On the point of the right of Ugandans living abroad to vote, I donot have any objection to this. I think many countries have done it. We amended the Constitution in 2005 to introduce dual citizenship. It means that even our brothers and sisters who live abroad but with Ugandan descent are as Ugandan as we are.So, a mechanism can be worked out to enable them to vote, but this is a matter that will be discussed at the level of Cabinet and Parliament and if you agree, this can be implemented. 

I think the deaf and the blind have a right to vote.Somebody was saying that they are not allowed to vote. Perhaps, I think he was talking about the need to help them exercise their right to vote properly but they do have a right to vote. 

It is true that some donors finance the Uganda Human Rights Commission, but the Uganda government really puts a lot of money in the budget of the UHRC. It is not true that the highest percentage of the budget of the Uganda Human Rights Commission is donor-funded. It is the civil society organisations that the committee was talking about which help the commission in investigating human rights in Uganda which are entirely donor-funded. For the time being, there are no limitations on how much –(Interjection)– No, the Speaker has given me limited time; I am afraid I cannot take the information.

On the rights of children whose mothers are in prison, again I will send this recommendation to my colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs, to address. I will also forward the recommendation on people living with HIV/AIDS to the Minister of Health to address. 

Accessibility of the poor to higher education; I think Government has done its best on this. Hon. Sabiiti, the introduction of USE is one effort at helping the poor also access higher education. The sponsorship of some 4,000 students at university is an effort at helping the poor access higher education. The introduction of the students’ loan schemes is another step at helping the poor access higher education. 

The Public Order Management Bill has just been passed by this House. So, we cannot talk of amendments even before it has been assented to. I think we should be realistic and fair to what we do.We think it is really premature to open this Bill and law to amendment because it has not even been tested in the field.

Transfer of convicted offenders; I will check with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. It is true that this convention has been passed not only in Uganda but also at the African Union level, so we already have an agreement with countries like UK to transfer convicted offenders. However, I will check with the Ministry of Internal Affairs to see how far they have gone.

On the right to clean water, we must understand that these rights are only enjoyable within the resources that the country can afford. We have the right to clean water but we must also look at the budget. I would like to say that in the case of Isingiro, we have a project called the Millennium Village Project, which has contributed in helping the people in that area access water. I know that it is not enough and Government can do more – (Interjections) -   Yes, it is spreading; thank you, honourable members. So, an effort has been made which should be acknowledged.

On health, the NRM Government introduced health centres IV, III and II. These never existed in the history of Uganda. For the first time, you have a hospital at the constituency and you have a small hospital at the sub county. You have a small post where patients can access at a health centre III. So, to stand up and say that there is nothing is not being fair at all. (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for the Minister of Local Government, whom I really respect, to lie before this august House that the NRM Government has introduced hospitals up to the level of health centres II, III and IV at sub county level when most countries actually do not have health centres IV, including my own. Agago District does not even have any hospital at all! Is the minister in order to lie to this august House? 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Rt. Hon. Speaker. Hon. Adolf Mwesige is a very senior member of this House. I always proudly refer to him as my senior grandson. However, today he has behaved in the opposite. He is trying to rewind history wrongly. 

We all know that in many of our sub counties, even before NRM Government came to power there were dispensaries, which are now being called health centres III. You may talk about health centres II and I but the health centres III were a creation right from Obote 1’s administration to Amin’s administration. 

Are you in order to really mislead us by rewinding history wrongly, when we all have these things in our sub counties? Rt. Hon. Speaker, is the honourable minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: What he is saying is that the NRM Government has expanded these facilities.

MR MWESIGE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 

Finally, on petty offenders, I think this Parliament has passed a law or regulation to allow community service. The petty offenders are in most cases now sentenced to community service. So, very soon, overcrowding in prisons by petty offenders will be minimized. 

I would like to stop here. Madam Speaker and honourable members, thank you very much for your kind attention. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us get the final comments from the chair.

6.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS AFFAIRS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Thank you, Rt. Hon. Speaker and Members. I would to thank the Rt. Hon. Speaker for according the opportunity to this House to discuss this first report of the Human Rights Committee.    

I would like to thank the Members for the overwhelming support and for affirming the recommendations of the committee. I would, therefore, like to urge the Members to move these recommendations forward by holding the various Government departments responsible for implementation accountable in our various committees. I would like to request the Members to use the checklist which was recently launched by the committee. 

I would like to thank the minister for first all responding to the issues of the Members but also for the co-operation that we were accorded during the investigations on the 11th to the 14th report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission.

Madam Speaker, there are a few issues that I would want to shed light on. First of all, there was a comment from hon. Stella Namoe that the committee should have come up with a strong recommendation on teachers who take money and do not offer services. Our duty was to look at the recommendations of the Uganda Human Rights Commission and this issue did not come up. I would really urge the Member to take up the issue with the Local Government Accounts Committee.

There was another comment on inmates digging; hon. Nakabale said that Parliament should come up with a policy for the inmates to have their own gardens so that they can benefit from the food. I want highlight this and say that there is already a policy that is being used in the prisons. There are prisons farms where these inmates work.

Finally, I would like to inform the Minister about the funding of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. It is true that Government funds the Uganda Human Rights Commission up to 70 per cent, but the concern is that Government does not put money into the sensitisation activities of the commission. The enjoyment of human rights by the people of Uganda depends on the level of awareness that they have in being able to demand for their rights. So, we would like to urge Government to fund the commission 100 per cent so that tis activity as contained in the report does not depend entirely on donors.

With that, I would like to thank you Rt. Hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that for the record, we need to correct the fact that it was hon. Bbosa and not hon. Nakabale who talked about those gardens. Let that be corrected.

I also want to remind the Committee on Equal Opportunities about the Certificate of Equity. You have heard the debates today and I think you can see that it was needed yesterday. Otherwise, I would like to thank the chair very much and the committee members for this initial bulky report covering several years. I want to thank the Members for their contribution and the minister for coming in to do the needful. I now put the question that this House adopts the report of the committee.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Are you tired? Well, honourable members, you know that there are things that the Business Committee had wanted us to finish but if you are tired, we can defer them to Tuesday. Thank you, honourable members, and have a good weekend. We shall reconvene on Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. I thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.29 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 1 October 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

