

Thursday, 13 September 2018

Parliament met at 3.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I begin by apologising for the late start. I had to go to support the people of Busoga in the fourth anniversary of the coronation of the Kyabazinga. That is why I am a bit late. 

However, that reminds me of something; last evening, we had the Panel of Speakers of the City Council of Nairobi. The Speaker of the City Council of Nairobi has six other people to support him. Here, we are only two. When we tried amending the Constitution in 2005, the Government really bashed it until we failed. However, you can see that if we had a panel, I could still be dancing in Bugweri while work is going on here.

Secondly, I will amend the Order Paper to permit hon. Margaret Rwabushaija to present a petition. Otherwise, there are a few matters of national concern. 

3.32
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On 12 August 2018, during the scuffle in Arua, a certain young lady called Sauda Madada, a daughter of a former minister here, was beaten until she became unconscious. She was brought to Kiryandongo Hospital when she was still unconscious. She did not actually remember how she got there. After two days, they transferred her to Nsambya Hospital. At Nsambya Hospital, the only constant was that she was vomiting blood. 

They put her on blood transfusion but still transferred her to Platinum Hospital. At Platinum Hospital, she spent 10 days. They did the entire scan using MRI and X-ray but she still vomits blood. So, what is sustaining her is daily blood transfusion because whatever blood that goes in, comes out. 

Right now, Platinum Hospital transferred her yet again to Rubaga Hospital. Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, because there is lack of diagnosis, it is well-wishers who are funding her treatment. I would like to bring to the attention of this House and Government that the life of this young lady is in danger. I think she needs referral for maybe treatment abroad for the right diagnosis. Also, Government needs to meet the cost of the escalating medical bills.

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, the honourable colleagues who were in the same situation are not in the country. I am praying to this House, through you, Madam Speaker, that Government interests itself in this case. The case of Sauda Madada is no longer a private citizen’s case.

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business is not here but I would like to task the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to investigate this issue and give us an update next week on what you are doing about Sauda Madada. Thank you.

3.36
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue of national importance is the failure by Government to compensate the air raid victims of Ojapi Parish. On 20 September 1991, there were two unknown planes that bombarded Ojapi Parish in Tara Sub-county, Maracha District. As a result, Ojapi Primary School, a church premise around the area and homes of individuals were destroyed. 

Also, during that time, there were two deaths that were registered; one child and one pregnant woman. There were people who were grossly injured and some of them were amputated. Animals were lost; 21 sheep and four cows. A school library and six staff houses, four church teachers’ houses as well as eight houses belonging to individuals were all destroyed during that time.

Madam Speaker, the issue was brought to the attention of the Government and the President visited the site together with other Government officials. The Government had promised they would carry out investigations to establish the cause and origin of these planes. Also, Government promised to compensate the victims for what was lost. Similarly, Government promised to provide free education to the victims and give relief to those who were affected.

However, Madam Speaker, none of these has been done so far. In June 2016, as I was following up the matter, this – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Just say your prayers in half a minute.

MS AYAKA: Thank you. Now, my prayer is that Government takes up this matter urgently because it is 27 years down the road. The people are feeling neglected and devastated. I went to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Office of the Prime Minister in a bid to follow up but, so far, nothing has happened. 

I pray that Government takes this as a very urgent matter and have these people compensated and rehabilitated. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, that issue is multifaceted; it concerns the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Education and the Office of the Prime Minister as the supervisor. I would like to direct the Office of the Prime Minister to come back to us in three weeks’ time to tell us how far they have gone with this issue that has taken very long.

So, let us give the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business three weeks to dig up this issue and come and report to this House so that the people of Ojapi Parish can have closure.
	
3.39
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last Sunday evening and Monday morning, there were heavy rains in my constituency. These rains came with a lot of wind and hailstorms. In particular, one sub-county of Rwentuha was hit so bad that food crops and houses were destroyed, including schools. A number of people were left without shelter.

An assessment by our sub-county agricultural officer indicates that a number of people may go without food for some time. My biggest worry is that this has happened before in my constituency. I approached the office of the Prime Minister but the ministries concerned have not been helpful; that is why I decided to raise it on the Floor of Parliament hoping that this time there will be help. Thank you.

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, and honourable colleagues, we would like to sympathise with the honourable member and people who have been affected. However, I request Members that as soon as these things happen, let us know because the Office of the Prime Minister will be able to do something about it.

Madam Speaker, under your leadership, we appropriated Shs 66 billion under the contingency fund to cater for all these emergencies. Members should not feel constrained to report these cases as and when they happen.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, especially for the contingency fund; it was always a bone of contention here. Yesterday, we asked the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to look at the situation in Kamwenge and Kyaka is also part of greater Tooro; let him report on both when he comes back.

3.41
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the violation of rights of people of Nwoya District by a Chinese company. The road from Olwiyo to Gulu and Kitgum is under construction by a Chinese Company called Zhong Mei. 

In the past three weeks, this company emptied their sewers and poured the sewage into the water. Efforts by authorities to have this company treat their waste and help the community have been fruitless. They are very adamant and do not listen to the district and sub-county leadership.

They even use vehicles in dangerous mechanical condition that drive at night without lights and have caused deaths of many people. 

On this same case of dumping sewage in water, the district water officers tested the water and found it contaminated. They were asked to treat it and give an alternative water source to the community but they refused. 

This morning the angry community mobilised and wanted to set ablaze the camp of the Chinese company which is about 25 kilometres from Gulu to Anaka.

As I speak now, efforts by the sub-county leadership to mediate between the community and the company have borne no fruits because the Chinese refused to heed - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Just half a minute for your prayers.

MS ADONG: Madam Speaker, I request the Ministry of Health to make sure that the health status of the community is verified. The Ministry of Works should supervise these companies they send to the communities.

They should not be allowed to settle deep in the villages without infrastructure that can handle their needs like sewers. People have vowed to burn up the camp tomorrow if they do not heed. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Health has heard; I am asking her to take interest in the health of the people. I don’t know whether you would like to say something now.

The Minister of Works and the supervisors should be able to mediate between the constructors and the people of Uganda. 

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, it is terrible to hear such statements coming from Nwoya District and matters of sewage should be handled very carefully, especially in this rainy season. We are going to follow up the matter in order to do whatever we can within our means. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works should come back and report what measures they have taken in managing and supervising the conduct of these companies amongst our people. 

3.45
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance - particularly about two of them. This Parliament appropriated funds for the elections in the new districts of Nabilatuk, Bugweri, Kassanda, Kwania, Kapelebyong and Kikuube, among others, including town councils and sub-counties across the whole nation. 

There has not been any roadmap given to us; the people in the local council areas named are not being represented in this Parliament. If a Member of Parliament were from Mityana, she would have to concentrate on the area which has been left for her.

We would like to know from the Minister of Justice what has caused the delay in conducting the elections in the said districts.

In addition, this Parliament appropriated about Shs 20.6 billion for the new sub-counties and town councils but the Ministry of Local Government has only been given Shs 5 billion. May we know from the Minister of Finance what is causing this anxiety and delay?
 
Secondly, this Parliament in May 2018, made a recommendation which was adopted – that pre-entry examinations are abolished. In August this very year, several law students were subjected to the same; we appropriated Shs 1 billion for the Law Development Centre to operate another branch in Mbarara. They were ready for 1,200 students but the law council has only pushed 600; this is going to cause an audit query.

The minister consented to policy shift because pre-entry exam was not a creation of any law here but some statutory instrument; it is just a policy.

May we know from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs why the change in policy has not been effected even when Parliament provided for funds for the increment of students’ intake in the two LDC campuses?

The next financial year will either be in eastern Uganda and the following financial year will be in northern Uganda. Pre-entry exam is a matter of national importance. Many students and parents have called me as the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs asking that Parliament obtains a response from the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we direct the Minister of Justice to come and give us a roadmap for the newly established districts, town councils and municipalities.

As you know when a new district is announced, people start organising themselves and spending money; the longer it takes, the harder it becomes on their side.

And the people who are in the new districts and new administration units need to know their leaders.

The same Minister of Justice should respond on the issue of the Law Development Centre (LDC) pre-entry examination. 

3.50 
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here on a matter of national importance and this is about the outbreak of anthrax disease in Arua District. It has also threatened other West Nile districts like Yumbe, Nebbi, Moyo and other areas like Rigbo, Rhino Camp, Uriama; Odupi, Pawor and Imvepi among others. 

Madam Speaker, anthrax is a life-threatening infectious disease caused by Bacillus Anthracis that normally affects animals especially ruminants such as goats, cattle, sheep and so on. Anthrax can be transmitted to humans by contact with infected animals or their products. 

Right now, more than 1,087 animals have so far died and 28 people infected. Out of these, two people have died of recent. The blood tests carried out by the Uganda Virus Research Institute in Entebbe have confirmed the outbreak of this disease. That has led to the decline of the social and economic livelihood of the people of West Nile.

My prayers are;
    1. May the officials from the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries visit Arua District to get the detail for themselves.
    2. More laboratory tests should be carried out by these two ministries.
    3. Vaccinations of all the animals in the affected areas should be carried out.
    4. People should be discouraged from – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we invite the ministers from the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come with a joint statement after visiting Arua so that they tell us the impact on the other communities and their plans to combat the outbreak of anthrax. Can they come back to us next week?

3.52
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning security. 

Three months ago, while I was in my constituency for a function, some two crime preventers attempted to unscrew my tyre. One of them was arrested by residents. When we went and reported at the Police, the suspect told us that it was the District Internal Security Officer (DISO) who asked him to do that. He was released so I did not take it seriously but I reported at the Police in Buhweju. 

Yesterday, when I left Parliament, I went to Uganda Management Institute (UMI) where I am studying. After UMI, I went and stopped at Bukoto, I bought a few things from the supermarket and as I was going home, I noticed people following me. 

When we reached Kyanja, I asked the driver to rotate the roundabout about three times. They were still following us so we sped off towards our home on Gayaza Road. I asked him to stop instantly and they turned to where he was going. We came back to town and I went home using an Uber taxi. 

Madam Speaker, this is not about –(Member timed out) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MR MWIJUKYE: My concern is not just because I am the one being followed but that insecurity is increasing in the country and I think we or the responsible ministers need to do something about it. I can come and speak here in Parliament but I am sure there are people who cannot speak for themselves. I think we need to see what we can do as leaders otherwise this is very bad for the country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, we asked the Minister of Security to come and support hon. Nzoghu who had the same issues. We ask him to also take interest in hon. Mwijukye’s case and other members who may be affected and come back to give us a report.

3.55
MR KAPS FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I salute all of you, honourable members. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. It is a matter to do with cyber security. This is to do with the security of your communication systems; telephones, internet et cetera.

Madam Speaker, I have realised that there are a lot of problems beginning with myself, tampering with communication systems and my computer in the office. When I return to my office, I find that somebody has been there tampering with my computer and changing passwords –

THE SPEAKER: How do they get in?

MR FUNGAROO: I do not know how it happens. Let me first bring this to you. This is where the prayer is going to end. 

I also discovered that honourable members have ever experienced issues of hacking into their communications. I have received communication from my supposed colleagues that so and so is in problems and needs help from me. When I tried to check if this person really needed help, I discovered the person is here and not in danger, which means somebody used his line of communication to communicate to me on his behalf. I do not know if honourable members have not got this kind of mails or calls. 

Members here may not know that I brought issue of swapping phones to your office – to Deputy Speaker Jacob Oulanyah. They use my phone to make – (Member timed out.) 

This is important for you. 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MR FUNGAROO: They removed money from my account to the tune of Shs 120 million. When I came to Parliament, I reported to the Office of the Speaker and we followed up this issue to the bank. We discovered that it was connivance between the bank and MTN because the line I was using was for MTN and I was using Equity Bank. The bank accepted to pay but the problem is – 

THE SPEAKER: Can you make your prayers?

MR FUNGAROO: My prayer is that; 
    1. We need guarantee from Parliament about the safety of our communication systems.
    2. Parliament has given us iPads, which are supposed to be used for all kinds of communications. Today, it is hard for members of Parliament and particularly myself to use my iPad for communication using Twitter and other social media systems because Parliament has not paid OTT Tax. Parliament cannot pay and I cannot even when I want to.

There is a problem with the contract between the Parliamentary Commission and the service provider for the communication system, which we use on our iPads. Communication is very important to save even lives of people like these who are followed. You could have twitted using your iPad to save your life. How do we contract –

THE SPEAKER: Can you make your prayers, honourable member?

MR FUNGAROO: My prayer is that Parliament should make sure that the company that has been contracted to provide communication services using our iPads allows us to use the social media as we should have used with our other private systems because it is very important to us. We cannot pay – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will be asking the minister to say something and the Minister of Internal Affairs will come back to us with an interim statement. 

However, before we do that, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Kortek Junior Academy represented by hon. Reuben Chelimo and hon. Evelyn Chemutai. They are here to observe the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

On this side, join me in welcoming the organising committee of the Basamia Bagwe Marathon 2018 Project. They are supporting maternal health in Busia and Namayingo districts. They are represented by hon. Julius Maganda and hon. Jane Nabulindo. Please stand up. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have in the Public Gallery, pupils and teachers of Aunt Jolly Primary School. They are from Rukungiri, represented by hon. Paula Turyahikayo and hon. Betty Bamukwatsa. Where are they? When they arrive, please let me know.

We also have young people from West Lango Diocese. They are represented by hon. Tonny Ayoo and hon. Betty Engola. You are welcome. (Applause) 

Can I now ask the Minister of Health to briefly speak on one of the issues which has been raised?

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the House that this year we have had anthrax outbreaks in various districts. The first outbreak was in February. We then had in Kween, then in Kiruhura and now in Arua and others. 

As Ministry of Health, we have been sending the necessary treatment for the anthrax and we have a national taskforce that was put into place jointly with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

Just to inform the House, the taskforce actually recommended the procurement of vaccines because that is the only way to go for these animals and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is handling that aspect. 

Otherwise, from the health side, the medications – the antibiotics which are used for treatment are available in the districts and we are going on with sensitising the communities – especially those who are slaughtering these animals to wear protective gear. 

The populations should not eat meat because when these cows die, some people actually eat them and that is where they sometimes get the problem. We are also continuing with sensitisation to encourage the populations to bury these animals and not eat them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Minister of Internal Aaffairs to make his brief statement and then minister of finance?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, last Tuesday, Parliament directed us to make a statement and we undertook to make a statement today on the issue of the murder of ASP Muhammad Kirumira and Resty Mbabazi Nalinya.

When we brought the statement to the Clerk this morning at around 11.00 a.m. the Order Paper had been issued. I undertook that I would consult you and you would be able to allow us space. 

I would like to thank you for allowing us this space to make this statement. My only problem is, I do not know whether the Clerk has uploaded the statement on the Member’s iPads. If I could confirm that, then I would be able to proceed –(Interjections)– thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, on 8 September 2018 at about 20:18 hours at Mile Eight junction, at Bulenga "A" Zone, Musoke Road along Mityana highway, Wakiso District, ASP Muhammad Kirumira, a police officer and a female colleague, Ms Resty Mbabazi alias Nalinya were shot dead by unidentified men/persons. The unknown persons had covered their heads with hoods and were travelling on two numberless motorcycles, according to the information from eyewitnesses.

The deceased persons who were in motor vehicle registration number UAJ 228V Toyota Corona, grey in colour, were approached from behind their vehicle by the criminals who parked opposite them and shot at their vehicle several times, killing them and thereafter riding off towards Mityana Town.

Some boda-boda cyclists, who were around, initially got scared by the shooting, but later got courage and tried to chase the thugs but they could not catch up with them, as the criminals kept firing in the air to scare the people.

Findings so far

As I have said, the deceased persons were shot by unknown persons who were travelling on two numberless motorcycles and, according to information, armed with two guns.

The unknown suspects, immediately after the act of murder, boarded their motorcycles and left the scene and rode towards Bulaga along Mityana Road, then disappeared.

Exhibits were recovered from the crime scene which included; cartridges, heads of projectiles and blood samples. These have been sent for investigations.

Investigations

The police are investigating the murder of the two, as a criminal act to establish the motive and apprehend those responsible. No arrests have so far been made, but some suspects are being questioned by the police investigating team.

In this regard, the Police appeals to the public and any eye witnesses who may have useful information to pass it over to the nearest security forces especially the police and the CID who are leading the investigations.

All this information will be analysed for the next appropriate action to be taken by the Police and the security authorities. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was a request just for your information. I believe that a debate on this issue may prejudice the investigations. It is for information. Let us allow the Police to conduct investigations. If there are Members here who have information relevant to this issue, take it there. It is sub judice. Thank you. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY HONOURABLE RWABUSHAIJA MARGARET, WORKERS’ MP

4.09
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a petition under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The humble petition of persons recruited by Saracen Uganda Ltd to work for SOC, an American company, in the US Embassy in Baghdad.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, please take your seat. Don’t you want her to speak? 

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Madam Speaker, 

The Humble Petition of persons recruited by Saracen Uganda Ltd to work for SOC, an American company, in the US Embassy in Baghdad and they are present in the gallery.

STATES That:

    1. Your petitioners’ complaint is against the unfair treatment, torture and non-payment of their salaries earned when they worked as armed guards for an American company known as SOC after they were recruited locally here;

    2. The petitioners underwent all the required procedures and they were employed but their employment was abruptly and rudely terminated on 7 September 2017 when they were found in a meeting intended among themselves to discuss issues affecting their employment, which they would subsequently submit to their employer for consideration;

    3. The petitioners were not paid for the month when they were undergoing a guard force basic course at Amman in Jordan and were denied leave for the entire period of their service;

    4. The petitioners were not paid salaries for the months of August and September 20I7, yet the agreement provided that they were entitled to be paid for their services monthly;

THEREFORE, your humble petitioners pray that:

    a) Parliament intervenes in their plight and ensures that they obtain what was due to them arising from their employment as armed guards in the US Embassy in Baghdad.

    b) Parliament intervenes in the plight of the Ugandans who are recruited by local employment companies to work abroad and are subjected to exploitation and inhuman treatment by their foreign employers.

AND your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.

And hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.

I beg to lay the petition at the Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of employment outside Uganda is supervised by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I direct that the petition be sent to the ministry so that they tell us what they have done before we delve into it.
(Mr Fungaroo rose_) Take your seat.

Honourable members, when you raise a matter of national concern, it is not an occasion to show how much you know. You come here to make specific prayers. That is the problem I have with you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SDR 145.9 MILLION ($200 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO SUPPORT THE UGANDA INTERGOVERNMENTAL FISCAL TRANSFERS PROGRAMME (UgIFT) FOR RESULTS

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table a request by Government to borrow up to $200 million, equivalent to SDR 145.9 million, from the International Development Association of the World Bank to support the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers programme for results.

Madam Speaker, I would like to note the –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, from Tuesday up to now, we have been receiving here requests for loans. Is it in order for the minister to make it a daily business to borrow? We are borrowing during every sitting. Are you not going to scare the citizens of this country? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today, the minister presents and it goes to the committee. If you want to reject, you bring a report and say, “we reject it.” Take the Floor.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I would like to record on the Hansard that there are two areas we are fine-tuning regarding this request. We are fine-tuning the number of schools and health centres that are going to be supported. It is going be discussed at Cabinet next week and we shall discuss with the committee when we appear before it.

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying you are going to amend the request?

MR BAHATI: No, we are not amending the request. It is to do with details of the schools.

THE SPEAKER: I see. The request is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. 

Honourable members, I think the minister wants to give information to Members about this loan.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I would like the whole House to understand this process and I would like to thank you for giving me this one minute to clarify on this. 

Colleagues, you recall that when we came here with the budget in April – which you debated and passed at the end of May and it was read in June – it had two sides. One side was the source of revenue to finance the budget and the other was the expenditure side. The revenue side had the tax revenue, non-tax revenue, appropriation in aid, grants and loans. 

Therefore, the figure that you approved, which is approximately Shs 7 trillion, was to be got from borrowing. Our Constitution dictates that every single loan comes here for approval. While you approved the broad figure of Shs 7 trillion, the individual project request must come here and be approved by Parliament. 

When we come here, we are not adding on top of what you approved but actually we are requesting, in bits, the amount of money that you have already appropriated. Therefore, when we come, you have to bear with us and this is not the last day. (Laughter) We will come even on Tuesday because we must fulfill what you have already appropriated. 

Therefore, I wanted to let people know that the loans that we are bringing here are part and parcel of what you have already appropriated and that is the process of this House.

However, in Kenya, for example, Madam Speaker, their Constitution dictates that Parliament gives permission on a certain amount or figure for Government to go and borrow. For example, they can say, “this year, you are borrowing Shs 2 billion” and they will not follow the Executive. However, for us here, you give us that permission but at the same time, the Constitution requires that for every individual loan, we must come here. 

Therefore, we have to bear with this process, unfortunately. Fortunately, however, it is to finance our budget. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item 4 - (Mr Ssekikubo rose_) - are you a Parliamentary Commissioner? (Laughter)

LAYING OF PAPERS

AN ASSESSMENT OF THE COMPATIBILITY OF UGANDA LEGISLATION WITH THE CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD (CRC)

4.19
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a report on “An Assessment of the Compatibility of Uganda’s Legislation with the Convention on the Rights of the Child.” I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the assessment is sent to the Committee on Human Rights for perusal and report back. We look forward to hearing from you in the Second Meeting of the Third Session, which is about reports and agencies.


QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 02/01/10 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

THE SPEAKER: Has hon. Denis Obua delegated anyone? Is the Minister of Works and Transport here? When the minister arrives, I will invite you, hon. Ssekikubo. We will defer item No.5 until the Minister of Works and Transport comes. Item No.6 is the Prime Minister’s Question Time - Let us go to item No. 7.
	
MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, you made a commitment to this Parliament and we waited for your arrival, and indeed Parliament has been able to sit. A set of items was placed on the Order Paper with the full knowledge of the ministers and they committed to be here. Our Rules of Procedure provide that on Thursday, we have Prime Minister’s Question Time, but no senior member of the Cabinet is around. The Prime Minister knows very well that this is the time for the Executive to communicate not only to Parliament but to the country, but he chooses to be away without any explanation. 

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Front Bench to treat matters of public importance in such a haphazard manner and render this Parliament lame? We cannot proceed now. We cannot tell the country that we cannot do our legislative role. If the Government, with 87 ministers on the Front Bench, has failed to process work for this House to consider and to serve this country, are we proceeding rightly?

THE SPEAKER: You know, when we adjourned last week, we said we were going to continue sitting this week. I know that in many ministries, there is more than one minister. In the Office of the Prime Minister, there are two Deputy Prime Ministers. I think it is a high level of discourtesy to this House. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, we may not be aware if there has been a reshuffle and the ones in front are the only ones who have - (Laughter). I say that because this is unusual. We might be here and there has been a reshuffle and we do not have a Prime Minister. It cannot be a coincidence that there is no senior minister here. There could be a reshuffle and we need to know.

MR DAVID BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have just spoken with the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. He said he wrote to you asking for permission because for three days, we have been at a Government review retreat. Today, we had a budget conference. Therefore, both the Prime Minister and the First Deputy Prime Minister are engaged. Actually, the First Deputy Prime Minister is representing the Vice President who is also representing the President at another function. (Laughter)

What I am saying here is that the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business wrote asking for permission because he would not be able to make it today. However, I would like to assure this House that Government is really represented here and all the decisions required to be made in this House at this moment will be taken. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, even if there are other activities of the Government going on, this is only 45 minutes. He could have excused himself from the meeting, come here and then gone back to his other business. They are not in Entebbe; they are at Kampala Serena, here in the neighbourhood.  

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. On the Order Paper today, there are questions for oral answer and one of the questions is mine. I wrote that question and presented it on 18 March 2018. This is the first time it is coming on the Order Paper but the person to answer it is not here. Therefore, are we proceeding rightly? This is not even motivating; it is very disappointing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just would like to remind the Government that Thursday is the day for Members’ questions. It is in our Rules of Procedure and it is well known. Can’t the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development enable one of the ministers in charge of works and transport to come so that we answer these questions today? 
In the meantime, let us go to the Mental Health Bill, 2014. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE MENTAL HEALTH BILL, 2014

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday, we were dealing with clause 2 - the interpretation section. There are areas we wanted to amend and the minister was supposed to come back and make proposals for changes. After that, we shall go to the title and conclude with the Bill.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We had two issues. One was to define “dependants” and we propose as follows: 

“A dependant includes - 
(a) 	a wife, husband, son or daughter under 18 years of age, or a son or daughter of or above 18 years of age who is wholly or substantially dependent on the person with mental illness. 

(b) 	a parent, a brother or sister, a grandparent or grandchild who is wholly or substantially dependent on the person with mental illness for the provision of ordinary necessities of life suitable to a person of his or her situation, or any other person who is wholly or substantially dependent on the person with mental illness.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is new proposal, which was not in the old law. The question is that that amendment be made to the interpretation clause. We shall take a vote on it when we receive the second one as well.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, the other one is the definition of a local authority: “‘local authority’ includes a community leader, a chief, an officer or member of a political, technical or administrative structure of a local government, a police officer, a religious leader, a non-governmental organisation or any other person of influence in a community.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have the proposal.

MR AOGON: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am comfortable with all the local authorities mentioned except Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs). We need to think about that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We were talking about a person who has either been released and has nowhere to go or someone who is just moving around. Someone in the community should have the responsibility to report that this person is in a certain place. It is about follow-up. In case they walk into the NGO’s buildings, let us allow them to inform us about it.

MR AOGON: It is okay, Madam Chairperson, since it is about somebody who has already attained treatment. I think we can go with that.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, in that respect, I believe that the proper definition should not be of a local leader but maybe a person in authority, because you are bringing in a police officer who is defined under another Act and a leader of a political party who is defined under the Political Parties and Organisations Act. We would rather use the words “person in authority” to include all those categories.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, do you have an objection to that?

MS OPENDI: We would have no an objection to that; it is okay. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Should we substitute the definition of the word “local authority” with “person in authority” to encompass all these different leaders?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On the definition of dependants, can we be specific and include an adopted child other than generalising. When the minister was reading, she did not mention adopted children. Someone can adopt a child from anywhere. Therefore, to avoid generalising by referring to anybody dependant on that particular person, let us include the words “adopted child”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In our society, do we really differentiate our children by saying, “this one is biological and this one is adopted”? Are we getting spoilt? I thought that we still have the community spirit.

MR OBOTH: The honourable member was trying to think aloud but once a child is adopted, it becomes a child both in law and in fact. I do not know about Amuru and Apaa land conflict, but an adopted child is a child in that home. Therefore, when you provide a definition, it covers whoever is referred to as a child in that family. When you go into defining an adopted child, you will also go into defining an illegitimate child. Children are children; there is no illegitimate child or a child out of wedlock.

MS OPENDI: On page 24 of the report, the committee proposed a definition of assisted treatment and care. We would like to amend the proposal of the committee with the following: “assisted treatment and care means the provision of health interventions to people who present themselves voluntarily to a health unit or mental health unit but are incapable of making informed decisions due to their mental health status especially during episodes of mental illness”. So, between the words, “people” and “incapable”, we are inserting “who present themselves voluntarily to a health unit or mental health unit but are…”

The justification is: To differentiate between the assisted procedure and the involuntary procedure. 

The second amendment is on the community mental health services. We would like it to state as follows: “Community mental health services refer to a system of care in which the community members, in collaboration with health workers, are the primary providers of the interventions to promote mental wellbeing of a person or persons.”

Madam Chairperson, the last amendment is on the definition of mental health services: “Mental health services refers to interventions provided to promote emotional, psychological and cognitive wellbeing of a person.” Once we have inserted this, then it accommodates yesterday’s proposals made by hon. Anywarach. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it in addition to what was proposed? 

MS OPENDI: Yes, we are simply trying to improve the definition of mental health services. We are adding the phrase, “interventions provided to promote emotional, psychological and cognitive wellbeing of a person.” These rest of the definition continues. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, we are making laws. For purposes of consistency, in the earlier presentation we talked about “people who present themselves voluntarily”. After that, you used the words, “a person or persons”. I thought if it is agreeable to us, let us be consistent and we use the words, “a person or persons” throughout.
 
MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, we have no objection to that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Our legal officers are directed to address that issue wherever it occurs and synchronise.
 
Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as variously proposed.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

MS NAUWAT: Madam Chairperson, yesterday the committee made an amendment to clause 37 and I had tried to make an observation, which you said would come later. This is about the arrangement of clauses. I wish to propose an amendment to that effect.

Under clause 37, the headnote reads, “Non-discrimination of persons with mental illness prohibited”. However, the amendment that was made reads, “Non-discrimination of persons with mental illness.” This is just for uniformity, so that the clause here conforms to the clause in the body of the Bill. I beg to submit.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, we have no objection to that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. On that note, honourable members, I now put the question that the entire of clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.
	
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 37, as amended, do stand part of the Bill

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, we had added the word “treatment” - mental health and treatment.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I think that was a proposal, which we had not yet debated. Maybe you can open it to Members for debate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think there was a feeling that the word “treatment” needed to be added to the title because many areas were about treatment. We had already debated it. That is why we said that we shall amend the title. Do you have a problem with that?

MR ANYWARACH: Because of the contents of the Bill, which is about treatment, we were of the opinion that the title be amended to read, “The Mental Treatment Bill,” which when passed into law would read, “The Mental Treatment Act”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We had proposed “The Mental Health and Treatment Bill.”

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, the problem with mentioning “mental health” would be that we did not look at mental health to include basic mental health services. The whole thing is about treatment. In a nutshell, we have improved the Mental Treatment Act of 1964.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that different from the Mental Health Act? Is there actually a mental treatment Act, which is different from what we are addressing now?

MR ANYWARACH: If it involved preventive measures as well, then it would be “the Mental Health Act.” However, it is about treatment and this can be seen right from the object of the Bill. If you read the long title of the Bill, it just speaks for itself. In law they say, res ipsa loquitur, meaning the facts speak for themselves. It is about treatment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you are the owner of this Bill, what do say?

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, when you talk about health, it involves treatment as well. To us, if we added the word “treatment”, it would be redundant. With the phrase, “mental health”, we are talking generally about the promotion – (Interjections) - No, we have just made an amendment; you came in late. 

To us, “health” encompasses all these interventions - the treatment and everything. We therefore propose that the Bill remains “the Mental Health Bill”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.
	
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, I would like to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clause 2 of the Mental Health Bill and approved it with amendments. I beg to move. 

            MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
 THIRD READING

THE MENTAL HEALTH BILL, 2014
              
4.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Mental Health Bill, 2014” be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Mental Health Bill, 2014 be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE MENTAL HEALTH ACT, 2018.”

THE SPEAKER: The title is settled and Bill passed. 

Honourable members, I would like to thank you. However, it should be not the norm that a Bill takes four years. This is not good for the country. I think in future, we should try to work expeditiously. Anyhow, congratulations to the minister, the chairperson of the committee and the House. (Applause)

Honourable members, it appears we have completed the items that we could handle on the Order Paper. Thank you very much for your cooperation. We shall reconvene on Tuesday.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that the House is still very ready to continue with business. (Laughter)
A while ago, the honourable minister of state for finance, the hon. David Bahati, assured this House that he was going to make very important calls. However, when he came back, he just fizzled out in his seat. He has not told us what became of the calls he went to make. Without him specifically apologizing to this House, can we just leave it at that?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe let us ask him. Honourable minister, you are back, what are your findings? (Laughter)

4.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I got in touch with the Minister of Works and Transport. She is a distance away in her office. If she is to come here, we will hold the Parliament for another 15 to 20 minutes. She apologises for not making it in time. 

I also want to apologise, on behalf of Government, for this way of handling business. We promise that beginning with Tuesday, we will ensure that all ministers who appear on the Order Paper are here physically and all the ministries will be represented in the House. So, in case there are any questions, the ministers responsible will be able to answer. Thank you.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a procedural issue. 

In Kanungu, we have serious debts regarding tea seedlings. Today, one of the ladies was taken to court because of a debt she has with Centenary Bank. This is a serious issue. I thought that maybe I would get one of the ministers here to respond on how far they have gone in looking for that money to pay our people – the tea money which has remained pending for years. I do not know what I will tell the people of Kanungu. It is very unfortunate. People are being taken to court by Centenary Bank because of the debts they got when they were preparing those tea seedlings. It is a very big issue.

I wish to request you, Madam Speaker, to direct that on Tuesday, when these ministers will be here, the responsible minister comes with a report on that issue because my people are being taken to prison on a daily basis. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this issue of the tea farmers in Kanungu and those in Kigezi has become recurrent. When are we going to get answers?

5.54
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, this is the situation on tea: We budgeted for this money. The National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) has the money to pay people who supplied the seedlings. The information they gave us is that they have been doing verification, which ended a month ago. 

All of us are affected by this issue. I think the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should come here on Tuesday and inform the House on how far they have gone because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did appropriate the money. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has the money. They have finished verification and we advised them to pay the people already verified. However, we continue to get this complaint every other day. Therefore, I think the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should come and inform the whole country why he has not paid these people who were verified when he has the money.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am surprised that despite the fact that we have gone digital for more than seven years now, we are still verifying issues locally by counting and looking at the people. How can we continue impoverishing our people in the name of verification? What are we verifying?

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, maybe that verification has taken place in Kabale but in Kanungu, they promised to come and verify again but they have not yet come back. That is why we are very worried. I do not understand that verification exercise. We really need to do something. 

There are many ladies who got involved in making these seedling gardens to get some money. Now to hear that a woman has slept in prison because of a debt from Centenary Bank money when actually it is the Government that is delaying to pay her is unfortunate.

THE SPEAKER: This is very important. We say we are an agricultural country and we encourage our farmers but they go into debt because of our policies. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries must come here on Tuesday and explain to us how he is going to solve the issue of these tea farmers. 

MR JACOB OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I do not come from Kigezi but I know a lot about the tea business in Kigezi. What is causing all the problems there is the role of the middlemen. The actual tea farmers have no problem; the list is known per subcounty. However, the issue is with the middlemen who are getting a difference between the actual price at which they supply to NAADS and the price they are giving the farmers. That is why the prices have been hiked. 

I am privileged, in my other position, to know what is going on there. If the truth will be spoken, the common person is suffering because of the role of the middlemen. Hon. Bahati knows some of the middlemen. I also know some. The issue is that they fear to expose them so that they can let the money to go from NAADS directly to the farmers. When NAADS is paying money, they have to pay these middlemen, who first deducted administrative costs, transport and the like. That is the truth there. I know it particularly from Kanungu under a very privileged position.

THE SPEAKER: It is very interesting that Government removed the Produce Marketing Board and introduced middlemen. So, what difference is there? Anyway, we want answers next week.

Honourable members, earlier I had introduced, in their absence, pupils and teachers from Aunt Jolly Primary School in Rukungiri. They are now here. They are represented by hon. Paula Turyahikayo and hon. Betty Muzanira. You are welcome. (Applause) Honourable members, the House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.  

(The House rose at 4.59 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 18 September 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

