
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 8 September 2021

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I had a lot of visits from Members of Parliament who had urgent matters and some who did not - who have been advised to take the other processes in the Rules of Procedure to deal with those matters. 

However, I have Members who have fairly urgent matters that should be raised now. There will be no much communication from the Chair today. Can I have the Member for Busiro South? He is not here. Member for Alebtong District? 

2.15
MS ACEN DORCAS (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise an urgent matter of national concern from Alebtong District –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Procedure?

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have two Members of Parliament, namely; hon. Allan Ssewanyana and hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya, who were both arrested, charged and sent to prison.

Mr Speaker, this is a matter that touches our own privileges and protection as Members of Parliament. The procedural issue I am raising is whether – traditionally it is done - this matter is not one of those on which you need, as the leader of this institution, to brief Members of Parliament and whether this institution - the employer of these two Members of Parliament - is taking any steps to offer them any help that they may need, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true that the two Members mentioned have gone through those processes; they have been taken into custody and I think charges were preferred against them. My latest understanding is that they have been remanded.

The processes of parliamentary privileges have limitations as well. It is not an open cheque that, once you become a Member of Parliament, therefore, you can engage in any act; there are limitations to those privileges. The privileges that I understand very well are those that protect free speech and actions taken in the Chamber of this Parliament. If you should go and do things contrary to the law in some other place or insult somebody in some other place, you could be immediately taken from there, without any recourse to anybody.

Therefore, the privileges - we should understand we enjoy them to give us the right and the freedom to speak freely about what affects our people. That is why we have those privileges.

When a Member of this House has found or has been alleged to have found himself in conflict with the law, there are procedures that are followed. 

One of them, and the most important, is that if charges are going to be preferred or an arrest warrant is going to be executed, the Speaker must be given notice. Actually, the warrants or whatever they are, are first brought to the Speaker. In this case, it was brought to the Deputy Speaker, who courteously called the two Members, had a meeting with them and even talked about choices of lawyers, which is not what the Speaker was required to do. She said, “Go and deal with the situation. These matters have been brought to my attention. Here you are. Best of luck.”

Once those processes have started taking place and they are moving on, we cannot interfere, as Parliament. There may be evidence or it might not be there. If there is evidence, they will produce them in court. If there is no evidence, they will not be able to produce them in court and the case will collapse on its own weight. 

So, are there any steps being taken by Parliament? The only steps that could be taken is to update you that, “Today they have done this and that”, which I think would not be part of what the Speaker should be doing in this House because these people are in custody; we know where they are. 

I am personally going to find time to go and see them wherever they are and have a chat with them. So, Members can go but it should not be the thing of the House to update that: “Today they slept very well or tomorrow…” No, please. I think we would be taking it a bit far. For now, let us leave it like that. 

As Members, we know they are there and we are concerned. If there are no charges or if the charges are not grounded, we will also find occasion to deal with that. However, for now, let us respect the court processes and our internal procedures in Parliament. Thank you.

MS ACEN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I had mentioned at the beginning, I am up to raise an urgent matter of national importance from Alebtong District. This is about the frequency and severity of fatalities and damages caused by lightning as a result of the heavy rains during this period.

Just about two days ago, we had a funeral service of five people who perished in one household - and that incident happened last Wednesday. This was not the first time we were having these fatal occurrences. 

In the recent past, we have had similar occurrences within subcounties of Omoro, Aloi and Abako. Looking at the trend, it looks like there are areas or sub-counties which are very prone to lightning. We are looking at the kind of fatalities and wondering.

In some of the incidents, like one which happened previously in Omoro, it struck 15 farmers who were having a meeting at the subcounty headquarters. We are left wondering what could be the fatality rates if this happened within a school setting, with thousands of pupils.

My prayer is to urgently urge the Government, especially the Office of the Prime Minister - the department of disaster risk and management - to support us with conducting hazard risks and vulnerability mapping to be able to come up with recommendations that can support planning so as to aid a contiguous plan to support this community. 

Also, the Government should explore possibilities of installing lightning arresters to prone areas, particularly the subcounty headquarters and schools. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we have a response from the Government?

2.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know if it would offend the rules. The Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees in a few minutes will be here. There is a colleague who also told me that he has an issue. I propose that when he comes, he addresses the two issues. However, my colleague here has information, Mr Speaker.

MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Thank you, Government Chief Whip, for giving way. Mr Speaker, we sympathise with the colleague from Alebtong. Indeed, whenever the rains come, these are the occurrences. Even in our individual homes, we are all scared of this. The information I would like to give is that because of the same occurrences, the Government took initiative to ensure that all schools install lightning arresters. As a way of policy, we have them.

I would like to request colleagues here to advise those who are able, to put lightning arresters in their individual residences. Otherwise, it is a common occurrence and there is a Government policy we are already putting in place. I would also like to implore my sister to advise those who are able to take that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise, Minister of Energy and Mineral Development?

MS NANKABIRWA: On information, which can mitigate the situation quickly? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of information because we have been receiving similar cases, where disaster happens. 

The first thing the District Disaster Management Committee should do is to assess the gravity of the matter, liaise with the Member of Parliament so that when the Member of Parliament brings the information, that preliminary requirement is done. Every district has a Disaster Preparedness Committee. Once the assessment is done, the Prime Minister’s Office can be able to gauge what kind of assistance can be taken. I thought I should give this information to help colleagues, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you – [Member rose: Information] – To who? – (Laughter)

2.26
MS FLORENCE KABUGHO (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to bring to the attention of the House the plight of the people of Kasese, which requires immediate Government intervention. 

The people of Kasese have experienced several disastrous floods since 2013. I appreciate the Prime Minister’s initiative, who took a team of ministers last month to assess the havoc caused by the floods. 

Mr Speaker, since the Prime Minister and the team left Kasese, River Nyamwamba has burst its banks five times. Yesterday, again, there were floods. As I speak, over 450 people have no shelter and food. Two children are even missing following the floods. 

My prayer is:

    1. The Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees urgently provides the affected persons with food and other relief items and also conducts a search for the missing children. 

    2. The Government commences the construction works on River Nyamwamba and other rivers in Kasese District, and puts in place a permanent resettlement plan to evacuate those in natural disaster prone areas.

Last week, the Third Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister without Portfolio called those ministers who were in Kasese for a meeting, and they told her that the construction works had started on River Nyamwamba. For sure, Mr Speaker, it is not happening. This is why people have continued suffering. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ACON: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is, for the five years I have been in Parliament, I raised a procedural matter of a storm that destroyed part of my constituency. The Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees never had a chance to visit, when we always raise these issues. Is it right each time – 

THE SPEAKER: Was that five years ago?

MR ACON: This year, in April, I raised it and wrote a letter to the minister who was ordered to visit Otuke. The procedural issue I am raising is, is it right that each time a Member of Parliament raises the matter of national importance, the ministry does not go to follow up on what ought to be done? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, it is bad manners. (Laughter)

2.29
MR MWESIGWA RUKAARI (NRM, Mbarara North Division, Mbarara City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter of national importance. Early this morning in my parish, a one Officer in Charge (OC), Corporal Richard Agaba, was murdered. 

There was an incident at a certain bar around Kiyanja Cell in Ruharo Parish, where the OC was called by a one James Tumusiime, to help. On reaching the scene, he found the thugs had taken off. He requested a boda boda cyclist to ride his motorcycle but at a certain place, near another hotel called Pam Hotel in Ruharo, he found these thugs who waylaid him.

Mr Speaker, the OC was shot, the rider took off and the murderers also took off with his gun. Thereafter, police enforcement came but the thugs were nowhere. I talked to the Resident City Commissioner (RCC) who confirmed that yesterday, he arrested eight people with pangas and they are going to be arraigned before court. 

With what is happening in Masaka, my prayer is that the honourable ministers concerned take action so that these also do not happen in Mbarara City. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister -
    
2.32
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Member for raising this matter. We have heard about that incident and indeed, it is similar to the other incidents we are handling in the areas of Greater Masaka. 

Like the honourable Attorney General assured the House yesterday, we are going to come up with a comprehensive report about these incidences of security. Thank you. 

MR SSENYONYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I risk being seen to hound colleagues because I raised a similar matter last week. This is because when rules are set, they must be followed and Mr Speaker, you are known to be a stickler to rules. 

I grew up seeing hon. Eng. Hilary Onek in this august House. By extension, he has been one of those that have framed the Rules of Procedure in this House since he has been here for a very long time. 

I am sure he is very aware of rule 82, which talks about dress code. The way he is dressed does not seem to be in conformity with rule 82. Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: The rule so cited outlines the category of clothing that are permitted in the Chamber. I watched the hon. Hilary Onek walking in, he bowed to me. I checked the way he was dressed and I was very comfortable with it because he is wearing a suit, a shirt inside and even another T-shirt inside. (Laughter) So, I am very comfortable. 

On what matter do you rise, hon. Ssemujju?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I am not challenging your ruling -

THE SPEAKER: No, you know better. 

MR SPEAKER: The trouble with COVID-19 masks is that they do not allow us to see well. Maybe the Member will need to stand up for you to see him properly because he is dressed like he is going for – I am looking for a good word to describe it. He came with his chest open as if he is going for war in South Sudan. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member knows how to challenge the Speaker’s ruling. (Laughter) Follow the procedure and you will be safe. 

Where were we? The thing about Nakawa and Nansana - The Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness is here. There is an issue from Alebtong. Lightning has hurt and killed people and the frequency is increasing. Something needs to be done. 

Secondly, in Kasese, the same river that has exerted so much pressure and suffering on people in Kasese has, in the last few weeks, burst its banks many times and over 400 people are displaced. This question was supposed to be submitted to you as the minister responsible. 

The honourable Minister of State for Environment had made some significant contribution on this matter of debate but now that you are here, you might want to say something about this. How do we help these people, both in the short term and in the long term?

2.37
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Eng. Hilary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad that Members are concerned with the occurrence of disasters throughout the country. Because of the climatic change, a lot is happening now. We are in a zone, which is bedevilled with a lot of hazards arising from different climatic changes. 

We have attempted, as the disasters department, to provide answers for some of these. For example, we have placed a department, which we created to study the causes of disasters. With reasonable accuracy of about 10 per cent, we can predict the problem but the challenge facing us is that the department is resource constrained to handle all the disasters, which are being reported. 

What is happening in areas like Alebtong; lightning hitting the areas there - We know that in practice, when people are putting up buildings, lightening arrestors have to be installed. That is the practice but of course, in villages, it is sometimes difficult for our population to access those items. They do not have the resources and the capacity. 

My office is coordinating with a team from USA, which is a group that gives donations. We have addressed some areas where lightning happens. For example, in Kiryandongo, a school was hit and several students were killed. They responded to it in time and helped us with various lightning arrestors. 

We have challenges with resources because we do not have stock of those building items to address the issue of lightning. However, I have taken note and I am going to try to see if the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could support us with resources so that we can start addressing specifically the issue of Alebtong but also Kiryandongo, which is equally bad. 

For the schools, we shall coordinate with the Ministry of Education and Sports to see that we put our efforts together to install lightning arrestors, if possible and buildings of interest. 

River Nyamwamba in Kasese has been a menace for a long time. The problem with Kasese is that with the increase in population, people have now occupied the hilltops. Agriculture is ongoing, deforestation is ongoing and the rock bases – the hills there are composed of rocks. The bases of those rocks have been destabilised and when there is a heavy downpour, all the rocks are pushed down. 

If you went to River Nyamwamba today, through Kilembe and follow it upwards, you would find that the river bed is now full of rocks; big boulders of five or six tonnes. There is no sand anymore; it is just rock bed all the way. There are a lot of rocks and these are because of the human activity on those hills. We have destabilised the environment and that is what is happening. 

We have discussed this with the Ministry of Water and Environment who actually have a plan on what interventions they can have in place.

As a result, many people are displaced. We have camps of displaced people in Kasese. About six or so weeks ago, when we went there with the Prime Minister, we took some relief items. We understand now that those relief items are over. 

Last week, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development availed to us some resources. We are, at the moment, trying to buy food and other requirements that will go to the disaster victims in Kasese. I think by the end of this week, we should be able to respond to the situation in Kasese because our staff are there and they have been going there most of the time to check on the situation.

These rivers have been bursting their banks very frequently because rainfall has increased yet the hills there have become bare – they can no longer hold up the water. Most of this water therefore, pours down with rocks and so on; it keeps sweeping the rocks down.

Hon. Ssemujju and another colleague negatively commented on my dressing but I dress like this because I am always on the move though I also try my best. (Laughter) I try my best at any time I am in the field. When I hear disasters have occurred in a place, I sometimes rush there –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I know that the minister is always in the field.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to sit down?

MR SSEMUJJU: He has maybe actually mistaken this Parliament to be part of the field –(Laughter) – that he can come dressed the way he is dressed.

Anyhow, the point of order I am raising is whether a Member can reopen a matter upon which the Speaker has made a ruling, in a way challenging the authority of the Speaker. (Laughter) Is the Member in order to reopen a matter closed by the Speaker with a ruling?

THE SPEAKER: Am I hearing hon. Ssemujju speaking about this? Is it you, hon. Ssemujju –(Laughter) – because you did the same thing hardly five minutes ago. Can we move on now? Honourable minister, please wind up without making reference to other things.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My office is open. At the moment, I am battling floods, in addition to landslides. The disaster is big. We need to put our heads together. For those affected, my office is open. Let us sit together, as colleagues, and find solutions. We can move on and make sure we get solutions – (Interruption)

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The simple clarification I am seeking from the minister is in regard to a communication that was passed on by the hon. Ruth Nankabirwa in his absence. She said that the district disaster committees always prepare information and share with you.

If that is happening, then how prepared are these district disaster committees and how well-facilitated are they? I ask this because from what I know about most of these district disaster committees is that even when a disaster happens, for a committee to move from one place to another to verify such a disaster is usually hard because they always give the excuse of not having fuel to move from point A to point B. 

Let me give an example of Amuru. The distance between the town council, where the district sits and for example, Elegu, where flooding always takes place, is about 100 kilometres. However, members of the disaster committee will always say, “We are not yet ready to go and verify that situation.” That is my biggest concern. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister –(Hon. Aogon rose_) Point of clarification? Are you seeking it from the Speaker; so you accept or reject? That is yours, not mine.

MR ONEK: Yes, you can ask your clarification. Thank you.

MR AOGON: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I like hon. Hilary Onek; he is somebody who does not fear to respond to questions.

Mr Speaker, hon. Acon has raised something very important to me. He said that over the last five years, he has had issues of a disaster nature in his constituency. Again, this year around April, he talked about issues of the same nature, but that he has not seen the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees present in his constituency.

I realise that there is need for you to specifically address that concern. What are you doing to specifically allay the Members’ fears about you not helping them at all? Can you go specific? For instance, when we talk about the issue of Kasese, the honourable colleague talked about two people who have gone missing but I have not heard anything in your response in regard to that. 

What is the specific action that you are taking on this because this is not a matter that can stay for another week? What are the specific answers to these questions? And how I wish you could visit Alebtong because I believe you have the fuel; at least fuel is there.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are still holding the Floor. (Laughter)

MR ONEK: Thank you, colleagues. I think the district disaster committees are basically there to give us information because they do not have the capacity - we do not have district disaster offices. We only have disaster committees in the districts, composed of some of the administrators in the districts. Their role is to give us timely information of what is happening in their districts. So, these are all on restricted budget. We do not have a big department; it is a very small department.

Hon. Acon stated that I have not visited his constituency. My plans right now are to go and visit the flooded areas around Lake Kyoga. I am moving there this week. I want to move over the weekend and assess the situation around Lake Kyoga. 

From there, I will try my best, hon. Acon, to visit and see what is happening in Alebtong. The problem there is no different from what I see in Kumi, Ngariam and all those other places in Teso, which are a flat terrain and often get flooded. 

The dams, which used to absorb that water, got silted leading to a lot of flooding in the lowlands. That has affected many people in Usuk and Ngariam, going all the way to Alebtong; they have similar problems.

So, we have those challenges, which I will go and see. However, our long-term solution is to get the Ministry of Water and Environment, with our support, desilt those dams. And we have asked His Excellency, the President to give us some equipment, so that we can go around and try to mitigate some of those issues ourselves. We shall work on that. It is maybe a long-term solution, not a short-term one.

On specific actions taken; there are many actions being taken. I cannot go into the specifics. The best thing to do is let me tour your districts. When I am going there – I will start from the Lake Kyoga areas before moving farther as my other colleagues will be going to Kasese - because I was there about two to three times - and then we see how to battle with these problems. Our challenge is resource constraint. We do not even have a budget, as a ministry. We have what is called the Contingency Fund, and of which most of it has gone to vaccines and other things. As a result, there is no money left there for us for disasters. So, it is a challenge. 

Anyway, thank you for your support, Members.

MR ACON: Mr Speaker, I would like to make clarification to the minister. I want you to get clarification between Otuke and Alebtong districts so that when you drive, you do not get lost. Hon. Acon represents Otuke County East and hon. Acen represents Alebtong District. So, please, when you go, do not turn on the left. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: But of course, if you leave Lake Kyoga, you go into Alebtong and then cross into Otuke. So, it is the same belt. Stop confusing the minister. 

2.53
MR SIRAJI EZAMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance. Yumbe District is hosting the biggest number of refugees in Uganda. The refugees are coming from South Sudan. We have more than 26 porous border points that allow free movement of refugees into Uganda. Their movement has now been characterised by influx of guns into Uganda. 

Aware that we have some rebel groups in South Sudan, some people from our district have decided to also go to South Sudan and join them. Now, there is a gun influx in Yumbe District and they are used to rob people. 

I am afraid that since we are hosting these refugees in Uganda and the border points are very porous, the South Sudan refugees are likely to transfer their conflict into Uganda because of the free movement - 

THE SPEAKER: What is the urgent matter? 

MR EZAMA: My prayer is that – 

THE SPEAKER: But I have not got the urgent matter. 

MR EZAMA: The urgent matter is that the movement of people with guns in Yumbe is causing a lot of robbery. Every day, at least a person gets robbed in the district. 

My prayer is that our gallant sons and daughters in uniform should be deployed along those porous points so that security is provided there to keep our people in peace. Aware that we had a rebel group in Yumbe whereby a comprehensive peace agreement was made, we do not want to go back into that situation. Thank you. I beg to submit. (Member rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member. Hon. Ezama has all the information. I know you are from the neighbourhood but let him deal with the matter. 

Can I have a response from the Minister of Security on this matter? 

2.56
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Maj. Gen. (Rtd). Jim Muhwezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Member rose_)-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are not even wearing a mask. By that alone, you have violated one of the –(Laughter) Can we listen to the minister and then I deal with your procedural matter? 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: I thank the Member for bringing this information. I will liaise with my colleagues, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, to handle the matter immediately. 

THE SPEAKER: So, it is a matter of defence. I see the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs here. 

MAJ. GEN (RTD) MUHWEZI: We had a discussion about the matter and we are going to handle it. 

THE SPEAKER: So, you are going to handle with him and he doesn’t have to respond now? You see, honourable minister, some of these things do not require a response in Parliament. Most of them actually require you in the field with your teams to solve that problem. It is not about us here. It is about those people who are being affected by these activities. So, I do not like too many statements here. I prefer action in the field so that those people feel protected. Speeches here – 

MAJ. GEN (RTD) MUHWEZI: I agree with you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: So, saying “We are coming with a report” will not help if those people are still grieving. (Applause)

MAJ. GEN (RTD) MUHWEZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. 

2.58
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague for raising that issue. When this issue of insecurity started, we sought the attention of both the Inspector General of Police and the Commander of the Defence Forces. We had a meeting with the police chief.  Another meeting was held in Mbuya with the CDF to explain all these situations. 

My brother represents Aringa County and I represent Aringa County North. The issue is that the number of people who come with arms from South Sudan is not a secret. We also - 

THE SPEAKER: So, do you know the number? 

MR ONZIMA: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: How many? 

MR ONZIMA: I am saying the number is more than one would imagine. I may not give the specific number of arms but insecurity incidences that happen in a particular night across the district give you the impression of the number of arms being used. On Saturday last weekend, two people were killed. Before that night, three other people were killed. So, it is not a small issue. 

There are other groups of people who are engaged in charcoal burning. If we do not supervise and control entrance into that charcoal activity, people may even smuggle guns in charcoal. It may not be an issue that will stop at the border alone; it may become a serious national issue.

In the meeting at Mbuya, we identified at least four porous areas where the UPDF could establish some detaches to carry out patrols. However, since that meeting, nothing has taken place. 

I think many times, when we raise issues and bring them forward, it should not be just for the sake of bringing them. We should take action. I believe that whatever the minister has said here will be taken seriously and action taken. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: That is exactly what I said. It is not about speeches here. It is about how we move back there to help those people being affected by some of these activities. I see the ministers of security, defence and veteran affairs and internal affairs. It is your bid to do this thing. You are established to defend the territorial integrity and the people of this country; their lives, property and information. It is your call. Just do it. If Members give you information, just act on it. We do not want to hear your statements; we just want to know that the country is peaceful. We would be happy. (Member rose_) No. You are now making this a territorial matter. 

Yes, honourable member, submit briefly please. If the microphone is not working, we move to the next item. 

3.01
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me and my colleagues. Honourable ministers of defence and security, this information is for you. As I talk, there is an anonymous letter to the effect that the same people from Sudan have said they are coming for the RDCs, DISOs and the PISOs. We have that small chit. Mr Speaker, this is a very serious issue. 

Just last week, we also raised a matter of urgent national importance to the effect that two people were shot in Obongi District and they were arrested with two guns, in a place called Kuru. Insecurity generally has engulfed the West Nile Region.

Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Minister of Internal Affairs, this is a very serious issue. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can we leave it here, hon. Odria? Otherwise, this debate has taken quite some time. 

3.03
MR ALIONI ODRIA (NRM, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for having guided the minister to take action.

On the issue of insecurity especially in Yumbe - Last year, we raised a concern about the police not having a patrol vehicle. To-date, the only pick-up which the district police had, got involved in an accident. As I talk, the entire district police force does not have a single pick-up.

Can the minister give this House assurance that to improve security in the district, they are going to provide at least a pick-up to the police? Thank you very much.

MAJ.GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Like you rightly guided, we are going to take action on the ground. The matter of Yumbe is well presented in the House and we have taken note. So, we are going to take action. 

I cannot speak about pick-ups here but we shall provide security in the area. Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I would like to offer help because there are many police pick-ups in my constituency. We can actually surrender two to Yumbe since they are too many.

THE SPEAKER: In what capacity are you speaking, hon. Ssemujju? Are you the distributor of pick-ups?

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I see these pick-ups; even in ordinary police posts, they are there. When you go to meet people, three follow you. I thought that since it is a public resource, we could surrender two of them to Yumbe. (Laughter)

3.05
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole South County, Kole District): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern. Recently, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs advertised the recruitment of Local Defence Forces (LDUs).

The people of Kole District responded to the advertisement and they went for an aptitude test and they were shortlisted. Yesterday, these candidates who were shortlisted turned up to check on their names. The names that were displayed on 1 September 2021 had 102 candidates that were shortlisted.

Just yesterday, that list was plucked off and another list of 70 candidates was displayed. The two lists are here, Mr Speaker. Recently, you mentioned that whoever is making a presentation should have evidence. (Applause) The second list does not include some names of the candidates from Kole District. We do not know where these names came from.

With the rampant unemployment in the country, Kole District, like any other district in Uganda, is also privileged to be employed especially, the youth. I would like to request that the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs gives Kole District its quota.

My humble prayer is that the indigenous youth of Kole District, who are longing to be employed in the LDU be employed. They should not be denied an opportunity.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, as you stated before, I would like to lay on the Table these two lists so that the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs can also come to our help and recruit people according to their quarter.

MR SPEAKER: Where did you get them from?

MR OCEN: These were the lists that were displayed.

MR SPEAKER: Where did you get them from? Are you the one who plucked them off the board? (Laughter) 

MR OCEN: No. Mr Speaker, with the current technology, when these youth went there -

THE SPEAKER: We will not receive them on record but you can avail them to the minister responsible for defense who will take action. Hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi, please.

MR OCEN: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence. The issue of Kole District looks a smaller issue but it seems to be a national concern.

Yesterday, while I was watching the news, the district where hon. Emmanuel Dombo comes from -

THE SPEAKER: Butaleja.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes, Butaleja. The district speaker and the councillor of the area were raising the same concern; that the list they displayed does not include people from their localities yet it is the quota of the district.

This has been a concern for quite some time; the way the UPDF recruits. We cannot just dismiss it like that. Therefore, my humble prayer is that -

MR SPEAKER: Honourable, who has dismissed it in your assessment? Would you like to resume your seat? I am the one who has directed that those documents be given to the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs for further interrogation. The minister was going to respond if you had not unceremoniously got up to speak without following the procedure. You only get the respect you deserve - If you disrespect other people, you may not get any. Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, please. 

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Peter Ocen from Kole and my other friend, hon. Kivumbi, for raising concerns about recruitment.

First, it is true that recruitment for the Local Defence Forces (LDUs) is ongoing and it is a national exercise. Given the interest, it could generate a lot of controversy. Having two lists here; one with the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) headed paper and the other without - Mr Speaker, I can only seek for your indulgence that as a ministry, we are given an opportunity to go and verify these lists –(Interjections) – we do not need pickups in this matter –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, honourable minister. I know that you were my chairman but you could allow me to seek this clarification. On the point being raised here, you want to go and verify LDUs but you can even see that in this House, when you look at the Generals who are here, they are also from the same region. When are you are going to verify even that? (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Thank you. Mr Speaker. That is the former Chief Opposition Whip and as rightly said, he was a member of my committee. I am very much used to him spinning even in the House. However, as I had said earlier, if the list contains strangers in Kole or Butaleja or anywhere else, that is a serious matter. I believe that as a ministry, we are going to investigate this matter and get to the core – Mr Speaker, protect me from –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Oboth, our life chairperson for the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs –

MR OBOTH: He is stroking my ego.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are happy that Kole has come up because those are the only people who are ready to testify as they do not fear anybody. However, there could be other districts, which have similar issues. 

The clarification I am seeking is; wouldn’t it be better that you get the first list and compare it with the second list for the entire country? This can be done easily. There are only 146 districts. You make only 146 calls and they will give you the lists; the first and second. By tomorrow, you will have an answer and submit.

MR OBOTH: I thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for his generosity in attempting to give us the method of work. I do not want to doubt that he wants this report quickly and we would like to be given that opportunity to do it the best way.

UPDF has a whole Chieftaincy of Training. There are hierarchies in this recruitment and if there is anywhere where there is order, it is where I am working. Something like this would not arise in UPDF. As you rightly said, if we are going to get lists coming here, probably on the notice boards there would be no lists at all. Some people are going to pluck them off. Therefore, we shall go into the core and get these facts clear. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: There is a point that we need to understand. The Member of Parliament for Kole South said one list is on a UPDF letterhead and the other list is not. How did you confirm that the list that does not have the UPDF logo is from UPDF?

MR OCEN: Mr Speaker, all these lists were displayed on the notice board of Kole District Headquarters by the District Internal Security Officer (DISO). These lists were signed, “DISO” at the bottom. When the second list came, the other was plucked off. Therefore, which is which?

THE SPEAKER: But at any one time, there was only one list on the notice board?

MR OCEN: There was only one list. The first one had 102 candidates who were shortlisted but the second that was brought later has 70 candidates shortlisted. It is an official notice board.

THE SPEAKER: When I talked about evidence-based decision-making, I was not talking about this kind of evidence, hon. Ocen.

MR OCEN: Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: I think my instincts were right that you do not lay them on the Table but let us work better and respect the House.

3.18
MS CHRISTINE AKELLO (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today, I am going to sleep because I have been suffocating under this matter.

I rise on a matter of national importance concerning school fees payment. It was in March last year when we had the first lockdown. Pupils/students had studied for only three weeks and paid full fees before the lockdown. As a result of the lockdown, most parents lost their jobs, businesses suffered, there was domestic violence, pregnancies and school dropouts. 

This time again, we had a second lockdown following the presidential directive. When students went back to school after the first lockdown, they were made to pay full amounts of school fees again. My question to the Minister of Education and Sports is; can they give the parents assurance this time before schools reopen because history keeps repeating itself. This time, students went for two weeks and some of them never reported to school but paid school fees.

My prayer is that parents should not pay full fees this time again because as we speak now, some lost their lives and we are in a crisis. We do not want history to repeat itself but things should move on normally. Thank you.

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for raising a very important matter and probably for sensitising our parents ahead of school re-opening.

Following the closure of schools during the first lockdown and subsequent closure during the second - When schools reopened after the first lockdown, first of all the curriculum was revised to be contained within a specific period of time. As a result, parents were not asked to pay school fees for the first continuation of the cycle of the term. A case in point was the school of health institutions, nursing training and medical schools whose students just reported last month on 13th August. They were not asked to pay school fees but the students were to continue to complete the cycle of education. For example, they are now sitting for exams. After the exams, they will go into the new term and that is only when parents can pay school fees.

I would like to assure my colleagues and the parents and to give hope to everybody that as we plan for the reopening of schools, as we did for the medical schools, the students will not be asked to pay school fees until they complete that cycle and start a new term. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week, I raised on the Floor of Parliament, a matter about how schools were going to reopen and one of the issues I talked about was the fees that parents had paid before the term begun. At that time, Mr Speaker, children had spent only one or two months at school. 

And I recall hon. Dr Muyingo assured this House that he would come back to Parliament, after seven days, which is today, to give a full report of what is taking place in the education sector and how they are going to open schools plus handling all the related matters.

Mr Speaker, would it be procedurally okay that this Ministry fulfills what the Speaker in the House at the time directed so that we get a better report? I say this because a lot of issues are rotating in these schools. Actually, other schools are already paying fees yet the term is not open. Others are recruiting children for senior one but not for Government schools - and they are paying. And the way the minister is answering shows she is not well versed with the information she is giving us.

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay for them to go back to the ministry and come back with a comprehensive report on what is happening in the Ministry of Education and Sports regarding the reopening of schools plus the matters that have been raised by the honourable member? 

For instance, she has said that there is no money that was paid but the fact is that parents are paying up to now; the Minister is just not aware of that. I want to put it on record that private schools are causing parents to pay and among those are schools owned by ministers in this Government. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Member for Erute North raises an important point that we need to interrogate; we do not have to just let it go. Once, she says, first lockdown caught students when they had just gone back to school, which means most of them had paid fees. That lockdown stayed on for some time.

When schools reopened, children were required to pay fees again and they did. Now most recently after children had paid fees, they announced that schools will not be reopening yet the money had been paid. So, the question is: when schools reopen, will these parents be required to pay more money? That is the question.

What the minister is saying is that the first lockdown served its purpose to save this country from more death. However, when schools reopened, the terms had shifted. First term for the rest of the schools was in January, February, and March - that was first term. However, when schools reopened – and I am just giving an example, it was already third term. So, you cannot use fees for the first term to cover third term. That is what the minister is saying. Isn’t it? 

Therefore, there is no incident of parents paying schools fees twice in the same term and that is what she is saying. Therefore, if it is first term, school has opened and then it is closed, you do not pay again for that same term and that is what the minister is saying and that has been the practice – please, who is accessing the microphone? Please sit down; you do not access the microphone before I have allowed you. You confuse the Hansard records because that will look as if I am the one saying, “information.” (Laughter) That is why you should respect the microphone because what you say in it goes straight into the record.

Therefore, if this is correct, then it might be a matter for further interrogation so that we do not just shroud this thing with facts that might not stand when finally it is looked at properly. 

So, the minister said that the Member raised that many of you are saying, well, they paid twice in one term; wouldn’t this be a matter that the Committee on Education and Sports should be interested in and look at quickly? I think it is an urgent matter that the Committee on Education and Sports should look at and then get back to the House in a short time so that we understand where we are on this matter. 

es, point of procedure from the Leader of Opposition.  

MR MPUUGA: Thank you for your indulgence, Mr Speaker and your elaborate guidance. Your conception of the issues by the Minister is the same as mine. 
However, there is a bigger challenge, Mr Speaker and you sending the matter to the committee is quite critical. 

When we went into the first lockdown, Government launched what they called the Continuity of Learning Framework. And if you ask the Ministry of Education, schools only closed physically but learning was and is taking place. They had a three-tier arrangement namely; to send learning materials to children in various subcounties - to photocopy and circulate whether they had photocopiers and power, it did not matter. Two was learning on televisions; whether televisions are universally accessible, it does not matter and thirdly, radios as part of the framework. 

As we speak, in some elite schools, learning is actually taking place. If you ask the Minister of Education and Sports now in which term we are- because according to the ministry, learning is taking place but which school term we are running, only heaven knows.

Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising so that we can come to the centre, is whether it might be right for the minister and the ministry in particular to come out clearly because we are losing an entire generation out of this confusion. Some students and pupils are being promoted; others do not actually know where they are.

Wouldn’t it be proper, as the minister communicates on record, in Parliament for them to issue an elaborate circular, informing parents and minders as to the state of where we are, including education institutions at all levels, so that we can discuss education and its continuity with a clear appreciation of the stand of the agency charged with guiding education, Mr Speaker? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You know, I proposed what I proposed because sometimes when ministers come with statements, there are so many gaps and that is why we end up sending them to committees for further interrogation. 

Therefore, instead of first starting with the minister and then going to the committee, I would rather start with the committee where the minister will go and make a submission on the basis of which the committee will report. The minister will then respond to it for us to debate and understand what exactly is going on. Because if I ask the minister to come with a statement, that statement might end up with the committee again; that would be a long way of coming back to Parliament.

That is why I am saying that let the Committee on Education and Sports pick up these matters. The records are clear about what the issues are; have a meeting with the Minister of Education and Sports, dig out the details and let the country know where we are on this matter. Come to Parliament and brief us and we get responses from the minister and we have a full debate on this matter. As representatives of the people, we will know exactly what the situation is and then we can communicate better to our people. 

I think that would be a better way of doing this. I see the minister has a point but the matter is referred to the Committee on Education and Sports. Is the chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports here? (Member rose_) Are you the chairperson? (Laughter) Do they have two chairpersons? Honourable, how much time do you need? These are things that are going on. We need them urgently. 

3.32
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Cuthbert Abigaba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am privileged to be the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports. 

Mr Speaker, we take your concerns. As a committee, we share similar concerns but we have had some meetings with the Ministry of Education and Sports. However, since it is a specific assignment, we undertake to carry on with it. We request for two weeks to report back to the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Are two weeks okay, Members? Let us give them two weeks. The specific issues are very clear; all we need are facts about what we need to communicate to our people.

MR ABIGABA: Mr Speaker, two weeks would be realistic for us.

THE SPEAKER: Will two weeks be sufficient?

MR ABIGABA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Committee on Education and Sports, please, report back to Parliament within two weeks on this issue. Make sure you talk to the people in charge of the Ministry of Education and Sports - have these meetings with them so that we know exactly what is there so that when the communications go out, everybody is guided.

MR ABIGABA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, now we have to go to the Order Paper. For the first time, I have gone this far.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION FOR RE-ALLOCATION OF FUNDS FROM THE RURAL ELECTRIFICATION AGENCY (REA) TO THE MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT AND FROM THE MINISTRY OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION TO STATE HOUSE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this motion was moved by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I referred it to the Committee on Budget and the committee has now interrogated the matter and they are back and ready to report. 

The motion that I propose for your debate, which debate will be initiated by the report from the committee, is for a resolution of Parliament for re-allocation of funds from Rural Electrification Agency to Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and from Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to State House. That is the motion that I propose for your debate. To start off the debate, I will ask the chairperson of the Committee on Budget to report.

Chairperson, how much time do you need to present the report because the debate is going to be involving? 

3.35 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Wamakuyu Mudimi): Mr Speaker, 10 minutes.

THE SPEAKER: 10 minutes? Okay, thank you.

MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Speaker, before I present the report, I beg to lay a copy of the report on the motion for a resolution of Parliament for re-allocation of funds from the Rural Electrification Agency to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and from Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to State house. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WAMAKUYU: It is accompanied by minutes of the committee meetings. We have: a motion for a resolution, submissions by the Attorney-General, list of members of staff of the Ministry of Science and Technology who have been absorbed by State house, list of staff of Rural Electrification Agency who were absorbed under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, statement on plan to restructure the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and the Rural Electrification Agency; and a brief on the re-allocation. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes and all those documents attached.

MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Speaker, on Tuesday, 24 August 2021, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of general duties, hon. Henry Musasizi, moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament to reallocate funds from Vote 123 – Rural Electrification Agency to Vote 017 – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and from Vote 023 – Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to Vote 002 – State House.

This was referred to our committee - Members, this has been uploaded and I think you can read. 

The object of this motion is to seek parliamentary resolution to authorise the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to reallocate funds from those Votes mentioned above.

On 10 May 2021, the existence and Vote status of the Rural Electrification Agency (Vote 123) was revoked under the Electricity (Establishment and Management of Rural Electrification Fund) Instrument No.29 of 2021 and its functions were mainstreamed into Vote 017 – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.

In addition, on 9 June 2021, in accordance with Article 113 of the Constitution, H.E the President of the Republic of Uganda abolished the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and transferred its functions to the Office of the President, serviced by State House Comptroller under Vote 002 – State House.

All the above actions occurred after Parliament had approved funds under Vote 123 and Vote 023 for Financial Year 2021/2022 and passed the Appropriation Act, 2021. The motion, therefore, requires that Parliament authorises the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to reallocate:

i) 	Shs 527,114,000,000 appropriated under Vote 123 – Rural Electrification Agency to Vote 017 – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.

ii) 	Shs 265,043,000,000 appropriated under Vote 023 – Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to Vote 002 – State House.

Members, you can read the methodology.

Legal framework

The request for budgetary reallocation is premised on section 20 of Public Finance Management Act, 2015, which provides that Parliament may, by resolution, authorise the minister to reallocate funds from a Vote to another Vote, where the functions of a Vote are transferred to another Vote.

Observation

Analysis of the motion

Paragraph (3) of the motion states, “Further aware that in accordance with Article 113 of the Constitution, H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda abolished the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and transferred its functions to the Office of the President, serviced by the State House Comptroller under Vote 002“ 

The committee observed that:

    a.  Whereas the Office of the President: Vote 001 has its own Cabinet minister and accounting officer, the President appointed another Cabinet minister, as a minister in the Office of the President, serviced by the State House Comptroller in charge of science, technology and innovation;
 
    b. Ministers are appointed to perform delegated functions of the President and State House as a vote is under the political supervision of the Office of the President;
 
    c. The functions of science and technology and innovation have moved to State House serviced by the same Vote 002 (State House). Inevitably, it warrants the reallocation of the attendant funds to enable the execution of the planned activity and realisation of the set target. 

5.2 Consistency of the budget appropriation with funds requested for reallocation. 

The committee observed that the budgetary amount proposed for reallocation under Vote 123 and Vote 017 are consistent with the amount passed under the Appropriation Act, 2021 and supplied under statutory expenditure as indicated in Table 1. Members, please read Table 1. The vote is there, the amount as per the motion approved by Parliament tallies. 

6.0 	Reallocation and transfer of functions

The transfer of Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation functions to State House. 

The committee interacted with the Ministry of Public Service, State House and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and observed the following:

    i) The Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation and all the under-listed subventions were transferred to the Office of the President under the function of control and management of the State House Comptroller. 

The subventions are:

    a) Uganda National Council for Science and Technology
    b) Sericulture Technologies and innovation
    c) Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID)
    d) Kiira Motors Corporation
    e) National Science, Technology, Engineering and Innovation Skills Enhancement Project
    f) Presidential Scientific Initiative on Epidemics 

    ii)  In the transition period, the management of the receiving entity (State House) shall take over all the staff of the defunct entity of Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation until the new arrangements are concluded. The committee was given assurance by the Minister of Public Service that no staff will be dismissed without following the laws and regulations governing Public Service.
    iii) The Ministry of Public Service has developed a draft macro-structure for science, technology and innovation under State House, whose operationalisation awaits Cabinet approval. It is attached as Annex I. This structure will carry on the functions that have been transferred from the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation.

    iv)  The funds hitherto appropriated under Vote 023, formerly Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation were allocated on the basis of the activities indicated in the policy statements approved by Parliament as provided for under Section 13(15) of the PFMA. These are the funds the motion is seeking to move.

6.2 	Transfer of Rural Electrification Agency to Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 

The REA is among the Government institutions that were earmarked for mainstreaming into the sector ministry; the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. The table below shows the activities. Members, please read Table 2, which is on the plans to transfer and mainstream. 

The committee observed that in the transition period, the management of the receiving entity - the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development - shall take on all staff of REA until the new arrangements are concluded. 

The committee further observed that the Ministry of Public Service has developed a draft macro-structure for Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development with mainstreamed function of rural electrification. It is attached as Annex II. 

The recommended macro-structure for the re-organised structure of the directorate of energy, resources and development is Annex III. All persons who were employed by REA were transferred to the ministry responsible for energy on the terms and conditions indicated in their contracts.

7.0 Pending obligation under Rural Electrification Agency and Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation

The committee observed that there are pending obligations that need to be addressed urgently. These include:

    i) Salaries of all people who were employed by REA, Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and the subventions thereunder have not been paid since the beginning of this financial year; 2021/2022. Their payments await the reallocation of funds that the motion seeks.

    ii) All obligations and liabilities subsisting against the REA shall continue to subsist against the ministry responsible for energy. Additionally, obligations under the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation are now the responsibility of State House Comptroller: Vote 002. 

    iii) A number of suppliers and contractors’ arrears are pending payment and activities are at a standstill.

    iv) Payments to contractors of the following subventions that were under the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation have also been absorbed in State House with all their assets and obligations. Their activities are now at a standstill pending the allocation of funds that the motion is trying to cure. The agencies are:

    a) National Council of Science and Technology.
    b) Sericulture Technologies and Innovation.
    c) Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development.
    d) Kiira Motors Corporation.
    e) National Science, Technology, Engineering and Innovation Skills Enhancement Project.
    f) Presidential Scientific Initiative on Epidemics. 
    g) National Science and Innovation Programme. 

8.0 	Recommendations

The committee recommends that Parliament adopts the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise the minister to reallocate Shs 527,113,846,591 from Vote 123 - Rural Electrification Agency to Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and Shs 265,430,176,419 from Vote 023 - Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to Vote 002 - State House, as follow: 

From Vote 123 - Rural Electrification Agency to Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 

Recurrent - Shs 28,796,824,583.
Statutory - Shs 3,896,681,638. 
Development - Shs 494,420,340,370. 

From Vote 023 - Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to Vote 002 - State House

Recurrent - Shs 70,932,588,498 
Statutory - Shs 257,168,657 
Development - Shs 193,853,419,264 

Mr Speaker, this is to urgently facilitate the two Votes to execute functions that were envisioned in the Appropriation Act. I beg to submit.

Mr Speaker, this report is attached with a minority report and I request one of the authors to present it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson, for keeping within the time. [Mr Muwanga Kivumbi rose_] Are you the proposer of the minority report? I thought it was you. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, much as I am the shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I work with a very competent committee and group. We assigned hon. Ssemujju Nganda to do the needful.

THE SPEAKER: Please do the needful, hon. Ssemujju.

3.52
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will skip the introduction, which the main report has given and straight away go to areas of dissent. I will list them and then read each one of them. This report – Maybe I will do that at the end.

The areas of dissent

    1. Violation of the Public Finance Management Act and the Rules of Procedure by the motion;
    2. Creation of a separate Vote for Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation; 
    3. Lack of approved structures;
    4. Unsuitable domiciling of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation;
    5. Security of the Rural Electrification Fund;
    6. Inadequate scrutiny of the reallocations; and
    7. Piecemeal rationalisation of agencies.

Mr Speaker, I will start with point one; violation of the Public Finance Management Act and the Rules of Procedure.

The motion proposes to transfer the functions of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to the Office of the President and the budget to State House. Please, make note that the motion proposes that the functions go to the Office of the President and the money to State House.

It reads thus, “In accordance with Article 113 of the Constitution, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda abolished the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and transferred its functions to the Office of the President, serviced by the State House Comptroller under Vote 002.” 

Section 20 of the Public Finance Management Act provides that: 

“Parliament may, by resolution, authorise the Minister to reallocate funds from a Vote to another Vote, where the functions of a Vote are transferred to that other Vote.” 

In this case, the funds go to State House and the function, which is the work of the ministry, goes to the Office of the President. That is what the motion seeks. This is contrary to the provision of the Public Finance Management Act, as already indicated. 

In this case, the budget and functions are moving in different directions; the money is marching to State House and functions are marching to President’s Office. Upon the realisation that the motion was offending the law, the committee summoned the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development – the mover of the motion – and brought it to his attention. 

The minister acknowledged that his motion was indeed contrary to Section 20 of the Public Finance Management Act. He immediately sought to amend it before the committee, contrary to rules 58 and 6l of the Rules of Procedure. 

The minister was advised to take advantage of these rules I have cited - rules 58 and 6l of the Rules of Procedure - to amend his motion to comply with the provisions of the law. This meant that the minister would have to amend the notice of motion and subsequently, the motion itself. 

During the consideration of the final draft report, the committee unanimously observed that the motion offended the law. To our surprise – those of us who have written the minority report - this observation has now mysteriously disappeared from the report. 

Recommendation

The motion should be withdrawn and a fresh one that complies with Section 20 of the Public Finance Management Act, as well as rules 58 and 6l of the Rules of Procedure, is brought.

Creation of a separate Vote for the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation

Mr Speaker, we are also opposed to the attempted amendment that the minister made before the committee i.e. matching the functions and budget of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to Vote 002 – State House.

While the minister agreed to the fact that functions and money should move in the same direction, he unfortunately chose a wrong destination for the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. 

The whole essence and genesis of this motion stems from Government’s attempt to streamline and rationalise agencies to end duplicity and ambiguity. His attempted amendment, once carried, defeats this purpose. 

Mr Speaker, State House, obviously, is the residence of the President and his family members. Its mission statement, as contained in policy statements presented to this House every year, has never changed. 

The mission statement of State House reads, “To provide, at all times, support to the Presidency in order to facilitate effective and efficient performance of his constitutional and administrative responsibilities and to cater for the welfare and security of His Excellency the President, the Vice President and their immediate families.” 

The main function of State House, therefore, is welfare and Parliament must not support any move to change or dilute it. Parliament must maintain a clear demarcation of roles between the residency and the office. 

The current staff structure of State House cannot accommodate a huge sector like science and technology with a budget of over Shs 250 billion. One of the biggest units in State House is household, with 136 employees. 

Do you know who these employees are? Chefs, catering officers, wardrobe assistants – (Laughter) - garden superintendents, laundry attendants, gardeners, waitresses. The other big unit is that of the Principal Private Secretary that has some assistants and Presidential advisors. 

The President should not turn his residence into an office. The President has been on record, despising former President QC Lutakoome Binaisa not for any other thing but for turning State House into a clearing house. 

The formal Government business ought to be handled in formal setups and not in a residence. Hence, Vote 023 - Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation - should not vanish into Vote 002 for State House. There is a high likelihood of funds being used to finance household obligations of State House as opposed to supporting innovations if the specific budget is made to disappear. 

It is our considered opinion that a separate vote, if the legal obligations have been discharged by the mover of the motion, is created for the defunct Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation under the Presidency. This has already been done with other sectors that are under the Presidency. You can see the table in the report. Under the Presidency, you have:

    1. Vote 001 - Office of the President; 
    2. Vote 002 - State House; 
    3. Vote 107 - Uganda AIDS Commission;
    4. Vote 112 – Ethics and Integrity;
    5. Vote 158 – Internal Security Organisation; and 
    6. Vote 159 – External Security Organisation.

So, if we must move this money, just create a separate vote and put it there. We recommend that a separate vote, once the obligations under the law have been followed, should be created under the Presidency where the functions and budget of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation will be reallocated. 

Lack of approved structures

I am trying to run very quickly, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Public Service appeared before the committee and told them that the new structures for State House creating various directorates and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development that would receive the staff, budget and functions have not been approved by the Ministry of Public Service itself and later Cabinet. He presented drafts, which he said were pending consideration and approval by Cabinet. These drafts are attached to both the main and the minority reports.

It would be unwise to approve reallocation in the absence of clearance of structures from the Ministry of Public Service. The structures are essential in ensuring seamless continuity of activities and delivery of services that were a responsibility of REA and the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. 

To the contrary, the absence of the approved revised structure has caused uncertainty amongst the staff of the defunct entities as to whether they are assured of continuity of employment. For instance, this was a concern that was documented and raised by the Minister of Public Service to the counterpart in the Office of the President and these correspondences are there. 

It was noted, from the correspondence, that consultations were still being undertaken to finalise a Cabinet paper. This, therefore, raises concerns as to whether it would be prudent to make reallocations that would be redundant pending these approvals by the Ministry of Public Service and Cabinet. 

The absence of structures would constrain service delivery and absorption of reallocated funds. The same concern was observed regarding the reallocation of REA. While Statutory Instrument 2021 transferred staff and funds to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, it was noted, in their submission that Cabinet was yet to approve the structure of the Rural Electrification Department under the ministry. 

Based on the above issue, it would be imprudent to reallocate funds to entities that lack revised structures to execute activities and absorb funds of the defunct agencies. 

Recommendation 

The reallocation should not be approved in the absence of the revised and approved structures within the votes inheriting functions and funds of the defunct entities; meaning REA and the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. 

Unsuitable domiciling of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation 

Mr Speaker, the majority on the committee consent to the proposed domicile of the functions of the defunct entities as well as the budgetary allocation. However, the proposed domicile is not the best suited. 

It should also be noted that the defunct ministry was responsible for Uganda National Council of Science and Technology, Presidential Initiative on Banana, Industrial Development, Sericulture, Technology and Innovation, Presidential Initiative on Epidemics and Kira Motors Corporation. The subventions may be better domiciled in other ministries. For instance, UNCST under the Ministry of Education and Sports, BID and Kira Motors under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, technology under the  Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

Recommendations 

The funds and activities of the entities under the defunct Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation should be transferred to best suited ministries, particularly the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

Security of Rural Electrification Fund

The committee noted, with concern, that statutory instruments gave Minister of Energy and Mineral Development nearly absolute power to determine functionality of the Rural Electrification Fund. However, the majority’s report is silent on the eminent risk of the minister’s power. They pose a risk to the rural electrification programme as envisaged in the recent litigation of the electricity establishment and management of the Rural Electrification Fund’s Instrument No. 62 of 2020 and Instrument Non. 29 of 2021. 

A greater risk is posed by the fact that the current instrument expires in 2023 yet, it provides no provision of continuity pertaining functionality of Rural Electrification Fund after expiry of the instrument. 

Recommendation

The electricity establishment and management of the Rural Electrification Fund’s Instrument No. 29 of 2021 should be retired through an amendment of the Electricity Act to explicitly provide for the functionality of the Rural Electricity Fund and programme. 

Inconsistency with the National Development Plan (NDP) III

The budgets of the defunct entities were approved after ascertaining that they were aligned to the National Development Programme III as required under Section 13(6) of the Public Finance Management Act. The current budget of 2021/2022 financial year was developed according to the programmes that are aligned to NDP III. One of the programmes was innovation, technology development and transfer. 

The activities of the defunct Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation were largely hinged onto this programme as the lead agency. Therefore, the retirement of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation amounts to amputation of the NDP III. 

Our recommendation is that going forward, care should be undertaken during the rationalisation process to ensure alignment with the National Development Plan III. 

I am about to come to the conclusion, Mr Speaker. 

Piecemeal Rationalisation of Agencies

While a concern was raised on the challenges of piecemeal rationalisation of agencies during committee meetings, the majority on the committee downplayed the proposal deferring approval until comprehensive rationalisation motion is presented. 

It is important to note that in February 2021, Cabinet resolved to rationalise all Ministries, Departments and Agencies in Government. In this regard, in May 2021, the minister informed Parliament about an implementation plan that was structured into two phases:

The first phase was to be executed in Financial Year 2021/2022, focusing on implementation of rationalisation of recommendations regarding 18 Government ministries and 97 agencies. Some of these Government ministries and agencies were expected to be merged, mainstreamed and functions transferred. Based on this, it would be prudent for Parliament to consider implementation mechanism for all entities flagged for 2021/2022 financial year rather than the current piecemeal approach of bringing, for example, REA alone and then tomorrow, you come carrying another one.

The proposed reallocation of only REA and the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation is selectively convenient. The latter was not even included amongst the entities being targeted for reallocations. Instead, it was argued that it was a young ministry and should be granted the opportunity to fully operationalise.

The second phase was to be implemented in 2020/2023, focusing on six Government offices and ministries as well as 61 agencies. These were to be retained, following an institutionalisation review.

Mr Speaker, our recommendation is that, before we approve this motion of picking REA and then you bring in another, a comprehensive motion regarding all the 18 ministries and 97 agencies, whose rationalisation was scheduled for this financial year, should be presented to Parliament.

Honourable members, we implore you to support the minority report because it will make the work of rationalisation better and keep the mandates of these agencies. 

This report, Mr Speaker, is signed by the reader; hon. John Baptist Nambeshe; hon. Muwanga Kivumbi; hon. Anna Adeke Ebaju and hon. Gorreth Namugga. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ssemujju. Thank you, chairperson, for the report in support of the motion. The minority report is also in support of the motion, as long as modifications can be made. That is what they are proposing.

Therefore, as a first step, we are in agreement that this should be done. It is in the way of doing it that there is disagreement. The minority report says, “No, there could be a better way of doing this. What you are proposing goes straight against the law; the Public Finance Management Act and the Rules of Procedure of this House.” Of course, they put other extraneous factors, which may not be substantially crucial in terms of determining how we should move. They also propose that the motion itself should be amended to accommodate all the issues. 

The majority is saying, “No, the way it is - if we shift this away from the initial proposition and house this thing in State House, the way it is structured - everything will be okay.”

There is, however, a third opinion - and I got this from hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who always likes to come out as the financial guru in this country. Sometimes there is not much evidence but he does a good job of guiding the House on how to proceed with these matters. His view is that this matter should not have come by motion - the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury (PS/ST), is the manager of Votes; he can collapse a Vote and create another.

Therefore, if there is a Vote that is housing these monies that are supposed to be moved, close that Vote and open another one where you would like to open it and then instead of going by motion, go by supplementary proposal to reallocate money to the new Vote you have created to cater for the ministry of hon. Musenero. Is she here now? I thought I saw her. It should be done that way and there is no need for the motion, according to hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

Therefore, now, there are three probably legally sustainable – I like two sides because three are many. Now that the learned Attorney-General is here, I am sure he is thinking hard about how to guide this Parliament on how to proceed with this matter.

Honourable members, I think there are preliminary matters before we open the debate because it can get very confusing if we do not streamline the areas where the debate should be. Of course, the general debate is that we would like money removed from REA and taken to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and from the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and taken to State House. 

We can debate that until tomorrow but if we want to take a proper decision, the debate should be guided. Okay, we agree that it should go. Since it is the President who proposes the Budget and now, he has changed his mind, let him do it - but how does he do it within the law?

Learned Attorney-General, do you have some quick thoughts on this matter or should I give you some time? On this matter, I am actually willing to pick the learned Attorney-General, the Leader of the Opposition and hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi and ask them to step aside and talk and then come and advise the Speaker on how we proceed with this matter.

Does the Leader of the Opposition not want to be part of it? I was just proposing - because you could go and the minister could also go. Who else would like to go? About three, four or five people could sit and take out all the other things and we agree. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please, join these people and agree on how we move best on this matter. Is that okay so that we do not debate endlessly? Of course, the chairman is the housing board. (Laughter)

Therefore, the chairman, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the shadow minister, the Leader of the Opposition - the honourable member for Dokolo might go and throw spanners in the works there again. So, I will not put her there. (Laughter) Would you like to go?

Hon. Oshabe, you are in the Pan-African Parliament. Let us first finish with this. (Laughter) Hon. Nandala-Mafabi –(Mr Patrick Oshabe rose_) - I am still constituting the list. Really, give me that - hon. Oshabe –(Laughter)– hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the learned Attorney-General, would you like to do this quickly and come back to guide us?

The Chief Whip? Do you have some brilliant ideas about this? (Laughter) Okay, please, just step aside for about 10-15 minutes and come and guide us on how to proceed while we handle some other business.

Hon. Nsereko, you would have to sit when the Speaker is talking. (Member rose_) There are two reports? No, there is a minority report - yeah but I have summarised the issues in the minority report, main report and the other option that has been brought up. We would like to have them harmonised so that we can have a proper debate. Thank you very much.

Please, those mentioned - Honourable member for Dokolo, are you going? Go to the Speaker’s VIP Room. Hon. Chemaswet, you have not been chosen, so, please, sit down. (Laughter)  

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to welcome you back to the House. I had the courtesy to listen to you and to share the wisdom in what you presented. I also carefully listened to both reports. 

My view is that when we are here, we want to fully represent our constituents and their views on this matter. These Votes were adopted and the Budget was passed. That means that the views and aspirations of the people were reflected in what was previously passed and they expect to hear the rationale as to why, one, the President would scrap a ministry and move a Vote from X to Y.

We are waiting for the justifications - and we have not heard that from both reports – as to why, today, the Republic of Uganda - which was ranking No.4 four years ago on the African Continent in innovation and now in the last three years, has dropped to 16th but now moves forward, to scrap a ministry that is very important. After being scrapped, you move a vote, like clearly stated, crossway; the responsibilities and the funds move in different directions. 

The country ought to know from us. If a few people march out of this august House and come up with a harmonised position, then that, clearly, is not listening to the views of the majority that will remain here. 

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that we should be given chance to debate and hear the justification from the minister as to why these votes have to swing the way they have to. If we come up with a harmonised position, it should be after the debate. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nsereko, for those views. We receive them but there are two levels of debate. From where I sit, I see beyond an ordinary debate; I try to see a conclusion. That is how I tried to guide.

There are two levels of debate. What I have sent Members to consult on is one level; the legal aspect or procedural – whether we are going by motion or supplementary proposal. That is what I have referred to. The substance - and I was hoping you would listen to me carefully. I have not yet touched the substance as to why we are doing this because I expect us to have a debate on that. 

However, to have that debate, why you have changed your mind and why you want to move the money away from here, send it there and mix it with legalities - maybe your brain can accommodate it but mine cannot because it will be too mixed up.

We would like to sort out the procedural issue. Are we proceeding properly? Can we iron out the proper procedure in handling this matter? That is what they are consulting on. When they come back, I will open up a full debate on the merits of this proposal. I am sure you will enjoy it, especially if you are ready to debate it.

Honourable members, that is the distinction I saw, which I hope you have now seen. So, we will proceed as guided by the Speaker. Are you in agreement now? Would you like to be on record to agree with the Speaker? I am joking –(Laughter)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Having heard your wise guidance based on the two shields; the legal and the substance, I am most obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. In the meantime, why don’t we look at the motion on item four, as we defer waiting for that guidance?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO URGE GOVERNMENT TO REVERSE THE DIRECTIVE REQUIRING LOCAL GOVERNMENTS TO REMIT ALL LOCAL REVENUES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FUND

4.24
MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, allow me to appreciate you for steering us. This is my maiden speech, with you in the Chair. 

I stand to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge the Government to reverse the directive requiring Local Governments to remit all local revenues to the Consolidated Fund. 

As I commence –

THE SPEAKER: Is it all revenues or all local revenues? That is important.

MS NALUYIMA: All local revenues. It is moved under rule 59 (1) (K) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

“WHEREAS Article 176 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for a decentralisation system of governance where functions, powers and responsibilities are devolved and transferred from the Central Government to the local Government units;

AND AWARE that sections 3 and 4 of the Local Governments Act provides that the system of the local Governments shall be based on districts and cities, under which there shall be lower Local Governments and administrative units;

NOTING that Article 176(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda stipulates that there shall be established for each of all local Government units a sound financial base with reliable sources of income;

FURTHER NOTING that Article 191(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers the local Governments to levy, charge, collect and appropriate fees and taxes;

COGNISANT that Article 192 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make a law that provides for a local Government to retain a specified proportion of collected revenues for the purpose of its function and services;

NOTING that section 39(3)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act allows any local Government as a vote, to retain revenue collected or received through levies, licenses, fees or fines;

AND FURTHER NOTING that section 30(1) of the Public Finance Management Act exempts local Government revenues from being paid into and forming parting of the Consolidated Fund;

AWARE that on 14 February 2020, the Permanent Secretary for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and also the Secretary to Treasury (PS/ST) directed all local Governments Accounting Officers to remit all local revenue into the Consolidated Fund;

FURTHER AWARE that even though local Governments remit the locally collected revenues to the Consolidated Fund, what they are eventually allocated is inadequate to meet the planned expenditures;

NOTING that the inadequate allocations adversely affect delivery of public services such as construction, maintenance of water sources, education and health facilities, among others;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament argues the Government to reverse the directive by the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury requiring local Governments to remit all local revenues to the Consolidated Fund.” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? [HON. MEMBERS: Yes.] I have not called for a vote. I have called for a secondment. (Laughter) I see it is seconded by Members for Kumi Municipality, Entebbe Municipality, Aruu North and Gweri County, Mawogola, Bubulo East and Kumi District. Those are enough secondments - and the man from Kaberamaido. The motion is seconded.

Would you like to speak to your motion briefly before the secondment? Your motion has been elaborate, so, please, limit the speech now.

MS NALUYIMA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. The policy of decentralisation, which we decided as Ugandans to embrace, empowers all local governments in the country to have the powers to ensure that they are able to levy and appropriate as per the given laws and that is fully backed by Article 176. The country should be in position to ensure that even local governments are able to operate.

Mr Speaker, through a circular, which I am to lay on the Table just after this, the Centre, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, directed that we reverse what we agreed upon as Ugandans so that we should also have powers devolved. Those very powers were supposed to allow local governments carry out some other services.

Today, when you look at the trend, these local governments have to ensure that they use all means possible to see that they are able to collect revenues. We should recall that today, local governments are mainly financed by the Centre but at 85 per cent. However, the little, which is 15 per cent, is what they have to use for their daily use; recurrent expenditure like fuelling of road equipment, continuous expenditure and council allowances, which is 20 per cent of locally raised revenue.

Mr Speaker, today, the trend is that local governments have to tussle it out to move to different points to collect locally raised revenue. However, at the end of it all, that money has to go to the Centre. Local governments only get money at the discretion of someone at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that is when they are able to spend.

Mr Speaker, this is entirely against the powers of what Parliament decided in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under Article 176. We made it very clear in the Public Finance Management Act and the Local Government Act that amongst the revenues to be collected by the Central Government, locally raised revenues are exempted such that they are able to cover their continuous needs.

Mr Speaker, it is my humble prayer to everyone here that today, we stand firm. I am aware that each of us represents a certain local government somewhere and at a certain moment, every one of us has been contacted and has got that pain in that local government where you feel that the works and the roles of the local government are really constrained.

I pray and invite you once again to stand firm and urge Government to reverse that directive that obligates the local government to remit their locally raised revenue to the Central Government other than what is provided for by law. I wish to submit. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable. Your motion is very well presented, the speech to it is very well articulated but your conclusion - Because this motion is to urge Government to reverse the directive. You may not have to stand firm because you are just pointing out that there is an error here. When you do this, you cripple local governments and so, we are urging you to reconsider what you did. 

Do you have to stand firm? No. You just have to say, “Reconsider, these are the facts.” The facts are before you can choose to look the other side, that is fine but here are the facts. Please, reconsider what you decided because you are crippling local governments against the spirit of decentralisation, which is in the Constitution.

Honourable members, that is the spirit. I want us to look at this preposition not the strong way but the actual way it is in the document so that if you feel persuaded, you also persuade your Government to reconsider this issue of locally generated revenue being sent by the districts back to the Centre. Seconder of the motion, Member for Aruu North, do you want to give a speech before I propose the question for debate?

4.36
MS SANTA OKOT (PPP, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion.

Mr Speaker, the policy of remitting all local government generated revenues to the Consolidated Fund is undermining the principle of decentralisation as provided for by Article 176(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Local Government Act and the Public Finance Management Act.

Secondly, the Central Government, through a circular to the accounting officers dated 14th by the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury, compelled all local governments to remit 100 per cent of all local generated revenues to the Consolidated Fund. Since then, spending of this revenue by local governments is at the discretion of the Central Government in terms of timing and the amount released to the respective local government. 

This usurps powers that are guaranteed under Article 176 of the Constitution that empower local governments to deliver on functions such as provision of medical and education services, waste management, construction, maintenance and rehabilitation of roads, among others.

Honourable members, all of you come from different districts. You may be aware that in most cases, when these district roads are graded, they are not rehabilitated or maintained. This is because funds are still at the Central Government and the collection of garbage in different areas becomes a difficult problem, especially in the town councils, cities and district headquarters.

Mr Speaker, it is important to note that Article 191(1) of the Constitution of Republic of Uganda empowers local governments to levy, charge, collect and appropriate fees and taxes. Local governments retain revenue collected or received through levies, license fees or fines as provided for under section 29(3)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act. The appropriation is meant to fund the discretional priorities of local governments such as office maintenance, fuel for construction, equipment for local government roads, recurrent operations, council allowances, among others.

Just this afternoon, you heard from the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees that in the districts, they have got district disaster committees but the lack of funds for fuel hampers them from going to the ground to ascertain the problems that affect our people. Even when local governments have exceeded the collection limits, they can neither pass a supplementary budget nor access revenues.

Mr Speaker, the House will recall that 85 per cent of local governments’ budgets are funded by the Central Government grants, which are conditioned on items like wages of teachers, health workers and other staff. Many grants are also ring-fenced for the construction of health centres, classroom blocks, water extension, road construction and related expenses. You can also note that some of these constructions are really awarded from the centre here though implemented by the local governments. 

And in many cases, it becomes very difficult for the local governments to monitor work that they have not really contracted out to service providers. You remember all the seed schools are being constructed by people sent from the Centre here, which makes it very difficult for the local governments to monitor. 

I want us to pray that the House considers local governments to retain the 15 per cent of the budget being locally generated as revenue or non-tax revenue, to finance developed services under the decentralisation policy without any bureaucracy. 

The most compelling reason for advocating for the retention of these revenues, at the local government level, is to minimise the time lost between revenue generation releases by Central Government and the implementation of the activities by the local governments. This is evident through warrants and limits controlled at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In order to enhance service delivery, local councils should be empowered to spend when they generate the local revenues. 

Mr Speaker, given this background, and aware that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not alive to these limitations, as per the directive of the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, on the 14th 2020, the directive in effect defeats the Decentralisation Policy. 

Section 31 of the Public Management Act exempts local governments’ revenues from being paid into and forming part of the Consolidated Fund. This provision is in line with Article 192 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda that provides for local governments to retain a specific portion of the collected revenues for the purposes of their functions and services.

In light of the above, I invite you, honourable colleagues, to urge Government to reverse these directives by the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury requiring local governments to remit all local revenues to the Consolidated Fund. This would empower the local governments to have flexibility to generate and expand funds available to them, which will in turn, boost the exercise of developed powers, to improve service delivery in our constituencies and respective communities, without waiting for the Central Government to send them funds on the ground. I beg to support this motion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to reverse the directive requiring local governments to remit all local revenues to the Consolidated Fund. That is the motion for your debate and the debate should start now. 

I can see Members want to speak. Let me say something and then we see how to proceed. I do not have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here but I have the one who has just been there the other day - who I am sure is conversant with some of these issues. Where did it come from? This never used to be, so, how did it come about before we debate? Is it rooted in the law? How did it come about? We need to interrogate that before we can have this debate.

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had actually prepared a statement to give to this House, on the background and the reasons the ministry based on before taking this decision; it was to do with increasing the financial management  and effectiveness of our resources. 

With your permission, Mr Speaker, I would request that the Government Chief Whip reads the minister’s statement, which is already prepared and is being uploaded on our iPads.

THE SPEAKER: If there is a proper justification for doing what you did, why don’t we have a debate? We can have a debate and then somewhere in the middle, you can guide. Should we receive the minister’s justification? 

What we are saying is; we want to urge Government to reverse that directive. Don’t you think the debate would be better if we say “But why did they do it in the first place? Why did they make this kind of decision?” If we get that, then we can have a good debate. That is my ruling.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

4.47
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the information of Members, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is part of the team that has been sent to the negotiating room, to come up with a way forward on the matter regarding the previous motion and that is why he is not here.

Mr Speaker, the Auditor-General raised queries on the treatment of local revenue and unspent balances, which were not remitted to the Consolidated Fund. I, therefore, want to inform you what the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has done to ensure that all financial management matters are in line with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as amended.

Locally raised revenue

Mr  Speaker, prior to the start of Financial Year 20l6/2017, the local governments’ budget funded by local revenue was approved by the respective local government councils and only the budget for direct transfers from Central Government grants would be submitted to Parliament for appropriation. 

Local governments collected local revenue for the financial year and spent the funds from General Fund maintained at the district while funds from all Central Government grants, were banked in Bank of Uganda under the Treasury Single Account arrangement.

Local governments would then be required to report on all sources of funds in line with Section 5l(l) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 (as amended), which states that: “An accounting officer of a Vote and an accounting officer of a local government, shall within two months after the end of each financial year, prepare and submit to the Auditor-General, and the Accountant-General, the accounts and information set out in paragraph 2 of Schedule 5 to this Act.”

Mr Speaker, the above process however, presented the following challenges:

    i) The budget approval was done at different times - that is for funds funded by revenue were approved by council while those funded by Central Government grants were approved by Parliament; 

    ii) There was lack of accountability and transparency for local revenue; and 

    iii) There was a challenge of delays in reporting and preparation of financial statements because of scattered information. 

In order to address the above challenges, effective Financial Year 2019/2020, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reviewed the process and required local revenue budget to also be appropriated by Parliament. 

Local governments were required to collect and remit local revenue to the Consolidated Fund, in line with section 30(1) of the Public Finance Management Act. 

During the execution, the ministry of finance would advance a first quarter release for local revenue to local governments. This provided local governments with funds to kick-start their work plans in order to avoid delays in service delivery given that they would not have made any collections at the start of any financial year - they would do frontloading. 

However, the subsequent quarterly releases would be based on actual remittances to the Consolidated Fund. 

However, this modality also resulted in a number of challenges, which included:
    i) Some local governments were inflating their budgets for local revenue and would fail to recover 25 per cent advance of their appropriated budget released in the first quarter. 

    ii) Delayed releases of local revenue due to delayed remittances of local revenue to the Consolidated Fund since subsequent quarterly releases were based on remittances to the Consolidated Fund. 

    iii) Audit queries by the Auditor-General as a result of local governments that had not recovered funds advanced to them, contrary to the PFMA, 2015. 

In order to address the above challenge, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, effective Financial Year 2021/2022, made a policy reversal to have expenditure limits for local revenue issued daily, based on actual remittance made to the Consolidated Fund and to date, all local governments that have remitted funds to the Consolidated Fund have got their releases. 

Where a local government collects more revenue than appropriated by Parliament, it is required to submit a council resolution requesting for a supplementary budget and a revised work plan clearly indicating the activities to be implemented using these extra funds. This request is then tabled before Parliament for supplementary appropriation. 

Unspent balances for local governments

Mr Speaker, in addition to the management of local revenue, several issues have been raised on unspent balances for conditional and unconditional grants under the local governments.

Article 193(l)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda states that the President shall, for each financial year in accordance with this Constitution, cause to be presented to Parliament proposals as to the monies to be paid out of the Consolidated Fund as conditional grant in accordance with clause (3) of this Article. This, therefore, provides for conditional grants to local governments. 

Further, Article 193(3) of the Constitution stipulates how the conditional grant should be spent. It states that the conditional grant shall consist of monies given to local governments to finance programmes agreed upon between the Government and the local governments; and shall be expended only for the purposes for which it was made and in accordance with the conditions agreed upon.

However, we have noted that at the end of every financial year, several local governments have unspent balances, which expire in accordance with Section 17(l) of the PFMA, 2015 which states that every appropriation by Parliament shall expire and cease to have any effect at the close of the financial year for which it is made.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development accordingly re-votes some of the unspent balances upon request by an accounting officer to fulfill contractual obligations of local governments such as payment of certificates for completion of works. For example, local governments are currently implementing the Uganda Inter-Governmental Fiscal Transfer co-funded by the World Bank and due to the delays in procurement process (hybrid procurement), the projects are not completed within the financial year that funds are appropriated. As such, such funds are re-voted through a supplementary budget to enable the local governments complete the projects.

Mr Speaker, this is for information purposes to guide the debate. The position of the Government is very clear: we do not need to amend this. We should continue working with local governments for proper accountability of public funds. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you have received a motion, quite passionately and eloquently presented and the secondment. You have also received the reason why they did what they did. I think the debate can now be balanced, based on the information we have received from the movers of the motion and the response from the ministry. 

The motion is to urge them to reverse the decision which they took - which has led to changes in the way local governments operate and has now provoked a response from Parliament to say, “No. That thing was working properly. Reverse that decision.” The justification for the decision is there. Debate opens now. (Members rose_)

When you all stand like this, I have to impose a time limit. That is how we come to two or three minutes. Some people keep asking, “Why two minutes? Who can speak for two minutes?” When all of you rise, I have to try to accommodate all of you; so, I have to limit the time. 

Can we agree on the time? (Interjections) Three minutes? Three minutes will not accommodate everybody and this debate will take 25-30 minutes. Let us agree on two minutes. Do not thank anybody; just go straight to the point. Don’t even thank the Speaker. It is not necessary. You are already here, that means you have already thanked me. (Laughter) Just go straight to the matter you want to present. 

4.57
MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much. I am on the Government side but I stand to support the reversal and I have a few reasons for that. I am aware that the Government had intentions of fighting corruption. 

While in local government, we used to blame the Centre for being more corrupt, yet the Centre was also saying local governments were more corrupt. 

The reason I support the reversal is the delays in terms of approval and remittance back to the local governments. You are aware that the operations of the local councils are highly dependent on the local revenues. When the local revenues are sent to the Consolidated Fund and they are delayed, you find that councils cannot operate. So, when there are urgent matters in the local governments, nothing can happen. 

When you look at garbage disposal in the urban set up – now, Kumi has a municipality – many times, the accounting officers will say that until we are given the local revenue, there is not much we can do. 

For us to have an effective and efficient Government that I support, we should reverse this because I know after five years, we shall make very clear accountability in terms of public service delivery. 

We normally have approved work plans by local governments that are funded by local revenues. Let me share with this House that there is now a lot of apathy in terms of collecting local revenues. The parish chiefs – even when you go to the urban settings, they are not motivated. They say that even if we work hard to get this money, we do not get the money on time. 

Mr Speaker, because of the time, I would like to plead that for an effective NRM Government, let this decision be reversed. (Applause) We shall have a clear follow-up of the implementers of the activities of local governments. In the end, if we do not, we shall always be blamed, as the ruling party. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I have the former chairman, Gulu District? 

4.59
MR MAPENDUZI OJARA (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Mr Speaker, I am in support of the motion to have this decision reversed. There is even a much bigger problem that we have to deal with.

First is the manner in which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes with policies and decisions every financial year. Most of these decisions are taken without preparing the local government entities to implement them.

When the financial year begins, the local governments are prepared to move but midway, either in the first quarter, there is a new decision. In the second quarter, there is another one. So, the local governments keep struggling how to cope with these new changes and end up failing to implement. When they fail to implement, the money goes back to the Treasury. It is always a struggle. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the decision to have local revenue taken to the Consolidated Fund is not only contradicting the spirit of decentralisation but it is also destroying the morale of the local Government entities. (Applause) 

When you interact with the local government leaders, they tell you they are helpless. They have been rendered redundant. So, the spirit of even being creative to generate local revenue is no more because there is a lot of micromanagement within the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Finally, the honourable Government Chief Whip made mention of a process, where when a local government entity collects way above their projection, they are required to make a requisition to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to have a supplementary budget.

I can give you an example, Mr Speaker. When I was Chairman of Gulu District, we repeatedly kept requesting for this supplementary but it was not done at will. You have to keep on struggling and sometimes, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will tell you, “We cannot present your issue as an individual district. We first have to wait for all”. That defeats the spirit of service delivery because there is uniqueness. 

Mr Speaker, it would be fair for this Parliament, first of all, to pay special interest in the manner in which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is treating local governments. (Applause)

Secondly, this Parliament also needs to pick interest to understand why local governments are failing to even generate local revenue. You will believe that most of the local government entities are generating less than 10 per cent of the total local projections. There is a culture of dependency that has been built and it is deliberate. This micromanagement will defeat the purpose for which decentralisation was introduced and it is responsible for the poor service delivery at local government level. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Have I run out of former chairpersons of districts? 

5.03
MR BOB OKAE (UPC, Kwania North County, Kwania): Mr Speaker, I have been a district chairperson for two terms. I support the motion.

I want to bring to the attention of this Parliament that reversing local revenue back to the Treasury has failed all the chairpersons in the Lango Subregion. I heard from the Government Chief Whip; the document is very clear. If you have not been in local government, you may not understand.

When they brought this issue to the chairpersons, we thought it was going to be the way he has presented it. However, local governments were given advance payments at the beginning of the year and they are dictated by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Apac District Local Government was given Shs 100 billion at the beginning of the financial year. 

In the second quarter, we were supposed to be given another advance, if we paid back the Shs 100 million. Unfortunately, we raised only Shs 90 million; we did not make Shs 100 million. During the release, we were not given money. We were now supposed to be given in the third quarter.

In the third quarter, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said there is a shortage in the ministry. So, they did not even give us. We had already raised our money up to Shs 160 million. They gave us only Shs 40 million in the fourth quarter.

So, in good faith, I am bringing it to the attention of this Parliament that if the ministry fails to reverse this money back to the local governments, then they will collapse. 

There are many activities at the local government that need local revenue. All these disagreements between council and technical staff, which is very rampant at local government, are brought about by this. I think we should think beyond issues of financial discipline and the rest. Let us reverse the decision and we take back control of local revenue to local governments. I submit. (Applause)

5.06
MR JACOB KARUBANGA (NRM, Kibanda County South, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much. I rise to support the motion.

Firstly, I want to allay the fears of the ministry that there has always been a contradiction between the approvals on local revenues by local governments and approvals of the Consolidated Fund by Parliament. Normally, local governments receive Indicative Planning Figures (IPFs), which get integrated and budgets are passed.

Secondly, on the lack of transparency and accountability, I am saying that the ministry is well aware that local governments and the Central Government have checks; the audit section, both at local and Central Government. The District Public Accounts Committees are there. This can be queried and solutions found.

Unspent balances, from my experience as a former Speaker, are normally generated from late releases from the Central Government. This is why you find a lot of money on the account, especially during the fourth quarter. We only need to cross examine ourselves, as the Central Government and ensure that there is timely release of funds.

The other is the issue of fiscal flexibility. Sometime back, local governments were urged to work hard so that maybe with time, they would be given an opportunity to continue handling more funds from the Consolidated Fund. That was a very well-designed policy, which I thought, if improved, would further strengthen local Governments.

The last one is delays in releases of money and contradictions of that kind will kill local governments so much –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: With the way we are going, is there a lot of debate on this matter? Let me take it from the revenue perspective. Hon. Kateshumbwa?

5.09
MR DICKSON KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad that this matter is a bipartisan one. I rise to support the motion –(Applause)– because in my constituency, we have been a victim of this practice.
		
Mr Speaker, I have a problem with the Government trying to deal with problems by creating another one. If the problem was accountability, who is in charge of the accounting officers? It is the ministry. I have heard, over the years, threats being issued to the accounting officers to make accountability. What actions have been taken to deal with that problem without creating more problems like we have seen?

That kind of –(Member rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, the time is too short to accept information. 

MR KATESHUMBWA: I would like to urge Government that as we look at such issues, when we are trying to deal with a problem, let us not create another one. The local governments are suffering. As I speak now, this matter has become a disincentive in local revenue mobilisation in local governments. We are not collecting garbage, we are not offering services and this is the excuse. No one is minding about efficiency in terms of returning this money to the local governments. 

So, I ask the ministry and Government to look at this matter and understand that it is impacting service delivery and undermining the spirit of local governments. Thank you.

5.11
MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, I am a former vice chairman of Bukomansimbi Twekembe SACCO. (Laughter) I thank my comrade, the Shadow Minister of Local Government, for bringing such a good motion. I am in support of it because when you look at our place, by the time money comes from Bukomansimbi to the Consolidated Fund and goes back to the district, it is already tired. It does not go back to the district the way it left. (Laughter)

Secondly, Government says they did it because of corruption but the corruption is as a result of the incompetent CAOs and accounting officers chosen by this Government. I think it is better to reverse the idea and leave the local governments to see what they can do with their taxes. Thank you. 

5.12
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will speak from the perspective of the Committee on Public Accounts where I am a member and a Whip. The policy by Government to request the local governments to remit local revenue, including the Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) from the regional hospitals and public universities would have been good. The unfortunate thing is, whereas front-loading is done for the first quarter, the management of the subsequent releases is where the challenge comes in.

You will all agree with me that it is difficult to generate local revenues in a short time to meet the planned activities for local administrative units, universities and regional hospitals. The revenue may not be there and therefore, this support would be good.

Government should come and streamline this for adequate timely releases if they would want this to continue. This would avoid conflict with local authorities, universities and regional hospitals. 

Many times when this revenue is released, it is released at the tail end of appropriation when the financial year is coming to an end and on 30 June, the money is swept back to the Consolidated Fund. 

These are all challenges that we have to harmonise with the ministry. For the good of our local authorities, regional hospitals and universities, we need to harmonise this well. We should be able to move and support the local government units, public universities and regional hospitals. 

On that note, in the meantime as it stands, Government release of funding is not good. We would support the motion because if Government cannot avail timely releases of funds then let us allow the local administrative units to gamble. In the long run, however, I think we need Government to improve for local governments to serve well. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, do you have a change of opinion on this debate? The motion is to urge you to reconsider. Do you want to fight this motion by vote? 

5.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The mood in the House requires that I go back and reconsider. I beg that I am given time to go back, reconsider and then report back to the House. 

THE SPEAKER: No, you are not going away with that. The motion is already asking you to reconsider. So, we will pass it to allow you to go and reconsider. Is that what you are saying? (Interjection) Okay.

Honourable members, I think the submissions from our colleagues who were in the local government have been extremely clear; as clear to me as it has been to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the people who are listening in including the Government Chief Whip who midway actually indicated that this one cannot be won. 

So, I am going to propose the question for a decision. I now put the question on the motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to reverse the directive requiring local governments to remit all local revenues to the Consolidated Fund be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Can we go back to item 3? 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION FOR REALLOCATION OF FUNDS FROM THE RURAL ELECTRICITY AGENCY TO THE MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT AND FROM THE MINISTRY OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION TO STATE HOUSE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I had constituted a small – I do not know who is going to report. The learned Attorney-General is there and the other ministers are there. 

5.17
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. We take great joy in the wisdom you have shown in leading us out of here. I think we have made great strides. There was indeed a breakdown on our part as far as how we moved the motion and we do take cognisance of that. We take wise counsel from our colleagues on the other side.

Like you correctly observed from the submissions of both sides, both sides agreed that the votes should move. The question was, how? I think we have come to a compromise on both sides and this should mean a balance on both of the reports. 

It will require a slight amendment and I would seek your guidance. Because of my new spacing here, I am still trying to juggle through the rules to figure out where to run. I think I found something under Rule 59(k) in this case and I will seek your guidance on that – 

THE SPEAKER: What do you want to do so that I guide you? 

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: I just want to amend the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Just propose an amendment. You do not need to cite any rule to make an amendment to a motion, especially if it is your own motion.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. We are amending the motion to read as follows:

“In order to streamline the operations of Government, there is need to reallocate funds; Shs 527.114 billion hitherto appropriated under the Vote 123 – Rural Electrification Agency, to Vote 107 for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.

Secondly, to reallocate Shs 265.043 billion, hitherto appropriated under Vote 023, Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, to a separate new vote created under the Presidency, for science technology and innovation service by the State House Comptroller.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move this motion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that motion for amendment is a consulted and discussed one. Is that motion seconded? But honourable members, you were not there –(Laughter)- I am joking!

5.20
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA-KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I speak on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition and the team from this side. We agreed - and this is the spirit of compromise after a deliberate long period of deliberation - that one, as the Attorney-General has stated, the law required the function and the vote to move in one direction. 

Therefore, while the functions were in the Office of the President, the vote was in State House. So, the compromise was that we move both the function and the vote into one sector, which is the Presidency. 

We also agreed, as the Attorney-General said, that it is NITAU for both accountability because innovation is the programme under NDP III and so critical to modernising the country for the prosperity of Uganda. Therefore, we agreed that a separate vote be created as the minister said.

It does no harm because the choice of who controls a vote is a preserve of the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury. If their wish is that the State House Comptroller should be the controller, we have no objection. After all, they would be accounting for a specific vote as other votes.

We feel that will address the concerns of Ugandans and will cater - we only have other commitments, which we seek from the Government; just commitments.

One, that regarding the rationalisation process - and we would like the Minister of Public Service to commit that where there are new structures, they should fast-track that process to end ambiguity. There are people who are losing jobs and the whole issue. Therefore, people need to move with certainty and know that tomorrow is certain. The Minister of Public Service said that he will commit to fast-track that process. 

Therefore, it is in that broad spirit that we agreed and I beg to move, Mr Speaker. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, now, the procedural aspect has been dealt with. There was another justification that the minister made the other day but which has come out from both sides; nobody queried the justification and it was about the procedure of how we are going to do it.

Yes, you have a right to change and reallocate but the way you are doing it is wrong. Nobody is asking why you are doing it. Anyway, that debate is still open. If anybody would like to ask why; is there any justification for this based on what the minister and the committee submitted that there was justification because of the changes that had happened in the ministries; some ministry has been moved or something like that.

Anyway, if there is no debate along that area, I would then proceed to propose the question to the amendment as proposed by the learned Attorney-General. Can I put the question to that amendment? 

I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the learned Attorney-General?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Motion duly amended and the Ayes have it. Now, is there a debate on the why principle? Is there any need for that, honourable members? Okay? [Member rose_] No, you are not going to debate by procedure. I warn you and in the same line, the honourable member who tricked the Speaker, if we have a long time here, you might - one day, I will also trick you.

Therefore, can we deal with this and finish? There is one concern; yes, a concern.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, the other concern is that we have got to proceed to appropriate. We have got to go the whole way to appropriate because this is being moved under a motion but because we are moving money from one vote to another, if we carry the motion afterwards as it is, then we will need to proceed the whole length to supply.

THE SPEAKER: That is what I was actually consulting on. When particular funds have already been committed to the fund and have been appropriated, do you supply twice? The answer may be no.

5.26
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. The reasoning is that we are not going to increase the resource envelope. If you are moving money from one vote to another, what basically happens is to approve a supplementary for the purpose of reallocation.  

What we would like to advise the Government – for which I am not being paid - is that such things would have moved under relocation. And that way, unnecessary debate would not have been caused here.

Mr Speaker, what hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi has said that while the motion is there, we have to go and do it by the supplementary for the purposes of reallocation, is correct. For the whys and the dos, Mr Speaker, it is the Executive that created the Ministry of Science and Technology and not Parliament; it was the Executive which created it.

Regarding the votes, the only activity we have done here today is to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Attorney-General to go and prevail over the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury, to create a vote so that after - because we are going to pass the money conditionally, then that is when the money will move. Failure to do it, the money will not move. That is what we are trying to do.

Otherwise, the “whys” and the “why nots”, I think they are the ones to answer those. Why did they create it in the first place, and why are they removing it?

However, Mr Speaker, this is our country.

THE SPEAKER: Now you are getting out of the issue.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Just one minute point, Mr Speaker. I would like to state this: supposing we were in the accounts class, Silas and I, and we do exams and I am the best and Silas is the worst. Then Silas waits –(Laughter)- that is an example -
 
THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Aogon, you are hon. Silas Aogon. You are not Silas in this House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you have ruled very well. I did not mean hon. Silas Aogon; I meant a Silas and a one Nandala. Therefore, he is panicking for nothing. 

Mr Speaker, if we are on the same bench and Silas gets 40 per cent and I get 80 per cent but he goes to the authority and I go to public service to earn Shs 300,000 yet the person with the worst mark earns Shs 20 million, it that rational when we are doing the same job? The Government must come up clearly with cost benefit analysis and we deal with it.

In 2002, Mr Speaker, you were here. We warned them against creating agencies and told them that that practice was going to be dangerous; now they are eating you. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the situation, before we get too far. The situation is that we have a motion that we need to deal with. However, there are events that could happen after the motion, which they will need to purify, interrogate and choose how to proceed: the best way forward - whether you want to do a supplementary and take a decision whether that supplementary will have to be approved or – because the money is already appropriated and you want to reallocate it as a supplementary. That could be a decision you will take after. 

The motion is a separate matter. We will not go into those details. What happens after the motion is up to you. Our only caution is that it must be legal. You have had enough opportunity, like the learned Attorney-General, with great humility - which is the way to go - accepted that there are some things that were overlooked. When they looked at it, again, they found out that the concerns were legitimate. So, you would like to do this properly, now that you have got a second chance. However, that does not affect our conclusion of this debate. 

I see the Member for – is that Butambala? You have been standing up a few times; on what matter do you rise? 

Ms aisha kabanda: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise?

Ms aisha kabanda: On a procedural matter. I am not sure whether we are proceeding well.

THE SPEAKER: Just ask me.

Ms kabanda: Section 20 of the Public Finance Management Act states that Parliament may, by resolution, authorise the minister to reallocate funds from a Vote to another where the functions of a Vote are transferred to that other Vote.

We were here last week and the Leader of Government Business told us that there is no rationalisation that has taken place, no department has been moved and everything is still as has been and they will update us if any rationalisation is done. To that effect, even an ad hoc committee was set up to go and study rationalisation, its effect and impact. That report has not come to us. The minister has not updated us on whether they have started the rationalisation or not and we are moving a Vote from an area to another. Are we proceeding well?

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kabanda. What we are moving is not a Vote but money. A Vote is different from money. A Vote is the bank account on which the money is put. 

We are removing the money for this financial year for a particular purpose. That is the distinction. The Vote is there. You can keep it forever. However, the money, which was already appropriated in that Vote, is what they are saying, “Please, move that money for this financial year for these purposes and let it be executed under this.” The Vote is not getting away. It is the money, which has already been appropriated by this House. That is why we are here. Therefore, we are proceeding very well. (Laughter)

Can I put the question?

Hon. Members: Yes.

5.33
Ms Cecilia ogwal (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): I have a concern. Before we express our adoption of this amendment, I would like the Minister of Public Service to give assurance to the House that any human resource implication will be taken care of or fast-tracked. That is the concern of the special team that was created by the Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I got indications from one of the Workers’ Representatives, hon. Dr Byakatonda. Is he here? You had something to raise about this.

5.34
Dr abdulhu byakatonda (Independent, Workers Representative): Yes, Mr Speaker. Like my colleague, hon. Ogwal, has raised, there are a number of implications that we need to address –

THE SPEAKER: No, we are talking about the implication of this motion. The other one about the bigger rationalisation is different.

dr byakatonda: Of course, to arrive at proper address of the motion, we need to address some issues that are salient.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let me put the question directly to you so that you can help us as a House. Is this movement of money going to affect individuals employed there?

dr byakatonda: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: That is then where we need guarantees from the minister. If it is going to affect personnel, honourable minister, you need to be on record on this.

dr byakatonda: Mr Speaker, it affects personnel. First, in order to reallocate and appropriate, we must address a lot of concerns. How is job evaluation done? As we attempt to reallocate and people move, already there is selective movement of staff. Within their petition, they have attached all those details.

Then, these staff are languishing on the streets. For the REA, there are staff working normally. However, here the communication has already come to stop their salaries. Therefore, I do not know how much their arrears are.

The other thing is that when you are doing this, there should be structured communication right from the word go. They do not know what is happening; they are in their own world.

Secondly, we need expert engagement wherein we need the Office of Attorney-General and the Ministry of Public Service to come up with proper job evaluation. How many jobs are we going to create? How many are we going to lose?

THE SPEAKER: No, you are going beyond what I asked.

dr byakatonda: Mr Speaker, these are technical issues that we need to address, if we are to arrive at a proper and smooth flow of things.

THE SPEAKER: For purposes of what I requested you, the technicalities do not matter much. The issue was very direct; is this going to affect staff? If it will, I need an assurance from the Minister of Public Service on how the staff will be handled – “they will not be mistreated”, “they will not be laid on the streets…” That is what I want. You, as Workers’ Representative, are now going into the bigger thing while I am still here.

dr byakatonda: Actually, it is very big and I would like to lay this for clarity.

THE SPEAKER: No, that one will be for another day.

5.37
The minister of public service (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give my assurance before this august House as the Minister of Public Service that, indeed, we shall fast-track the human resource. As far as matters are concerned now, the human resource that has been in the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation is going, intact, to their new domicile. 

The fact that we are also creating a structure – just not creating but customising – is clear indication that we are interested in fast-tracking. We are not going to cause any unnecessary harm to the staff. Nothing will come to the staff, that is outside the law.

Some of the issues, which are raised by our colleague, hon. Byakatonda, were also raised in the committee. Fortunately, we had the minister in charge of science, technology and innovation and most of these things were proved to be false. There is no selective recruitment so far. Nobody is to be disadvantaged in terms of pay. What we appropriated is what is going to prevail in the new domicile. 

I am standing here as an honourable Member of Parliament. I have been here for some time and upon my word of honour, Mr Speaker, I would like to pledge before you that nothing will come to any public servant in this particular sector that is outside the law. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I will put the question to this matter so that we conclude it. I now put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament for reallocation of funds from Rural Electrification Agency (REA) to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and from the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to the Office of the President. That is the motion as amended. 

It is Office of the President because that is the Vote; Presidency is not a Vote. Please, let us stick to what the law says. So, honourable member for Dokolo, the Speaker is very alert on these occasions. It is the Office of the President, which is Vote 001.

I now put the question to the motion, as amended. I put the question that the motion be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The harmony is good. When people agree, things move better. When people are laughing, I find it easier to process business. However, when people are not happy, business does not move. Therefore, we should always try our best to make a happy House, so that we process the business of our people, when we are smiling, not when we are fighting.

The matter that is supposed to come next is the motion on a public university in Bunyoro. That motion will need further consultation among Members who come from that region. I have received both sentiments from the Government, movers of the motion and other Members of Parliament that come from that region so that they have a common ground on this before they move it forward. 

Therefore, I will defer this motion for another day, when there is harmony on the way they want to proceed with this. 
This House stands adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.42 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 9 September 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)

