

Tuesday, 4 September 2018

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Jimmy Akena, the honourable member for Kira Municipality has outdone you completely. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As I communicated last week, we have work that has piled up, which we need to get time to do. I had designated this week to handling those urgent matters that had been raised and the ministers had not had the opportunity to deal with them. However, we were not able to do what we should have done last week and that means we cannot do what we should have done this week. We will do what we should have done last week, this week.
 
Honourable members, you may already be aware of the death of the founding chaplain of the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy, Fr Bob Binta, which occurred on the 20 August 2018 in the United States of America. The preparations for his burial are underway and the programme is as follows:

    1. Parliament will pay tribute to Fr Bob Binta on Thursday, 6 September 2018. That will be through a motion that will be moved by the honourable members and we will deal with it the way we handle tribute motions, respecting the role that Fr Binta played in setting up the catholic chaplaincy in this Parliament.

    2. There shall also be a requiem mass on Thursday, 6 September 2018 at 5.00 p.m. in the Members’ Lounge. I talked to the organisers to allow us do business up to about 6 o’clock then we can all join the mass. Here, it says 5 o’clock but we will see how to negotiate and accommodate the proceedings of this House as well.

	Honourable members, just to be clear, when I said there will be a tribute motion, it does not mean that the body of Fr Binta will be here. It will be a motion on the Order Paper with other business as we deal with that.

    3. Burial will take place on Monday, 10 September 2018 at Virika Cathedral, Fort Portal. Please join the family and the faith to give Fr Binta a proper send-off.
 
Honourable members, I have also received the sad news about the untimely death of Mr Obita Geoffrey, son of Mr Okello G. Obabaru, the Deputy Clerk, Corporate Affairs, which occurred yesterday. Burial will take place tomorrow, Wednesday, 5 September at Biwang Village, Lira-Palwo Subcounty in Agago District. The departure time for burial will be at 5.00 a.m. from the South Wing, ground level parking.
 
Allow me to convey sincere condolences, on behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, for the loss of Fr Bob Binta and also Mr Obita Geoffrey. Let us rise and observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

2.14
MR ELLY ASIKU (NRM, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under rule 53 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to make a statement on a matter of national importance.
 
On the night of Wednesday, 29 August 2018, my constituency was hit by a devastating hailstorm. This devastated mainly two parishes - Gborokolongo and Onyokunga - in Abuku Subcounty. This was the first time we experienced that level of devastation. A lot of crops and property were destroyed, which if valued would run into billions of shillings. 

Hundreds of acres of maize, beans, cassava, sweet potatoes, bananas and many other crops were completely destroyed. In fact, there is a district team on the ground trying to assess the extent of the destruction. Domestic animals, including goats and sheep, were killed. The roofs of houses were blown off and several pit latrines collapsed.
 
Mr Speaker, my people are resilient and they detest handouts. You remember that during the last national drought when rice was given out, they asked for seeds rather than handouts. Therefore, in the immediate term, they require maize seeds and beans for planting. They also require temporary shelter for those whose house tops were blown off. To accelerate their immediate participation in this second season of ploughing, they will need some tractor services to plough what was destroyed and plant new crops.

In the medium term, their needs will also include restocking of the lost domestic animals, rebuilding the destroyed structures and providing some relief in form of foodstuff to mitigate the effect of hunger normally associated with hailstorms. My prayers, therefore, are: 

1. 	Government urgently extends relief assistance to these affected communities.

2. 	Government immediately provides some medium-term needs, which include the rebuilding of the structures of the affected communities.
 
I beg to move.

2.18
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, we sympathise and in fact express our solidarity with the people affected by the storms and rains. It is true that we have problems associated with climate change, and the demand is high for support. However, our department responsible for relief is going to follow up this matter and make a quick assessment. They will see how best we can support the people affected within the means available.

2.18
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under rule 54 to make a personal statement - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it a personal statement or a personal matter?

MS NAKAYENZE: It is a statement on a personal matter, explaining – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, if it is a personal explanation, then we need a statement. If it is an urgent matter, then you need - 

MS NAKAYENZE: It is an urgent matter, Mr Speaker. Last week, there were a series of incidents where I was trailed by unknown persons. The first time, it was on Monday when I left the House at around 4.00 p.m. I went home and by 5.30 p.m., I was near my home. As I branched off, some cars were following me and I thought that they were going on their way. However, I later suspected that I was being followed and I branched off to a different place. This particular car also followed, and when I slowed down, it also slowed down and parked somewhere.

After that, I continued to a petrol station to fuel my car and to check the tyre pressure. The same car was sighted again in the same vicinity, near the petrol station. When I left that place, I did not go home; I went to Mukono to check on my business. After about an hour, when I came out, I saw the same vehicle. Unfortunately, it was around 5.30 p.m. in the evening and I did not bother until I was in Mukono when I realised that this car had been trailing me. However, I was at a distance and my sight is not very good; I cannot see something at a distance, unless I have my glasses on.

I called my manager and I told him that I had seen a car, and it is the same car that I saw at the petrol station although I do not know the registration number. He asked me if he could go and see the registration number. However, we were on a slope, so I told him that maybe if he went there, they will see us and they might become suspicious. I told him that we just have to turn in the opposite direction and go home. We turned and went home, and thank God there was no problem on that day. 

On Thursday morning, I got up very early to come for the prayer breakfast. It was around 6.30 a.m. and I was a bit late, but I reached the road that leads me to the main road and I realised that I had left my phone at home. I turned and went back home to pick it, but little did I know that some people were somewhere waiting for me. When they saw me go home, they imagined that I had got to know about their plan and they followed me. After picking my phone and as I was getting out of the gate, they were now at the gate. I had been blocked and they kept on flashing lights as it was still dark. I stayed in the middle of the gate. For about five minutes, they did not move.

At first, I thought that they were my neighbours, but they had actually passed by the neighbours’ gate and they were now at my gate. I could not move at all because they had blocked me. If I had moved backwards – I think that is what they wanted – they would have followed me inside. So, I could not go backwards. After five minutes, they turned to another neighbour’s residence and so, I could pass.

While they were turning, I sped off. When I looked in the side mirror, I saw some light following me, but I was not bothered. I continued until I came here for the prayer breakfast. The house help, who had opened the gate, closed it and then she went and told my children that “Mummy seems to be in danger.” So, they followed me using a boda boda. 

I did not know that my children were following me. They kept on trying to call me but I had switched off my phone. They were really tense. When they reached Bweyogerere and saw that my car was not in the same vicinity, they gave up and went back home. By that time, I did not know anything. 

When I went back home, everybody asked if I was okay and if I had reached safely. I asked them what happened. They said that, the car that was at the gate followed me. I told them to go and ask the police guard for the registration number, but he told them that he did not know it. When I asked my house help if she had seen the registration number, she also told me that she did not bother looking at it intently.

It is quite unfortunate that we did not know the registration number and the police guard had gone away at 6.00 a.m. He said that he had seen a car, but those people appeared like they were repairing it. By that time, I had not gone out. 

Ever since then, I feel very insecure. When I called my husband after the children told me, he said that I should go to a police station and report the matter. On Friday, I went to the police post in Seeta and made a statement. Unfortunately, I do not know who these people could be, because I just see cars following me. Last night, when I left the salon around 10.30 p.m., we saw the same car again, but –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, have you reported this matter to the police?

MS NAKAYENZE: Mr Speaker, I have reported the matter to the police.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was their response?

MS NAKAYENZE: The police advised me to try to find security or even another car. They advised me to either camouflage – (Laughter) – Yes! I am telling you what I was advised to do. They said that since these people follow me up to my home, maybe sometimes I should use a different car. I told them that I have only one car. There is no way I am going to get another car right now.

Mr Speaker, I feel that my life is in danger and I am getting more insecure. I am only being very strong because I know that God protects me and I know that with God, all things are possible. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to request the minister maybe to give us the status of security in the nation because my children and I are getting very insecure. 
I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to sympathise with my colleague for the unfortunate incidents that have occurred to her. 

In general terms, let me first of all say that we always do have a sixth sense about our security. When you notice something unusual threatening your life, you should make the quickest possible report, after taking any evasive actions. I cannot blame the colleague for taking that long, but my advice is that it would have been good if she tried every possible way to describe that car or tried to see the number plate, if she could, so that it could be followed.

However, ultimately, please colleagues, when you see anything which threatens your life, report to the nearest police station. I know immediate action might not be taken but it will still be on record that you recorded a statement at that police station and then action could be taken.

Secondly, colleagues, my office as a Minister of Internal Affairs and even all security agencies around you are always available for such action to be taken. The details of what we shall do to support your security, I would prefer to discuss them with you at a personal level. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.29
MR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Parliament last week was adjourned on an unusual note. To avoid misrepresenting the note on which you adjourned Parliament, I will try to paraphrase it. You said that you were not willing to preside over a Parliament of Members who were unwilling to sit.

Mr Speaker, the reason we were unwilling to sit was because of what had happened to our colleagues. We did ask you, as an institution of the Speaker, to inform us if you had obtained it from the head of state, because the institution of the Speaker had written to him demanding to know who had tortured our colleagues during the Arua elections. Mr Speaker, that matter was not concluded because of what obtained, and you wisely adjourned Parliament to today.

Although this business was not on the Order Paper to be covered under relevant provisions of our rules, it is business that is in the record of Parliament as having not been completed. Our prayer was that we needed to be briefed on whether the head of state has responded. In fact, the reason we were unwilling to proceed was because of our own security. A colleague has just narrated what she went through. There are many of us who are living under a lot of fear; you do not know what is going to happen to you or in whose hands you are going to fall next.

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is whether it would not be procedurally right to first deal with that issue conclusively and then we proceed. Some of us are not in a good frame until that matter has been clarified, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I forgot to mention that there is an alteration in the Order Paper to accommodate the honourable member for Dokolo District. She has a short presentation to make on an issue she wants to bring to the attention of Parliament. We also have a statement on the update of issues from the minister in charge of security. This will follow immediately after the urgent matters that the Members are raising. In addition, before the minister makes a statement, I will brief the House on where we are on this issue.  

MR NSABA BUTURO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our country is reeling under the full weight of immorality, like we have not seen before. Our country is witnessing situations that arise from that immorality that is attacking our nation.

Homosexuality, as the honourable members know, is prohibited in this country. Last time, this august House passed a law but on a technicality, the courts of law did not support us. Some of us intend to revive that Bill so that we can successfully have a law that defends and protects this country against those who promote and facilitate homosexuality in our country.

In the meantime, Sir, from impeccable sources, near the River Nile in Jinja there is an annual festival for homosexuals from around the world that is going to take place. It is expected that over 4,000 homosexuals will be congregating in Jinja this week starting tomorrow, and it is an event we have not seen before.

It is also reported that a lot of unspeakable, despicable and detestable practices, such as men having sex with men, women with women, sex with animals, will be on show on that day and on Ugandan soil. This is unprecedented and unacceptable. 

This moral invasion, Mr Speaker, is one that we should not take lightly because it has ramifications on our security, stability, unity and prosperity as a country. This invasion is beginning to cause our country unrest. Much of the unrest we see today has its roots in that external invasion that we are witnessing. 

In addition, I would like to say that they are counting on what they assume is our timidity and inability to boldly stand up to the world and say that these are our values; take them or leave them, or our ability to say to those who are friends and give us their money to take their money back if they want to impose immorality on our nation. We need to stand and it is that sort of courage that we need. (Applause)

The timidity and fear which has attacked many of us who should be able to stand up for the interest of this country, is what we should not support, Mr Speaker. We want to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the urgent matter, honourable?

MR NSABA BUTURO: The urgent matter, Mr Speaker, is that I want Government to intervene first of all to comment on this likelihood of a festival on Ugandan soil. If that is true, we want to hear from Government, particularly because it is an illegality that we are dealing with, with implications on this nation.

2.37
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, Government has received the reports that hon. Nsaba Buturo is raising. The Minister of Internal Affairs, Gen. Jeje Odongo, is investigating this matter and he is handling the situation. Therefore, we should give him time to investigate and handle the situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Ushindi Primary School, Arua Municipality. They are represented by hon. Kassiano Wadri and hon. Mourine Osoru. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of staff from the National Assembly of Zambia. They include:

    a) Mr Alfred Mulaye, Principal Clerk, Procurement.
    b) Mr Francis Phiri, Assistant Accountant.
    c) Mrs Kunda Nyondo, Purchasing Officer. 

They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

2.38
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, District Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. I would like to thank my colleagues and the Office of the Speaker for supporting my husband and me to receive medical treatment in India recently. 

I am very sorry and I would like to express my heartfelt sympathy for my colleagues who were beaten and mistreated in the course of practising politics. I would like to register my sympathy for what happened. 

One of our colleagues, hon. Lucy Akello, Member of Parliament for Amuru District, was recently awarded a distinguished award and it is in this regard that I would like to address the House. The issue of family values is very important and this particular Parliament adopted the theme of family values in last year’s prayer breakfast.

In September 2017, hon. Lucy Akello raised a motion on the Floor of Parliament halting the Government policy on comprehensive sexuality education in schools. This motion was overwhelmingly supported by the whole House and Parliament resolved that the policy be halted, pending wider consultation of all concerned parties. 

It is against this background that the International Catholic Legislators Network (ICLN) on 20 August 2018 in Rome, Italy, awarded hon. Lucy Akello the distinguished St Thomas More Defence of Marriage Award. (Applause) Could you stand up for recognition. (Applause) Unfortunately, the law does not allow her to bring her husband to the House (Laughter)

This award is because of her outstanding and courageous commitment as a lawmaker. Further, for upholding the integrity of marriage in all its dimensions as the union of man and woman into one being, in accordance with the Christian doctrine, while promoting and defending God’s plan with humility. 

You will recall, Mr Speaker, that last year’s theme for the prayer breakfast was “As for me and my family, we shall serve the Lord”. That is what we would like to continue to preach to all leaders led by this distinguished Member of Parliament.

I would like to brief you about the International Catholic Legislators Network (ICLN) where all of us can belong, whether you are a Muslim, an Anglican or pagan. The International Catholic Legislators Network was founded in the year 2010 as an independent and non-partisan international initiative to bring together practising Catholics and other Christians in elected office on a regular basis for Christian faith development, education and fellowship.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are now proceeding as if it were a motion. What I had allowed you to do was to introduce the award, lay it on the Table and resume your seat. However, if now you would like to move for justification, then I am going to ask you to prepare a substantive motion and come back at an appropriate time and we have a debate on this issue. For now, lay the document on the Table and we shall receive it and we shall allow you to resume your seat.

MS OGWAL: I shall abide, Mr Speaker. As you know, when you are addressing legislators, they ask too many questions and in compliance – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will deal with that in the motion – 

MS OGWAL: In compliance with your ruling, Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the award I have just mentioned - the St Thomas More Defence of Marriage award – which was given to hon. Lucy Akello, Member of Parliament, Amuru District. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, by acclamation, can we recognise the award that has been given to the hon. Lucy Akello, Member of Parliament, Amuru District. (Applause) Congratulations upon lifting the flag and lifting the institution that is important, for which you received this award. Thank you (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATE OF SECURITY


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we receive the statement, which is additional to the one that was made previously – it is like an update – let me inform the House as follows:

By now, I am informed that the two honourable members are out of the country seeking further medical attention. Yesterday, I also received the President’s response to a letter written to him by the Speaker. Let me inform the House that on Thursday morning, the President called and said that he was looking for the letter and he had not seen it. He inquired whether I had a copy. I told him that indeed I did have a copy. However, I told him that it was all over the internet and asked why his people would not just print him a copy and he looks at it. He said, “No, at least I will say I got it from the Deputy Speaker.” Therefore, I had to quickly arrange a copy for the President on Thursday morning, because he said that he needed to respond to that letter before he went to China.  

Yesterday, I saw a copy of the letter - a response to the Speaker’s letter. It is five pages. I am not sure why you have not received it through the sources you previously received the first one from. That would have probably been a better medium, so that we do not have to start talking about the content of the letter and so on and so forth. The letter has been received by the Office of the Speaker and I have received a copy as Deputy Speaker of Parliament. Thank you.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We would like to thank His Excellency the President for responding to the letter of the Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could I know on what matter you are rising?

MEMBERS: As Leader of the Opposition – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She still needs permission from the Speaker because I had raised the matter that the minister was going to make a statement. Preceding that, I needed to brief the House about what was pending but the key element was supposed to be the minister’s statement.

MS BETTY AOL: Mr Speaker, you realise that it was because of the demand for the response to the letter of the Speaker that we did not do business last week. We are grateful that it is now in place. However, for all of us Members of Parliament, I think it would be procedurally right to know the contents of the letter to the Speaker. 

The Speaker wrote as an institution. You are in the Chair right now. It is procedurally right for you to also give us the contents of His Excellency the President’s letter. Even if we have this issue in court, we are also aware of the sub judice rule but it would help us to respond and demand because the demand was about the perpetrators of torture. Therefore, we would like to know the contents of the two letters. 

I also beg that you give me space either tomorrow or the day after tomorrow to respond to that. That is the procedural matter I am raising, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us proceed properly. A letter was written by the Speaker to the President and the President received the copy that I sent to him on Thursday. I did not read the contents of that letter because it was not my letter and it was not addressed to me. The President has responded to the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Let me be very clear. For the issues raised by the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, she is the one competent to assess whether to her satisfaction, responses have been made. (Applause) However, the letter has been responded to. 

I do not know what value we give to the Office of the Deputy Speaker. To really ask the Deputy Speaker to be a letter reader in the Chair of the Speaker I think might now be calling for too much from the Speaker. To start reading letters - “Dear so and so, I hereby write…” - Really, the Speaker! What do you want to become of this institution, in all fairness? Reading letters! I do not even remember in any part of the rules where the Speaker is supposed to read letters in Parliament. 

I think this issue has been handled institutionally. Let it be resolved the way it should been resolved, honourable members. (Applause) We have business. We have additional things, probably updates on some of the issues that were raised in those letters. The Minister of Security is going to give an update on those issues. We have processes. The presidency has nominated all this Front Bench to act as advisers to him and act on his behalf. They are here and I have asked the minister responsible for this matter to make a statement, adjoining to what he had made previously. That could help. Therefore, can we receive the additional statement from the Minister of Security and we see how to proceed. 

I have just ruled on procedure, honourable member. If you are challenging the ruling of the Speaker, you know how to do it. (Applause)

2.53
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Gen. Elly Tumwine): Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda describe how a Member of Parliament should be dressed. The descriptions in our rules do not include bitenge-like clothes, as if someone is going to see a traditional doctor. Is the Minister of Security in order to dress as if he is going to see a witchdoctor? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the last time I looked at this provision, it was clear. I do not recollect some things but I might have to look at it again. As a lawyer, there is something we call equity and they say if you are going to plead your case under equity, you should come with clean hands. (Laughter)

I am trying to recollect from the rules the provision relating to headgear. However, being probably religious clerical attire, which is preserved for purposes of mosques, churches and other places, it could also be permissible in this House, but let us leave it there. However, the minister is donned in clear African gear, smarter than anybody I have seen in this House. (Laughter) Therefore, he is very well dressed and this is not the first time he is dressing that way.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for continuing to promote Africa’s interest against all other interests. 

Two weeks ago, I made a statement in this House and a lot of things have since taken place in relation to the security situation and from the genesis where we started having concerns about security caused by electoral violence, which started in the constituencies I mentioned in that statement, especially Rukungiri, Jinja, Bugiri and Arua. Since I made that statement on this Floor two weeks ago, new developments have taken place in the process of bringing justice to the accused and in maintaining peace and security in this country. 

I would, therefore, like you to move to page 5 of that statement I made. It is an update of the old - (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I sat in attentively, hoping that the minister would give an opportunity to the Members in this House to have a glimpse of what his boss, His Excellency the President, could have wanted to inform this House about, since a Cabinet minister can always relay a message from the President.

Mr Speaker, Article 82 of the Constitution provides for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. Rule 7 of our Rules of Procedure provides for the general rule of the Speaker. At any point in time in this country, most importantly when the House is sitting, there is the Speaker and we know there is the Speaker in this House. Now, when the President communicated to the Speaker, I am sure that communication must not have been in a private capacity.

As we sit here, the letter and the contents had a clear purview of the concerns raised by this House. Therefore, before the honourable Minister for Security could proceed with page 5 where he ended, we would have wanted him to give us a glimpse. In case he has failed, Mr Speaker, rule 7, sub-rule (3) provides as follows: “(3) In deciding a point of order or practice, the Speaker shall state reasons for the decision and shall cite any Rule of Procedure or other applicable authority.” 

Mr Speaker, you happen to be the one in the Chair, and we are talking about grave matters for which this House was suspended - the assault of Members of Parliament, the deteriorating situation of Members of Parliament, and the untenable situation that Members of Parliament find themselves in in this House. Now that there is a response from the President to the Members’ fears as raised by the Speaker – and as Members of Parliament, we owned up to the Speaker’s letter - it would be more comfortable and procedurally right that we receive the responses from the President regarding the concerns raised in that letter. We would be very comfortably seated as we wait for any other interaction with the President, given that the concerns and fears have been addressed.

We are Members of Parliament here but outside, we need to galvanise the general public and tell the country that all is well now. Without that coming up and when the honourable minister proceeds from where he left off, I find it a disservice to this House. 

When will this House ever take its position and be respected? It can only be today, to show that the collective decision taken by Parliament was respected and these are the outcomes of that communication. Honourable members will then be sure that the concerns raised have been addressed and business can resume in a normal way. However, without that, and trying to sweep this under the carpet and yet these are the concerns of Members of Parliament and of the general public, I find it resistible, Mr Speaker – 

When we have you, we do not look elsewhere; you are the Speaker and your decision is binding on this institution. It is binding on all authorities in the country. Therefore, it would not be the best, Mr Speaker-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, in case you have forgotten why you stood, you rose on a point of order. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I remind you that I rose on a point of procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you rose on a point of order.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I said procedure. Is it procedurally right for us to proceed as if nothing happened, as if there was no communication from the institution of the Parliament of Uganda to the Executive, headed by the President, and to allow that communication and position to be swept under the carpet when we are here seated? The House and the Executive are fully constituted. 

Without being given those pertinent responses to the matters raised on the Floor of Parliament and through a communication in the letter to the President that has been acknowledged with a response, and without any regard to those basic facts on the record, are we proceeding rightly, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are proceeding very well.

GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, we are proceeding very well. (Laughter) Everything is where I had reached. I referred you to page 5, from where I will update you on the statement since I delivered it two weeks ago. 

On 13 August 2018, hon. Robert Kyagulanyi reappeared before the General Court Martial in Gulu and the proceedings were terminated upon instructions from the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP). On the same day, he was rearrested by the police and charged before the Gulu Magistrates Court for treason alongside 32 other suspects. He was thereafter remanded to the Uganda Government prison in Gulu. 

On 27 August 2018, all the suspects, including the Members of Parliament that had been arraigned in court on charges of treason, were granted bail by the High Court judge sitting in Gulu and they all left prison.

Hon. Kyagulanyi was admitted at Rubaga Hospital and so was hon. Zaake, who had escaped from lawful custody in Arua. The two Members of Parliament wanted to undergo medical treatment abroad but they were required to be examined by Government medical experts –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With immense respect to my senior colleague, I have been patient as he continued making statements that I do not construe to be statements of fact.

One, under Article 120 of the Constitution, the Director of Public Prosecutions is barred from interfering with matters before a court martial. Two, Article 23 provides that a person can only be detained in any case for not longer than 48 hours. Hon. Zaake had been detained in custody for more than 48 hours as required by the Constitution, and someone ignorantly is saying on treason charges - the Constitution does not draw that distinction. 

Is the minister in order to tell two statements of fact that are false? First, that the DPP ordered the withdrawal of proceedings in the court martial without tendering that order, which is contrary to the Constitution; secondly, that a person escaped from lawful custody after 48 hours. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as for the issue of the advice that led to the withdrawal of charges from the military court martial, I will leave the minister to explain properly what happened.

As to the issue of escaping after 48 hours, that is not factual, from what the minister said. Hon. Kyagulanyi was admitted at Rubaga Hospital and so was hon. Zaake, who had escaped from lawful custody in Arua. I suppose there were no 48 hours in Arua, so that would not be factual. Can you clarify on the issue of withdrawal of charges?

GEN. TUMWINE: I did not want to get into the details of how the whole thing happened. When the DPP had other charges other than those which were being tried in the General Court Martial, the Director of Legal Services advised that the DPP had other charges other than those charged in the General Court Martial and therefore, it would not have parallel trials. That is why it referred all other matters that could also be tried in the High Court or any other court.

Hon. Zaake escaped from police custody in Arua. The two MPs wanted to undergo medical treatment abroad but they were required to be examined –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, hon. Francis Zaake was flown out of the country to seek medical attention and he cannot walk. By the time he was admitted at Rubaga, he was not even in a position to sit.

Gen. Elly Tumwine is a trained soldier; even when he was shot in Kabamba, he continued walking. However, here you are talking about a civilian. Is he in order to lie to this Parliament that hon. Zaake, who is in a situation that all of us are aware of, was able to escape from prison when he cannot even walk?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are factual matters not within the knowledge of the Speaker. I cannot rule on that. 

GEN. TUMWINE: We shall respond to all allegations and they must prove. They were required to be examined by Government medical experts not only as per procedure of the Medical Board but also to support the ongoing police investigations into the alleged torture as reported to the DPP by the Uganda Law Society. While hon. Kyagulanyi cooperated with the board and he was examined, hon. Zaake only consented to medical examination after a protracted dialogue with his representatives. He was eventually examined and was subsequently granted bond by the Uganda Police Force.

All these developments are a reaffirmation of the independence of the Judiciary as it dispenses its justice in the country and a systematic commitment of the Government to uphold the rule of law. I, therefore, would like to inform the honourable members here that the due process of the law will be followed to the letter. 

I take this opportunity to reassure you and the country that our security forces will remain firm and resolved as always in maintaining law and order throughout the country. No one is above the law and lawlessness shall not be tolerated at all. In this respect, we all have a collective duty to preserve our dignity as a country with its treasured way of life of a peaceful, stable, democratic and prosperous Uganda.

The security situation is now very calm. People should continue to carry out their business normally. Anybody who seeks justice must do it with clean hands. (Applause) We shall defend the country, peace and prosperity. For God and my country.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a copy of the Order Paper. Item No.3 that was called reads as follows: “Statement on the state of security.” 

We all know the kind of insecurity that is prevailing across the country. In a space of about two weeks, we have lost about five Ugandan lives at the hands of security officers, and this is happening across the country. As you earlier guided, the Fountain of Honour has responded to the request of the Speaker and the House is yet to consume that information. What the Minister of Security is revealing to us is in regard to the two honourable Members of Parliament who were severely beaten. We all know that they were flown abroad for further medical attention.
 
Therefore, is he in order not to talk about security across the country and pre-empt what the Fountain of Honour could have responded to in the letter to the Speaker, whose contents we are yet to get? Is he in order to hide and try to mislead this House that everything is okay only because the Government can afford to fly Ugandans who are tortured and being killed out of the country and not attend to the insecurity and loss of lives at the hands of security officers? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Sometimes, the presiding officer faces difficulties first of all, even appreciating some of the issues that are raised and secondly, ruling on them. Is it in order for the honourable minister to hide? Hiding the truth? If you already know the truth, how can he hide it? (Laughter) You make it difficult for me to rule. I wish you could come out clearly on what issue you want addressed by the Speaker so that I can address it properly. 

On the previous Order Paper, this title was discussed. It was said that this is to deal with the situation that had arisen from the by-elections that were taking place in Arua. That was the basis on which this statement was previously made and it is the same item on the Order Paper that the minister is now giving supplementary information about, to enable us debate this matter if you so wish. The rules permit us to debate that. Therefore, can we debate this statement or not? Honourable members, the rules say there is debate. Debate starts now. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise a point of procedure. 

The matters that the honourable minister was talking about are very familiar with the Ugandan population where I belong. It is common knowledge now that our two colleagues who went abroad have gone for further medical treatment because of wounds of torture.
 
We instituted an ad hoc committee that was going to particularly inform this House on the state of our Members under detention who are subsequently out of detention. I happened to be one of the sureties of hon. Kyagulanyi. When he appeared in the dock in Gulu, he could hardly even stand. We are interested in knowing exactly what happened because this House instituted an ad hoc committee whose report is ready. 

We are getting more and more interested. When we are talking about a matter of high constitutional nature – non-derogable rights – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I wish you could move to what you are going to say because I see item No.4 on the Order Paper. Can you guide on what you want me to guide you on?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Okay, I am coming to that. Mr Speaker, the matter we are talking about is a non-derogable right. To me, it is too fundamental –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I arose on a point of procedure –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I keep saying this but it looks like we have difficulties appreciating it: A point of procedure takes precedence only when raised with a point of order at the same time. It does not mean that when you have risen on a point of procedure and you have violated any order, you cannot be called to order.

MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like us to follow our Rules of Procedure, rule 77 (4). Is it in order for the Member of Parliament to continue giving his statements without following the Rules of Procedure of Parliament? 

Rule 77 (4) states, “Where a Member interrupts debate on a point of procedure, the Member shall state the rule of procedure he or she deems to have been breached by the Member holding the Floor…” Is he in order to continue giving his statements without giving the real point of procedure he was trying to use? I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is not in order and I am now trying to guide - (Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: You know that it very difficult to be an advocate of the devil. Mr Speaker, you have your joy, you have your family, you are living in your country and somebody is outside his country suffering, looking for survival – treatment for the next day. You want to call it a matter of an ordinary job?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue is that you have risen on a point of procedure. Please, raise the procedural matter.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: The procedural matter that I would like to raise is: Given the nature and the heat this matter has generated in this country, given the impact it has caused on the lives of very many people, to the level of causing death, is it procedurally right for us to deal with the minister’s statement – actually now two statements because he referred to page 5 of the one he made last week - without first hearing the contents of this ad hoc committee report? Is it procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just look at how much time you have taken to just state that you request that we also handle item No. 4 before we debate. This is because item No.4 is on the motion of the ad hoc committee. Therefore, you are saying, is it proper for us to proceed to debate the minister’s statement without receiving the report of the ad hoc committee? Is that what you are saying? See how long we have taken to get to this. You even started talking of advocates of the devil in the process. 

Honourable members, there is a report. The last time it was coming before the House, it had issues. Now it is on the Order Paper. If you, honourable members, wish that the report is also presented and then we debate both of them together, that is it. However, also remember that as we proceed today, the ad hoc committee had four clear terms of reference:

1. 	To go to Gulu and see the condition of the Members of Parliament.
2. 	To find out what charges were preferred against them.
3. 	To find out whether the rights of the detained persons were being respected. I think that was it.
 
Therefore, those were the issues that the committee went to Gulu to find out and they came back. If it is the wish of the House that we proceed with this –

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I presume that the statement by the minister is being given under rule 51 of our Rules of Procedure. With your permission, it attracts a debate for not more than an hour. The report of the ad hoc committee has not been presented and our rules stop us from debating in anticipation. 

I, therefore, would like to invite you to persuade colleagues. Let us first deal with this statement of the minister and then deal with the report. By not doing so, we will be debating in anticipation. I do not know what is in the report to demand that they should be debated together.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Debate starts now and the hon. Fred Mwesigye had started the debate.

3.32
MR FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had arisen on the Floor but I was interrupted. This time I need your protection so that I can conclude my submission.

Mr Speaker, I was calling the attention of this august House to the level of provocation and impunity in this country. I would like to call your attention to the provocation that was witnessed in the stoning of the vehicle of the head of state. I would like to call upon every member of the House and also every leader of this country to condemn this act. If you really need us to tackle the causes of what we are discussing, we must discuss and understand the cause of what precipitated all this that is happening in this country.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With respect to my colleague, the hon. Fred Mwesigye – (Interjections) - I actually do not know about his number. 

Mr Speaker, the question of stoning His Excellency the President’s motorcade is ingredient No.1 in the charges of treason labelled against the Members of Parliament and other suspects. The debate my brother is attracting is substantially for somebody to give evidence of the stoning and another person to give evidence controverting that, therefore offending the rule of sub judice. Is he therefore, in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is not in order. That particular matter is substantially before court. We cannot begin discussing it because it will be pre-judicial to the matters that are before court. Please, leave it and deal with other issues, if there are any left. Can we take two to three minutes each? Please, wind up.

MR MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling. I withdraw and I will not continue with that matter. However, as leaders of this country, we must be concerned about the impunity and indiscipline that is creeping into our society. We must all condemn it, irrespective of what happened in Arua. This is my request. 

Even our conduct in this House calls for scrutiny. The conduct of honourable members of this House calls for attention. It is a sign of indiscipline that is creeping in this country. We must talk about it and condemn it, if we are sincere. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.37
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the report, the minister talks about charging the policemen and army men who tortured victims like journalists and others. However, the little I know about army and police operations is that they work under a certain command. There is no way you will talk of charging a policeman or soldier without charging the commander because policemen or soldiers do not work alone. The moment these soldiers go to the streets with sticks, you know what they are going to do. They are not herdsmen that they have to move with sticks; these sticks have a purpose.

Therefore, there is no way you can charge this poor policeman or soldier and leave the commander behind. I would like the minister to categorically state on the Floor of Parliament that he is going to look for the commanders of those operations and charge them. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I have listened to and read the statement by the Minister for Security and it all zeros down to the facts that resulted from the arrest and charging of our colleagues. 

Mr Speaker, under rule 72(5), I call upon you to make a ruling and to agree with me that debating the minister’s statement is tantamount to sub judice because the matters are already before court. We are here determining who should be charged and who should be charged with what. Are we trying to pre-empt the judgment of the court? I call upon you, Mr Speaker, under rule 72(5), to agree with me that debating this statement would be sub judice. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I was guiding hon. Ssemujju, I think I said that let us debate, if there is anything left to debate. It is the same principle I am going to use now. If you look at the minister’s statement and the way it has been presented, whatever is left for debate that will not contravene the sub judice rule can be debated - if there is anything left that can be debated. 

That means we have to be careful not to fall into the trap of beginning to discuss the substance of what is already before court. Therefore, for Members who rise up to debate this statement, bear that in mind because if I hear two more crossing into areas that are sub judice, I will terminate this debate.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I listened attentively to the statement by the minister and that is why I agree with my colleague, hon. Kafuuzi, that the minister’s statement in its entirety borders on the sub judice rule. 

My point of procedure is: Would it not be procedurally right to wait for a complete debate on the report of the ad hoc committee of Parliament so that we can go into the nitty gritty of Members’ rights, who battered our Members of Parliament, whether they would be brought to book - (Interruption)

MR MWIJUKYE: Mr Speaker, you have just ruled on how we should proceed and debate. Is the Member in order to challenge your ruling?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is not. Honourable member for Padyere, you are not in order to try and debate my ruling. 

Honourable members, the issue is, if there is an aspect of this statement that can be debated, debate it. Please, let us debate those aspects.

3.44
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to debate the statement entitled, “Ministerial statement on the state of security by the honourable Minister of Security.”

First, let me note that if the description of security by the minister is this narrow, this country is in trouble. This is my opinion. If the entire ministry sat down and what they think the security situation is is what is contained in this statement, then I can understand why this country is in trouble.

I am happy, nevertheless, that hon. Elly Tumwine is now the one holding the portfolio of security and is the one reading this statement. Why? Hon. Tumwine is part of a group that is allergic to elections and election loss. You remember what you did when you lost elections in 1980; you invaded a barracks and that is how you were shot. (Laughter) You invaded a barracks called Kabamba on 6 February 1981 - (Interruption)

GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, I have been in this Parliament since 1986. My curriculum vitae is on the internet and my record is well known in this country. The history of Uganda is very clear. Members of Uganda Patriotic Movement (UPM), Uganda People’s Congress (UPC), the Democratic Party (DP) and other parties that stood and participated in the elections of 1980 are known. In 1980, I was an instructor in Masindi Barracks. I did not participate in the political elections and I did not lose any election. 

We have been fed so many lies and assumptions. We have been fed un-factual and un-researched information by people who do not take time to get their facts right. As honourable members who are disciplined in this House, we have kept quiet and obeyed the rules of the game while Members disobey them with impunity and go ahead to speak of things they do not know about.

Another Member on the Floor talked of how I was injured in Kabamba. I was not injured in Kabamba - (Interjections)- I am giving examples of where people do not care but deceive the country and the world. 

Is hon. Ssemujju in order to continue propagating wrong, un-researched, misleading, unsubstantiated and inflammatory statements in this House to deceive the public? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have absolutely no contest to the testimony of Gen. Elly Tumwine that he was not shot in Kabamba. The honourable member for Kira Municipality had stated, as a matter of fact, that he was shot in Kabamba. Now you know that he was not shot in Kabamba. Would you like to correct the record and proceed? 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I knew it was going to be very difficult because it is his opinion against mine. If hon. Elly Tumwine was shot from a different location, I am sorry. (Laughter) 

The point I was making is that hon. Elly Tumwine is part of a group that went to fight, protesting the outcome of the 1980 elections. Their response to losing elections has been to resort to violence and he cannot deny that. The Democratic Party, under Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere, whose victory it is reported was stolen, remained civil people in this Parliament. He was actually the Leader of the Opposition. The group he supported that won only one seat in Kasese are the ones who went to wage a war in which nearly one million people died in Luweero. I would be reluctant to be lectured by someone whose response has always been to resort to violence. To come here and tell me – (Interruption)

GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, it is the duty of the members of this House to discipline themselves. It is the duty of this House to remain consistent with your ruling, when you make one. Is the honourable member in order, after you have ruled on information he does not seem to know, to say that those who went to the bush were those who lost in the elections, when I had already given him public information that those who had lost elections were those who were political? 

There were many who had not participated in those elections, there were those who were not in the political campaigns, there were many who were in universities, many who were young and many who were in all parties. I should give you information, if you do not have it. There were people from UPC, DP and other parties who went to the bush. Is he therefore in order to continue misinforming the public that it is only those who lost that went to the bush when you have already ruled him out of order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe hon. Elly Tumwine could stop this line of debate by stating to us why he went to the bush. (Applause)

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have never been given such a wonderful opportunity in this House – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please use about three minutes. 

GEN. TUMWINE: Okay. With those restrictions, I will try to be very brief. 

From 1971 when Idi Amin took power in this country, the people of Uganda were being killed every day and everywhere. People had to run out of this country in thousands. Very many went into exile and the economy had collapsed. 

The 1979 war, in which I also participated - I did not go to the bush before we had joined the struggle to remove Idi Amin. We defeated Idi Amin and established relative order but alas, the armed forces of the time continued killing people. 

Do not compare incomparables. At the time, shops would close at 3.00 p.m., road blocks were everywhere. Some of you are very young; you did not go through that experience. The situation in the entire country was very dangerous. The Parliament was not as free as this - (Interjections) - the Speaker gave me an opportunity –(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, in 1980, I was 20 years. The reason the Member stood up was to tell us why he went to the bush. Is he in order to continue lamenting about Amin who never went to the bush without telling us why he went to the bush? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we listening to the same speech because I thought that is what he was doing. He is giving reasons why he went to the bush. 

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It shows we need more time even to learn our own history. The freedom for the people of Uganda to elect their own leaders like we have done was at stake and was not there. We went to the bush, first of all, to empower the people of Uganda, educate them, train them, give them experience, discuss with them, live with them and speak about four questions: where Uganda had come from, where Uganda had reached, where Uganda needed to go, and how it needed to go there. (Applause)

We needed to sit down and discuss the politics of Uganda and we sat from morning to evening and from evening to midnight to discuss those four subjects. We needed to make sure that we were in a safe place where we could not only defend ourselves but could have time to discuss, plan, prepare and rescue the people of Uganda, like we did. Since then, Uganda –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, on matters of history, one has to be very specific and factual, aware that some persons could have been there during the time you are talking about. Therefore, be extremely careful when you talk about history. 

I would like to tell you that the people that went to educate the masses got only one seat in Parliament. Let it be recorded in Parliament that they got one seat. President Yoweri Museveni was defeated by Sam Kuteesa, not by any other person. (Applause)

Therefore, when you talk about elections and winning elections - Through what power? That election was won without firing a gun, without intimidating anybody and without the army or any security forces on the streets. It was not like what you saw in Arua – (Interjections) - you were not there but I was. (Applause) 

We had the late Boniface Byanyima on the Opposition side in this Parliament as well as other members of Parliament, including Paul Ssemogerere, in the Opposition in Parliament. Is it in order for you to make it appear as if there was no legitimately elected Government? Is it in order for you to go and shoot buses on the streets and claim victory over it? You came to power on people’s blood and you are now -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am required to rule on this point of order. In 1980, I was not able to vote because I was below age. Therefore, I could not follow the goings on very much. So many years after, I am being called upon to rule on a factual matter that happened where I was not. I am not able to rule but in case they are factual, please take note.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will try to summarise – (Members rose)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, the honourable member is holding the Floor.

GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, you allowed me to give the reasons why I went to the bush -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me recast. The issue is that there was a point of order on which I ruled. There was another point of order, which related to factual matters that were not within my knowledge and I could not rule. I asked the honourable member to give us reasons why he went to the bush and I gave him three minutes but in the course of his speech, Members kept coming up. Please, wind up in one minute.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We went to the bush, as I have told you, to mobilise Ugandans to take power, to shape the economy of Uganda afresh, to establish democracy that has brought leaders from LC I – like the ones we have elected recently throughout the country, to give power to LCs III, to give power to the districts, to give power to members of Parliament who are here and to debate in freedom and harmony, to build a strong army; a pro-people’s army that is keeping the peace of the country, to develop the economy and education of the people – [MR SSEKIKUBO: “Clarification.”] - I cannot get clarification from a person like hon. Ssekikubo.

Mr Speaker, that was the basis and it is on the same principle that I am appealing to you and all young people; let us talk and debate in the peace and harmony that was established by our revolution.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought that context would guide me as I debate the statement by hon. Elly Tumwine and I deliberately went for history. What we are dealing with now – and this is a matter that is very serious that each one of us must reflect on – is the militarisation of politics. When you lose an election, the Constitution provides avenues for seeking redress. 

However, because of the history of resorting to violence when you have lost, that is why in Arua, SFC became the arbiter. 

All the elections the President has mentioned – and I have read statements he has made - are elections that he lost. Not only is he attacking members of Parliament, he is also attacking the Electoral Commission. That is what you must reflect on. I am happy that another revolutionary, Maj. Gen. Pecos Kuteesa, is here. If you read his book, “Uganda’s Revolution”, he speaks about how they formed a group of terrorists with Brig. Matayo Kyaligonza. We are talking about people who have an appetite for violence each time they lose an argument or an election.

If you went to Luweero to come and empower Ugandans to choose their leaders, why should you be aggrieved when they are not choosing your choice? You are quarrelling over Bugiri and Jinja. I was in Jinja and I was the chairman for hon. Mwiru’s campaign. Each time this violence follows the President. There was peace in Arua before he went there. There was also peace in Jinja before he came. The moment he came to Jinja, our campaign headquarters were raided and everybody was loaded on trucks and driven to Kayunga because the President does not want to see a loss. This is how you have been exporting violence from one area to another. 

I have spoken to Gen. Tumwine in private and I thought he had actually moved from that belligerence tone. Let me tell you that these guns that you carry and use to terrorise people - the past governments thought these guns were very heavy and you took young people to carry them. Do not ever deceive yourself that you are the last to carry these guns. Continue using them to terrorise and beat people but one time, people will carry them and use them against you.

Therefore, my final plea - (Interruption)

GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, if you want to use the opportunity of Parliament, use it for telling the truth. I would like him to tell me - and I demand that he really explains to this House - when I sat with him in private to discuss the issues he is talking about and under what circumstances I discussed with - the last time I had a discussion with hon. Ssemujju was on NTV and not in private. We never discussed what he has raised. Is he in order to continue peddling lies?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know this is the people’s House. One time, I said that if this country had only 450 citizens, they would be the ones here dealing with these matters themselves. However because they are many, they chose representatives. Whatever we do here, we should really do it on their behalf. That should be our guiding principle. 

You all remember John McCain; a USA Senator. He fought in the wars in Vietnam where he was captured and later released. He later became a Secretary and contested twice for presidency of the USA. Last year, he was diagnosed with cancer of the brain and he knew he was going to die. One day, after he had kind of recovered properly, he came back to the Senate. When he got in, the entire Senate stood up to give him a standing ovation for this stroke of patriotism that he had demonstrated. He was sick to the point of death but he walked into the Chamber of the Senate to articulate issues of the welfare of the American people. 

When he got up to speak, he said, “I hope we can again rely on humility, on our need to cooperate, on our dependence on each other to learn how to trust each other again and by so doing, better serve the people who elected us. Stop listening to the bombastic loudmouths on the radio and the television and the Internet. To hell with them. They do not want anything done for the public good.” 

That is Senator McCain and I say this really as a tribute to him for the kind of leadership he demonstrated. He voted against his party many times because he thought the national good was being defeated by partisan politics. 

I wish we could adopt these kinds of things. I wish we could demonstrate this spirit that brings this country together. I wish we could propagate peace rather than violence for the rest of the country. Is it so difficult to do things in peace? Please, honourable members, let us recast how we debate because whatever we do here sends a signal across the country. If we are showing tendencies of violence here, we are transmitting it to the general public and we cannot expect anything better. We are the leaders; let us be leaders. Let us lead, honourable members. 

Honourable members, it is one hour and the minister’s debate is supposed to be one hour. This debate is terminated. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE INVESTIGATION INTO THE CONDITION OF MEMBERS AND OTHER SUSPECTS ARRESTED IN THE RUN UP TO THE BY-ELECTION FOR ARUA MUNICIPALITY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Firm Foundation Nursery and Primary school and Kanyum Children Educational Centre Nursery and Primary School, Kumi District. They are represented by hon. Ismael Orot and hon. Monicah Amoding. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome.

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have called for the presentation of the report of the ad hoc committee. This report was uploaded on our iPads and all of us have it. When I look at the terms of reference, they indicate, among others; whether indeed the suspects in detention were in Gulu, the physical condition of the detained suspects, the charges preferred against the detainees and whether the rights of the detained suspects were being respected. 

My understanding of this and my reading of the report indicates that it is already overtaken by events. Most importantly, it is sub judice because the report presents matters, which are already before court and its presentation will clearly delve into the realm of whatever is already in court.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, this matter has been raised and our rules do not allow us to debate in anticipation. No report of Parliament has been presented. I know hon. Kafuuzi likes corners – (Interjections) - I am on a point of order and so there cannot be a point of order on a point of order.

So, is hon. Kafuuzi in order to debate in anticipation in total violation of our rules?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member was not debating. He rose on a procedural matter and he is not debating in anticipation. He only raised a procedural matter which I would like to handle this way. 

It is a procedural matter that I would like to put to you and seek guidance. That the issues in the report were overtaken by events and the balance of what is remaining is substantially before court – that is what he is raising. Can we briefly debate whether this report is debatable in the circumstances that he has stated?

4.19
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the point raised by hon. Kafuuzi to the extent that this matter is sub judice and I add my voice to invite you to rule as such.

To the extent that the terms of reference command the committee to establish whether the suspects were in Gulu; to that extent we are talking about the scene of crime; to that extent we are talking about the place of detention –(Interjections)– I am giving my contribution –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. For a very long time, I have rendered my blanket trust to hon. Adolf Mwesige by reason of his seniority to me in many respects; first, as a lawyer, second as a parliamentarian and even as a matter of age. I am now getting tempted to withdraw the blanket trust.

Is the honourable member in order to give false facts about the scene of crime being Gulu whereas not? Indeed from the previous statement of the minister, previously read, the purported scene of crime is in Arua.

Secondly, even the heading of the report, which he has seen and the terms of reference, if he has read the same - but beyond that, to mislead the House by saying whether the suspects were in Gulu is a matter considered to be sub judice as part of the trial - is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, from the facts that have been presented to this Parliament including the terms of reference and the heading of the report all refer to events that happened in Arua.

Honourable minister, having been the Minister of Local Government, I am sure that you know the different locations of Arua and Gulu. Would you like to explain what you were saying? (Laughter)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, as you know, criminal procedure is a chain of events. You cannot discuss it in isolation of the chain in which the events took place.

If I started with Gulu and maybe that was not appropriate to Members, I am sorry. But the fact of the matter is that there were events relating to this case including alleged torture and the trial itself which took place in Gulu.

I was about to go to Makindye –(Interjections)– yes, please give me time - because if you are to comprehensively look at this matter, you have to talk about Arua, Gulu, Makindye, Rubaga Hospital and Kiruddu Hospital because all those venues have a bearing on different aspects which took place around the case. My point of sub judice is to the extent that all these things are revealed in the report: the alleged torture, the happenings in Arua, the whole context being in Arua and all these matters are before the court of law for inquiry. This House has a duty to leave the matter to court to handle it conclusively.

MR SSEGGONA: The person who arrested me from the court yard of this House needs to take his seat as I raise my point. It is common decency, hon. Rukutana. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, what constitutes a criminal charge is within the four corners of a charge sheet. The charge sheet is self-contained talking about treason. Nowhere in any court in Uganda is the issue of torture pending determination by any court. 

No facts and no evidence; to the extent that somebody wants to talk about the ingredients of charge of treason as it stands before the court, I will defend any Member who says, “No discussion” and I will agree. 

To the extent that the terms of reference of this committee are: 

    1. To established whether the suspects were in Gulu. How sub judice is that? 
    2. Whether any rights have been violated. Where is it in the criminal court in Gulu? When a Member talks about a series of events; unless he lays at the Table any charge sheet in court that talks about events beyond Arua and Gulu.
Is he in order, therefore, to continue misleading this House with his seniority and the respect that he is abusing? I was just about to say something else but I will not.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is where I always have difficulties. I previously looked at a typical treason case charge sheet. It is drafted in such a way that it covers so many places. 

I have not looked at this charge sheet in particular. How do I rule since I have not seen the charge sheet? I cannot rule on the basis of a charge sheet that I have not seen. Probably, if there was a copy, I would look at it now so that it can help me with what I should say.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Very carefully as you quoted McCain, he was in the Senate. Houses of Representatives are firewalls for democracy. They are the last resort where all matters are debated; whether people want to pour off, it can be a psychological relief.
 
The last that can happen to any Parliament is to invent technicalities to avert debate. The cornerstone of a democracy is our capacity to debate the hardest matter in our country.

The procedural point I am raising is to the effect that in all that we are trying to do, I see this Parliament failing in its cardinal duty to be a place where people can debate any matter. 

When I look at what we are trying to debate about the report - that people are trying to subvert that it should not be debated, it has absolutely nothing to do with a charge sheet except that people want to shy away from the truth. When we do so, the truth will catch up with us one day, one time. 

Therefore, the point of procedure I am trying to rise on is that within your powers and I know you are more than capable of doing the needful, is to avail members of Parliament; first, to hear what happened to their Members –(Interruption)

MR ALIONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This House and Members are aware and have seen the report that is on our iPads. I believe that report is not authentic because it has not been signed by the chairperson of the committee. 

Secondly, there is a member who was not part of the select committee who signed. Therefore, is my colleague in order to push this House to make the report to be read –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which Member was not part of the committee but signed the report?

MR ALIONI: Hon. Benard Atiku signed on the first page of the report –(Interjections)- yes, he signed. Therefore, is the report authentic? It is not. 

Therefore, is my colleague in order to push this House to discuss an unauthentic report that is misleading this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a procedural matter, which was being concluded. Now, there is a point of order, which I must rule on.

The rules governing the authenticity of reports are clear. It has to be signed by a quorum of members. How many members were on this committee?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Six.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many signed?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Five. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report is authentic. (Applause). On the issue of the membership of hon. Bernard Atiku, I am in possession of a letter authored by the Speaker who constituted the committee in writing. The hon. Benard Atiku is a member of that committee. Therefore, if those are the grounds for this point of order, then it is not sustainable. 

Can I finish with the procedural matter that was raised by the Member then I come to you, learned Deputy Attorney-General? Please wind up. Had you finished?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I was trying to appeal to Members of Parliament –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are addressing me on a point of procedure.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I am appealing to you as the Speaker of Parliament that you are more than capable at any time of the journey of this session to determine when matters will become sub judice.

However, in as far as one - for instance in the report, about torture of Members, we need to know from the committee what happened; what they saw in as far as determining whether their rights were abused. We are required to know because what happens to an individual Member may happen to me the next day and to the rest of the country. Those matters are not in any way procedural; I see the sensitivity of the matter and I am alive to the fact that there is tension in the country. 

The only way to diffuse the tension in the country is for the House of Representatives to speak boldly, clearly and honestly about what could have happened. That is why I appeal to you that much as there could have been those other contentions, in your own judgment, let you be the guide who will steer the boat clearly so that we can receive this report and determine whether there was torture or rights of Members were abused - that is the cardinal role of a Parliament. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. You see, honourable members, sometimes, I am at a loss about how consistent we are in what we say because, last week, I made the same plea that this is a  House of last resort, didn’t I?

I pleaded with Members when the honourable member for Lwemiyaga raised a point that when there were problems in the kingdom of Buganda, they had to recall Parliament from recess, and when there was another problem somewhere, they had to call Parliament from recess. I urge you, honourable members, that the day we have no other place to go, what will the people do? 

Honourable members, you unanimously told me we could not proceed against that plea. Today, the honourable member for Butambala is raising my same argument, which I used, and he defeated - actually, he must have listened to me very carefully. 

I used the same argument to try to urge Members to say that these matters are urgent, “Can we deal with them now?” and you flatly said, “No”. Today, I am now being told that these matters are urgent and important and we must debate them. Really? What has changed since last week? I thought last week was more urgent than today.

Honourable members, let us be consistent because it helps the presiding officer. When we make these pleas to you, we mean well. We try to project, cover the image of the institution and avoid pitfalls that could end up affecting our future engagements. That is my purpose here. Now today, I am supposed to say that the argument you used last week can be used now when it failed to work last week.

Please, honourable members, I really urge you, the same spirit that you used last week - that is why I am being careful in how I am handling this matter. I have posed a question and I am not going to use the prerogative of the Speaker to rule whether to support the motion or not - I am not going to rule. I am going to have debate and I will take a vote. So, let us debate.

4.39
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I rise pursuant to the mandate bestowed on me under Article 119 (3) and (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to give advice on the matter before you, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker, it has been raised that the issue before this Parliament is sub judice. I have had the occasion to look at the report of the committee. The entire team of Attorney-General’s Chambers and I looked at the report of the committee. We have had the occasion to look at the charge sheet. It comprises of two parts - statement of offense and particulars of offense; the statement is elaborate, the particulars are detailed.

Having looked at them and subjecting what we have read to the sub judice rule, which I would like to quote verbatim for honourable members to appreciate what we are doing - rule 72: The Sub judice Rule 

    (1) Subject to sub rule (5) of this rule, a Member shall not refer to any particular matter which is sub judice. 
    (2) A matter shall be considered sub judice if it refers to active criminal or civil proceedings in the opinion of the Speaker, the discussion of such matter is likely to prejudice its fair determination.
    (3) In determining whether a criminal or civil proceeding is active, the following shall apply - 
    (a) criminal proceedings shall be deemed active when a charge has been made or a summons to appear has been issued by court; 
I will stop there for some time and tell you that having looked at the charge sheet, the statement of the offense, the particulars of the offenses; having scrutinised the report of the committee, there is no way, Mr Speaker, we can debate this report without infringing upon the sub judice rule. (Applause) The opinion I am giving -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am able to deal with these things. Please give me a chance to deal with them.

MR RUKUTANA: The opinion I am giving is based on the fact that having scrutinised the report, we are of the opinion that we cannot sever and say that these elements of the report do not offend the sub judice rule and these elements offend the sub judice rule. The report is intertwined. It has to be taken as one. 

Mr Speaker, I am inviting you, considering that it is not possible for this House to sever, it is not possible for you, Mr Speaker, to determine what Members will say in the debate. It is not possible for you, Mr Speaker to know the nature of evidence the prosecution and the defence intend to adduce - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, again it disturbs when the Attorney-General of a country avoids the real questions and controversy. 

As his client –(Interjections)– Gen. Tumwine, I respect you on matters of art not law, please respect me in my area also. (Laughter). [Members rose_] If the statement is offensive to my brother, the hon. Tumwine –(Interjections)– I am told he is my father, even when we are still here together. I will take it in good faith and say I am sorry if you find it offensive that I respect your profession. 

Mr Speaker, I expect any lawyer worth the name, who is giving an opinion to a client, which we happen to be, to make reference to the specifics where he thinks the rule will be offended. 

Is torture an ingredient of the offence called treason? Is torture part of the evidence that may necessarily be laid in proving or disproving the offence of treason? –(Interjections)– If you say it is likely to be, then you are speculating and thereby offending the rules of this House. The rule that my brother, the hon. Rukutana has read, makes reference to the opinion of the Speaker. 

Now, the Speaker is in the Chair. The Speaker, being misled by the Attorney-General, has not been supplied with that copy of the charge sheet that the Attorney-General is talking about.

Indeed, he has not written an opinion. He has been absent. He has not been on any charges and he has not explained where he has been. Is he, therefore, in order to fail in his duties to write an opinion to this House?

I have immense respect for you, hon. Mwesige. I have never known you to be a heckler. Now, without placing the charge sheet before you, Mr Speaker, they want to tempt you to make a finding that the Members will debate in a manner that will offend the rule. Therefore, I must stop the reading of the report and the debating without even giving an opportunity for the report to be read for the Speaker to be able to discern and say, “Do not debate this aspect to the extent that it will offend the law”

I have seen Attorney-Generals in this country. I have seen one who wrote an opinion that the levels of equality before innocence are different. They have ended badly. And to my brother, the hon. Rukutana, I do not want you to end badly simply because you confused and abused your intelligence. Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a point of order; whether the learned Deputy Attorney-General is in order to fail in his duty of giving an opinion. I thought that is what he was attempting to do here. 

My understanding, in the opinion of the Attorney-General and he articulated it, to the extent that he refers to a debate, there is no debate. There is no report that has been presented and so there is no debate. 

The issue I am seeking concurrence on because of the nature of this issue, is on the procedural matter raised by hon. Jackson Kafuuzi of Kyaka South County. He raises the point that even a move – going by the title of this report, the move to present it – first of all, part of the matter is already overtaken by events and secondly, whatever has remained is sub judice. That is what he raised and I have declined because of the nature of this to have this matter discussed before I make my ruling - to have this matter shared properly before I make my ruling.

Honourable members, when I went to law school, they taught things about cause and effect. Things about causation. I do not know whether they are still the same but that is what I was taught. That there is something like cause and effect which I was hoping the learned people would have helped me with so that I would be guided properly. Since I seem to have been left on my own, let me guide as follows; 

Cause: what caused the effect? If there are allegations of the offence of treason and the activities associated with the act constituting the offence did they in anyway cause what is being referred to in the secondary issue of the effect of what happened? If it does, is there a correlation that cannot be severed? I am just thinking. 

Therefore, if I am being – of course I will never be – forcefully arrested on suspicion of a commission of an offence and going by my nature and if I felt I was not guilty of anything, I could engage. If I did, and in the process we exchanged and I got some injuries, would that be related to the commission of the act I am being accused of? Just thinking. Can you sever a discussion of cause and discuss the effect or can you discuss the effect without discussing the cause? 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, that is why we are blessed to have a very brilliant Speaker in you. (Applause) If I had not been interrupted, I wanted to tell this House that from our assessment, having looked at both the charge sheet and the report, we are of the informed opinion that the entire process of criminal prosecutions that is going ahead and the allegations of torture all impinge on the manner of arrest which is a direct beginning of the entire process of criminal prosecution. 

I looked at the report and the charge sheet as I told you –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We rise and fall as one people. We rise and fall as one nation. On the issue we are talking about, let me start from what you said: “This country has enough space for all of us.” I wiped my tears and said, “Surely, he has finished it.”

Mr Speaker, from what you spoke – and last week struggling with “why” – we needed to discuss, honestly, matters relating to our wellbeing, privileges and how Members are handled and so on. I listened to you attentively. You said: “I am giving two days for the Government to respond.” 

We came here, Mr Speaker, today and Government has responded –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not what I said. I never said anything like that.

MR ANYWARACH: It was when you were adjourning Parliament on Tuesday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I never said anything like that.

MR ANYWARACH: Okay, Mr Speaker, my understanding was that the two days that you said, “okay, we meet on Tuesday”, would be today that we receive at least a report from H.E the President. A report came from the minster, which report in its entirety I thought – I am not disputing your ruling – was  bordering more on the sub judice. In your wise ruling, you said, “Well, we will allow debate but where the debate is bordering so much on sub judice, I will stop a Member.”

In my understanding, Mr Speaker, the report of Parliament is not even any close to offending the sub judice rule because we are looking at the privileges of members of Parliament: how they were treated and whether their rights were respected –(Interjections)- right, some of the issues have been overtaken by events.

Mr Speaker, the report which is yet to come on the Floor of Parliament – some people could have already read it on the iPads – has become an issue in context and content for the Attorney-General to make reference. You have just said “causation is never correlation”. That is my understanding in science and that is pure science: causation is not correlation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not say that.

MR ANYWARACH: Well, you said you are looking at causation and effects but in science we say “causation is not correlation”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the two concepts are extremely different. I like you repeating my words but I do not like you putting words in my mouth.

MR ANYWARACH: The point of order I am raising here, Mr Speaker, is, is it in order for the Attorney-General to stand here and make reference to a report that he says he looked at, yet the report is not yet authoritatively laid on the Floor of Parliament? For it to be laid on the Floor of Parliament, it must be read and the Speaker comes on to guide whether we should debate it and whether it borders on sub judice? 

Is he in order to continue relying on that report which has never been presented on the Floor of Parliament as a point for him to misguide the side of Government and now he is importing his misguidance even on the Floor of Parliament, which is led by you, a very capable lawyer and I think even much better than him? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when somebody selects words to use, if you have to quote them, quote them. However, if you try to paraphrase, at least be close to what that person said. I like what you said about “We rise and fall together”. That is very pessimistic. I prefer you to put it the other way: “We fall and rise together.” That is more optimistic and that has been the thing about the country – it falls and it rises and we rise together.

However, that said, honourable members, we are where we are just because a Member raised a procedural matter and we are trying to find a solution on how to deal with that. He raised the procedural matter here and I have to rule and I am saying I need assistance. I need to understand where we are on this and then I rule. He says what I have been repeating here and if I do it, it will be the fourth time. 

That is the procedural matter he raised and that is what the Attorney-General is responding to and that is what all of us are responding to. Therefore, nobody is talking about a presented report or an unpresented report. We are just dealing with the issue of the procedure raised and the explanation raised.

MR RUKUTANA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. (Mr Jonathan Odur rose_) I was still giving my opinion -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I really wish you could listen to the Attorney-General. Let him wind up and then we can proceed.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, in our considered opinion, the allegations of torture, which are the subject matter of this report, have a direct correlation with the mode of arrest and bringing the suspects to court. 

The mode of arrest, for anybody who knows criminal proceedings, has a direct correlation on the judgment that the court is likely to give. Having assessed all that situation in its entirety, there is no way we can sit here, debate how the accused persons were arrested, how they were treated and how they were eventually charged without infringing on the outcome of the cases before the court and that is exactly what rule 72 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament is meant to protect –(Interjections)- I am giving this as a professional opinion, pursuant to my mandate given to me by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to which all of us must bow –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you might be aware, I am one of the appellants in the Supreme Court case: hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, hon. Muhammad Nsereko and hon. Wilfred Niwagaba Vs the NRM and, among others, the Attorney-General. One of the issues then was: is the decision and opinion of the Attorney-General binding on Parliament? It was settled that the opinion and advice of the Attorney-General is not binding on the Speaker of Parliament. 

Just now, the Attorney-General is taking us for a ride that he is giving his opinion by virtue of the Constitution, citing Article 119, among others. Is the Attorney-General in order to mislead this House on a matter that was determined and decided by the Supreme Court of this Country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Article referred to is Article 119:

“119. Attorney-General.
    (1) There shall be an Attorney-General who shall be a Cabinet Minister appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.
(2) 	Is on qualification.
(3)	The Attorney General shall be the principal legal adviser of the Government.
(4) The functions of the Attorney General shall include the following -
(a) To give legal advice and legal services to the Government on any subject;
(c) To represent Government in courts or any other legal proceedings to which the Government is a party; and 
(d) To perform such other functions as may be assigned to him or her by the President or by law.
Yes, that is what it says. So, the issue of whether the opinion of the Attorney General is binding or not does not arise because all he has to do is to give that opinion. It is up to the people to apply it. However, he has given his opinion. So, if we go against it, we will have gone against an opinion already given. So, there is no problem.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, to conclude this matter, I would like to put it on record that as Attorney General and Attorney General’s chambers, our full time occupation is to apply our minds to the interpretation of the law so that we can adequately advise Government and all Government agencies. I have rendered our considered opinion and advice. The advice is very well researched and grounded. There is no way we can debate this report without infringing on rule 72 of our Rules of Procedure. I rest my case.

MR ODUR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to address you and also persuade you on three points regarding the procedural matter raised by my brother, hon. Kafuuzi. First of all, the rule on sub judice was brought in because Government and the State by then could control information. It was in the era where there was only one broadcaster giving information to the whole country.

However, in this era of social media and information, it is - (Interruption)

MR BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two weeks ago, hon. Odur was on the Floor here alleging that hon. Kyagulanyi was executed. So, are we proceeding well to allow that honourable member to mislead the House again? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is why I insist on consistency. Honourable member for Erute County South actually made those statements and he continued to say they were not producing hon. Kyagulanyi because he had been executed. So, they were scared. That is on the record of Parliament. Would you like to start with that?

MR ODUR: Thank you very much. Before I proceed to address the House on the issue of sub judice, I would like to correct the records. I rose on a point of information. At that time, we had a number of information moving across the country. One of them is on record; it is on social media and it included torture, possible death, execution and the arrest of members of Parliament. 

I challenged Government that to deal with this matter, why don’t they come on the Floor and present to us information that is accurate so that the country cannot be in anxiety? Only five minutes after that, the First Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business, Gen. Moses Ali, came and clarified that “Members, I want to inform you that no death has occurred. But, I can confirm that hon. Kyagulanyi was transported in a military chopper and he is receiving treatment”. It means something had happened to him. It was clarified here.

So, Mr Speaker, I now beg to proceed to address you on the issue of sub judice. I was raising that at that time, when the law came in effect; it was possible for the State to control how information goes to the public. Now, in this era, where there is social media and people can discuss, the law of sub judice cannot apply.

Secondly, judicial officers who decide our cases - this is a strong point - are under obligation to consider only facts that are before them; not facts that are discussed outside court. If a judicial officer is going to decide, even though he sat in a bar or witnessed what happened, he cannot bring that as evidence and say I am going to convict you because I was there and I saw it. Judicial officers rely on what is tabled before them. 

In this case, I would like to assume that the judges we have in this country are people of sound minds. They are independent under Article 128 of the Constitution. Whatever we discuss here has no bearing on what they decide. If that were the case, you know very well that by now so many judgments that came out - as indicated, whatever we discussed or passed here cannot hold. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, all of us in this House have gone to school and rule 72 on sub judice is very clear. Hon. Odur is arguing as if he is suspending our very rules because the rules are very elaborate. So, is he in order to stand on the Floor of Parliament and challenge a rule which is written in our own rules; that it has no effect at all when it is clearly written in rule 72? Is he in order to mislead the public on sub judice?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, laws are implemented as they are, not as they ought to be or as anybody would have wished them to be. Laws are laws and the only thing you do with them is respect them. 

We reviewed our Rules of Procedure recently and we maintained the rule. Actually, we explained and enlarged better the rule on sub judice. The political economy you have given to this particular rule does not hold any water either in history or fact because the rule on sub judice applies internationally. 

Decisions of Parliament can impact on what goes on in the courts of law. Debates in Parliament can impact on what goes on in terms of evidence in the courts of law. That is what this rule seeks to regulate; that you can do whatever you would like to do in the House but leave whatever is before the other branch. Give them the independence to deal with it properly. That is what it is. It is all about separation of powers and respect for the different Arms of Government. It has nothing to do with what you have just stated.

There is no procedure. We are looking for opinions. There is a procedural point that is outstanding. 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you with the magnanimity with which you have guided us. Under normal circumstances, when the issue of sub judice is raised, it is entirely your prerogative to give your guidance based on your opinion and I am only here to persuade you to decline to  agree with the Deputy Attorney-General for the following reasons - (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Hon. Sseggona is one of the lawyers who have been paid hefty sums of money to represent the accused persons. He has not declared his interest to this House as required by the rules. Is he in order to rise and debate on a matter in which he has a direct personal interest?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, would you like of explain?

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to make a clarification on matters raised since we are in Parliament not based on ignorance but on lack of information.

For the same reasons that the Deputy Attorney-General has no patience to look at the report that we wrote as the ad hoc committee; if he had taken the time to read as he said that they have researched, he would have found out that when we were in Gulu and blocked by the military from accessing the Member we had gone to access, I was asked to offer pro bono legal services.

I am conversant and fairly schooled in our Rules of Procedure; they make reference and I agree with him to pecuniary interest. As to whether I have made hefty sums of money or anything akin to that, it would be my wish and be like him except to the extent that I would not want to be arraigned before the anti-corruption court.

I offered my services pro bono to a colleague after all other members had been blocked and the military only allowed lawyers. 

My colleague, hon. Basalirwa Asuman and I were the only lawyers amongst the members of Parliament that could be allowed and because of the dire need to access the Member and report to Parliament I offered pro bono services.

I would like to challenge the Deputy Attorney-General together with the entire intelligence that could be feeding or misadvising him to produce just one single receipt, where I acknowledged receipt of money from a client who was not even free to instruct me at that point.

The purpose was to enter the barracks and see if the Member was alive; I have never taken or received a coin from this gentleman.

For members that lack the humane element which I consider to be basic in human kind - the Deputy Attorney-General would be right to assume and a presumption which is rebuttable; that everybody must do anything solely for money, I decline to subscribe to that with immense respect. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the point of order was to the effect that hon. Sseggona was counsel to one of the people affected and is appearing in this case and has been paid and that he comes to debate against our rules because he has not declared his interests. If he had, he would not have been in violation of our rules.

The purpose of this rule was to help Members who have interests that are pecuniary in nature to alert his or her colleagues and withdraw or record them so that they handle you accordingly.

The honourable member says that he does not have any pecuniary interest but to settle the minds of the Members, it would have been okay to tell them that you are representing these people but the matter was pro bono and you are doing it out of kindness and good heart and nobody was paying you.

When you debate, you also have the background of knowing that you are representing one of the people. So bear that in mind when you are articulating the issues.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. Perhaps I was wrong because it is disclosed in the report that I offered pro bono. My thinking was that my colleagues would read this; now that he did not, let me declare that yes, under those circumstances, I did represent my colleagues, I have no pecuniary interest at all. Thank you very much and you have the liberty to find out.

Mr Speaker, I thank you for your magnanimity because ordinarily you could have decided this without our input. I repeat and perhaps for the last time, I agree that in criminal law, the case has ingredients. The ingredients of treason are known and you can only prove them in the charge sheet that members committed a crime as contained in a charge sheet and you prove. Anyone who seeks to lead evidence or talk about them, I will not stand with that. 

However, the issue of whether these Members were ever tortured is not anywhere in court not even the issue whether they were tortured during arrest. 

There is only one thing that those suspects committed acts that amount to treason. The way we decide on how to proceed with this debate breaks or makes us as Parliament.

I am one of those that agreed with you as I am bound that we let the minister put on the Table what he had; it is only to that extent that you determine whether his statement offends the rule of sub judice and indeed we allowed it. I regret that there were some hiccups; I thought he was more than that - (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I have much respect for my colleague, hon. Sseggona, but the issue we are discussing is whether we should proceed with the report of the ad hoc committee where he was a member. 

Wouldn’t it be smooth for a member of the committee to give chance to the House and we decide whether we are going to move ahead with his report or not? Is he in order to coerce members whether they should debate his report or not? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are very strict on members of committees participating in reports that they have produced. Actually, the rules prohibit that but we are not debating a report. Please wind up, hon. Sseggona.

MR SSEGGONA: What we are seeking to do, as you have permitted us graciously, is to persuade you with our various points of view and that is what I am doing. 

First, the duty is incumbent on the Attorney General who is telling you that the matter is or will be sub judice, to put that charge sheet before you for you to be able to make the decision. However, us knowing that torture is not an ingredient of treason, it becomes overly suspicious for anyone to say it will cross the red-line into sub judice. 

Secondly, as you said, this is the last forum of debate; there are many people that have been tortured out there. After torturing, they are presented to court and it convicts them. I would not have a problem with convicting a person who is tortured - at least for purposes of this forum – being convicted if the ingredients of treason are found. However, it is overly inexcusable that the Government can stand in the way against torture. 

The resistance and the force with which my colleagues across the other side - some of them - are calling upon you not to allow this report on torture is again overly suspicious. The circumstances are extra-ordinary and they call for extra-ordinary patience and measures. 

Does it not surprise everyone that it is the minister responsible for the soldiers speaking on matters of arrests of civilians? Colleagues, does it not trigger your suspicion that there is a problem; that there is an issue to be discussed? The minister responsible for Internal Affairs, in charge of the police, who ought to have arrested these people, is quiet on this matter? He is the minister of state. 

It is a matter where we passed a law, not long ago, in Parliament against torture. Apparently, the debate is about torture. They are not even allowing us to talk about whether the suspects were in Gulu; they are not bothered about that term of reference – and you see, I can even receive information. If you permit me, I will receive his information.

MR OBIGA: Mr Speaker, you recall that two weeks ago, when we issued this statement, we made it clear that it was a joint statement of the security ministries including; Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Security and Ministry of Defence. We stand by contents of that statement. Thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, how I was brought up is to thank people for what they give me. I would like to thank my colleague – I would like to thank you for the information because that is how I was brought up. Thank you, honourable minister.
 
Mr Speaker, the only way you can be satisfied that the matter is sub judice is by somebody being specific by telling you that, “By looking at this paragraph of the charge sheet, the particulars of the offence point to torture, for example, …” To that extent, Mr Speaker, strike out everything called “Torture” from this report and do not allow a debate.”

If only colleagues could be persuaded to have the report laid and read then when people are crossing into the area of sub judice - it has always been your duty and you have done it perfectly; the same way you guided us with the minister’s statement. (Interjections) May I persuade you, Mr Speaker, that you permit the report to be read and guide it as you have always done but not a blanket refusal. Otherwise, why do we go out and use public resources? We would be going to the Attorney General. 

Let me wind up this point by reminding Parliament and the nation. This is the very reason we have always protested against the Attorney General being a member of Cabinet. I have immense respect for the provision of the Constitution but that is what it is. In future, we should look at it again because the Attorney General now is already bound by the statements of his colleagues; he is a minister in Cabinet. They have justified whatever transpired –(Interjections)- well, he says he has not heard me – I would advise that in future, when he is in Parliament, he takes time to listen. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members – when I say “honourable members” I am not calling for motions, procedural matters; I would like to make a statement.

Honourable members, we have come this far because of the point of procedure raised by the hon. Kafuuzi. What would have guided me on the issue that is raised by the honourable member, like I said, would have been a quick look at what the documents in court say then I would be properly guided. However, I have not had the opportunity to look at it so I am not able to, at this moment, deal with this matter. 

However, I have heard all the submissions from you, which has been helpful. What I am going to do is to pause this matter here then I come back tomorrow and rule on it. I will have looked at the charge sheet and all the documents that are related. I will then be able to guide the House on how to proceed with this matter tomorrow.

Can we deal with the next item? If we can conclude that item 5 so that tomorrow we proceed with other matters.

Honourable members, in the public gallery, this afternoon, are students and teachers from Hillside Primary School, Kapchorwa District represented by hon. Sam Cheptoris and hon. Rukia Chekamondo. They are here to observe the proceedings; please join me to welcome them. You are welcome.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E THE PRESIDENT TO PARLIAMENT ON WEDNESDAY, 6 JUNE 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, have we received sufficient debate on this matter? Can I put the question to this motion? If not can we debate? –(Interjections)– No, I will conclude this matter today, honourable members. Can I put the question to this motion?

Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the address on the State of the Nation by H.E the President to Parliament on Wednesday, 6 June 2018.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

5.36
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, we are the sponsors of this Constitution Amendment Bill. However, subsequent to presenting it for the first reading, Government discovered that the Bill required extensive consultations. We have been consulting and are still doing so. It is a matter that touches the livelihoods of all Ugandans. We have not exhausted all the consultations we are making. It is our prayer, therefore, that we stand over this Bill until we have done exhaustive and conclusive consultations to be in position to proceed with the debate of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the request from the honourable minister but let me state this. This Bill was brought to this Parliament, and it became property of this Parliament. A committee of Parliament did whatever it needed to do to consult as Parliament and has compiled a report and the report is ready. 

The consultation that was left after the Bill was read for the first time in Parliament was the consultation by Parliament. If the learned Attorney-General or the Minister of Justice now, is persuaded that the Government needs to do further consultation on its part, then the proper procedure would be to withdrawal this Bill from Parliament and take it back and then consult as much as possible and then you bring the Bill back - that would be the procedure. Since the report is here, what do we do as Parliament?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I entirely agree with your ruling that having been presented before the House, this Bill is now the property of the House. I reaffirm what I earlier said that we discovered that we need to do exhaustive consultations. 

However, the decision as to whether we want to withdrawal or proceed with the Bill is a decision I cannot take now. I seek for time to consult Government so that it comes up with an informed position on the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, then we need to pause this at a proper stage because there is nothing to stand over. What the Minister can do is to move the motion, we receive the report then makes that plea and he takes back the Bill for consultation so that you at least, have the report. Then you can go and consult - that would be the proper way, because now what are we doing? The report is ready, Parliament is ready but you are not ready yet it is your Bill; what do we do?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, let us be informed of what transpired. When the committee was considering this Bill and before it made its report, we wrote to the committee and indicated our wish to do further consultations before they express themselves on the report. That being the case, Mr Speaker, I am not in position to move a motion for the Bill to be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members -

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I hereby withdrawal the Bill pending further consultations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules say you will move a motion of your withdrawal so that we agree to your withdrawal. Please proceed with the motion for those purposes you have stated.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, for the reasons I have given, I beg to move that this Bill be withdrawn pending further consultations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which Bill?

MR RUKUTANA: I beg to move that The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2017 be withdrawn pending further consultations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, hon. Elly Tumwine, hon. Sarah Opendi, hon. Kizige and the backbenchers - hon. Odur and the National Youth Representative. Honourable members, do we debate or I put the question to the motion?

Honourable members, I now put the question to the request by the learned Deputy Attorney-General that the Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2017 be withdrawn. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is accordingly withdrawn from Parliament. If it is ready, it will be brought back by the Executive.

Honourable members, thank you very much. The House is adjourned to tomorrow, 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 5.46 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 September 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 
