Friday, 2 September 2005

(Parliament met at 10.42 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had agreed that the Committee on Social Services presents its report this morning. However, I notice that the sub-sector ministers are not here.  

10.43
MRS DOROTHY HYUHA: Madam Speaker, Education and Health are here. Minister Bitangaro of Gender and Cultural Affairs is in the lobby.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If they are all around, we can start with theirs. I will permit the Minister of Internal Affairs to make a statement thereafter.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES

10.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am here to present the report of the Committee on Social Services, on the Ministerial Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for the FY 2005/2006, for the Ministries of Education and Sports, Gender, Labour and Social Development, and Health. In the interest of time, I may not be in position to read each and everything. Members will remember that we had already submitted a report to the Budget Committee, which the Chairperson presented here sometime back. Probably, what I will do is to draw the attention of this House to the new developments, which we had after the discussion of the budget framework on the indicative figures.  

Madam Speaker, the committee studied the Ministerial Policy Statements, and made an intensive study of the budget framework papers. We eventually made observations and recommendations.  

I will go straight to page 2 of my report, where we have the budget performance of Ministry of Education and Sports.  There are sections on Approved and Revised figures as well as Cumulative Releases, Cumulative Expenditure and Release Budget and Expenditure Releases.  At the bottom of that table, you will see that the ministry release performance was at 99.3 per cent, and the expenditure performance was at 99.5 per cent.  

Madam Speaker, among others, I will highlight some of the ministry’s achievements. We appreciate the ministry’s implementation of the quota system for public universities, the lifting of the ban on teacher recruitment for secondary schools and the commencement of the construction of laboratories under the ADB loan.  Honourable members, you will remember that this has been a long overdue loan, which we approved in the Sixth Parliament. It was meant to construct 54 laboratories in rural girls’ secondary schools. The loan would also facilitate the increase the number of grant aided secondary schools.

On page 3, we have key priorities under education. Under the primary sub-sector, wage increment for primary school teachers has been a priority. The committee was informed that primary school teachers’ salaries would be increased from Shs 130,000 to Shs 150,000. However, we note that the budget provided for only Shs 254b, yet what is required is Shs 267b. Therefore, this leaves a shortfall of Shs 13b.  

Madam Speaker, there is also an important policy, which we discussed concerning mid cycle exaMs The committee was informed that this programme had been suspended, whereas we had approved it in the budget. The recent development is that it has been suspended, pending further consultation. The Committee therefore recommends that the Shs 1b, which had been budgeted for mid cycle exams be now reallocated to instructional materials and equipment for secondary schools. This will support the new policy on science subjects. To remind you about mid cycle exams, the ministry had proposed that pupils at p.4 level would be given competence tests nationwide. This was meant to be a checkpoint on the quality of Universal Primary Education (UPE). The committee had approved this.  Now we are told it has been suspended. Therefore, we cannot leave this money hanging within the budget. This is why we recommend that it should be used for the purchase of science materials and equipment for secondary schools.

Madam Speaker the school feeding programme was an issue in the Budget Committee. During 2004/2005, we had allocated Shs 10 billion to this programme, but now the programme has been shelved due to difficulties in the procurement process.  The Minister of Finance had opted to secure milk from the Thai Company that was going to take over Dairy Corporation by the end of 2004/2005. However, the process was not completed and the programme was not implemented.  Shs 4,843,600,000, which had already been released to Education, was reallocated to Makerere University in the fourth quarter. This was to help the University bridge in the funding gap. The remaining was reallocated within the Ministry of Education.

The Ministry of Education and Sports has reallocated the Shs 1 billion meant for the School Feeding Programme as follows; Shs 559 million to Karamoja Feeding Programme, which was being funded by World Food Programme (WFP);  Shs 100 million for ADB counterpart funding, used for construction of laboratories, Shs 120 million to the Uganda Vocational Qualifications Framework and Shs 221 million to the JICA Project.  In other words, we do not expect the School Feeding Programme this financial year because of those developments.

On page 4, under Secondary sub-sector, I wish to emphasise that the key priority will be; strengthening the teaching of science subjects in schools and through the construction of 54 laboratories. Where there is a shortfall, reallocations have been made, as I already indicated.  There will be a bursary for needy but bright students, where Shs 1.6 billion has been budgeted for. The numbers of students who have benefited is indicated. In addition to that, Government paid school fees for 39,770 students in IDP camps in the North and North East of Uganda.  

The third key priority, honourable members, is provision of instructional and science materials for secondary schools.  However, no provision for this has been provided for in the budget, for secondary schools. The committee was informed that the ministry proposes to reallocate Shs 20 from capitation grants of the Shs 65 per student per working day. 

The committee rejected this proposal and instead recommends the reallocation of Shs 1 billion, which had been earmarked for mid cycle exams in primary schools. Probably, to tell you more about this, every student in a Government-aided school gets an average of Shs 65 per working day. The rural small schools get their income from these grants. We are all aware of schools, where fees range from 15,000 to 20,000. These schools cannot sustain themselves.  Therefore, when you reduce this further to Shs 40, it means you are denying the rural of the rural school an opportunity to survive. We shall appear to be planning for schools like Budo, Nabumali and others of that standard.  The committee thought that this was a wrong area for reallocation and suggested that the Shs 65 should be left as it is. 

Honourable members, on the wage bill for secondary schools, the committee was concerned about the shortfall. We seriously note a shortfall of Shs 3.65 billion for teachers who have been posted and are on the payroll.  The committee was informed that Government has directed a clean up of the entire payroll by 31 September 2005, through the Prime Minister’s Office. We had a joint meeting with the Ministries of Finance, Public Service and Education. Public Service says that they suspect that there could be some ghost teachers. They have agreed that a clean up exercise will be conducted. Nevertheless, we agreed that teachers who were already posted should be provided for.  

Madam Speaker, the second issue is about recruitment of teachers in the newly grant-aided secondary schools.  This has been the committee’s concern for two or three consecutive financial years. When Government accepted to partially lift the ban on recruitment of teachers, we agreed that some schools be grant-aided, after serious discussion. We are surprised that in 2003/2004, Parliament approved Shs 4.6 billion for the recruitment of teachers and grant aiding of schools. In a supplementary, Shs 1.1 billion was approved, and last financial year, we approved Shs 9.9 billion. This adds up to Shs 15.6 billion. 

Madam Speaker, by last financial year, we should have recruited over 1,900 teachers for secondary schools. However, when we asked for accountability, whereas we had approved 76 secondary schools, only 56 were grant-aided.  We need an explanation as to what happened to the 20. In one financial year, instead of 1,976 teachers, only 829 were recruited. 

The latest communication from Public Service, says that whereas we had recommended and approved Shs 9.9 billion, they are in position to account for only Shs 6.4 billion. The ministry should give us an explanation as to what happened to the Shs 3.4 billion. 

I am emphasising this because it has turned out that we should not recruit teachers during 2005/2006 and yet not all the money we approved was utilised. In our meetings, we also discovered that some teachers who had been interviewed by Education Service Commission were posted but their letters were withdrawn. This is shocking because we should have a minimum of 12 teachers, a head teacher and a deputy in grant-aided schools. This august House should get an explanation concerning all these details. The previous financial year, we had approved Shs 4.6 billion, whose accountability was never given. We went ahead and approved Shs 1.1 billion in the supplementary budget.

Madam Speaker, on page 5, we have BTVETS, whose key priorities will be to consolidate the establishment of Uganda vocational Qualification Framework and the mainstreaming of the competence-based education and training. The committee was informed that an allocation of Shs 120 million for counterpart funding from the School Feeding Programme was made for the operation UVQF.  This is a programme, which is funded by the Germans and the committee supported this proposal.  

The Committee however, also noted the severe under funding of this sub-sector, with a shortfall of Shs 407.2 million. This implies that this financial year, these vocational institutes will not admit students on Government sponsorship. In the joint meeting, we have agreed that there should be a reallocation within the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

Madam Speaker, the committee was also concerned about the IDB loan, which was given counterpart funding. This loan, which was passed in the Sixth Parliament from Islamic Development Bank, was to facilitate the construction of community polytechnics. When we scrutinised the budget, we were very sad to find out that this money had not been provided.  Honourable members, I wish to inform you that the latest communication we have received from Finance says they accept to increase the sealing of Ministry of Education by US $1.2 million, so that the construction of 14 polytechnics takes off.

In section 3.4, this financial year the ministry is going to continue to rationalise National Teachers Colleges. As we informed you last year, they have reduced funding from 10 to only 6 National Teachers Colleges.  The other 4 were returned to the foundation bodies. However, when we scrutinised the budget, we noted that there was no provision for admission of Government students for first year. We have now agreed that some of this Shs 391 million be provided under PAF budgetary line so that the recruitment of students continues.  

Honourable members, on page 6 we have Higher Education.  The committee was happy to note that plans for the establishment of a multi-campus public university in eastern Uganda were finalised and project code NO. 0946 has been created.  However, the committee was informed that only Shs 40 million was available to kick start the University, which was quite sad.

However, in the joint meeting we had, I wish to inform you that Finance and Education jointly agreed that a reallocation of Shs 500 million from the project 0943, from emergency rehabilitation of primary schools be reallocated for this purpose. This means that the ministry will only put in place a task force to begin preparing so that probably next financial year, the admission of students takes off. 

On Makerere University in section 3.5.2, I want Parliament to know that first of all, we appreciate the intervention of His Excellency the President for the effort to harmonise the issue of school fees.  The committee was informed that it was agreed as follows: 

(a)	That there will be no increase of Makerere University as earlier on indicated and that Government would raise an additional Shs 5 billion for Makerere University; hence increase the budget from Shs 33 billion to Shs 38 billion in the FY 2005/2006. 
(b)	That Makerere University should institute efficiency measures in order to cut down costs equivalent to 5 billion.
(c)	A visitation committee will be constituted with the help of auditors to carryout an investigative audit in the use of the funds at Makerere University.

However, the committee noted with concern that the proposed additional Shs 5 billion is not reflected within the Ministry of Education budget of this financial year.

About Mbarara University, the committee welcomed the move of transferring Mbarara Teaching Hospital with its budget to the Ministry of Health as Parliament had recommended. 

Madam Speaker, on Kyambogo University the committee noted with concern the delay in the restructuring process after the merger of UNISE, UPK and ITEK and the non-provision of funds for their package. Right now, we have a pending strike in Kyambogo because after the merger of the three institutes, some of the staff may qualify to teach in that University while others may not. Therefore, we had expected that by the beginning of this financial year, this exercise would be complete and Finance would be in position to provide for the package of those who would retire. Two years down the road, some staff do not know their fate. Even the salaries of staff of UPK, UNISE and former ITEK differ. This causes a lot of confusion. 

Concerning MUBS, the committee was concerned about the lack of library facilities. We have recommended internal reallocation.

Madam Speaker, on Sports, the committee is greatly concerned about non-provision of operational funds to the sports sub-sector, despite the existence of approved sports policy in this country. The committee recommended that funds should be secured for this policy. I am happy to report that from the communication by Finance, they have permitted Ministry of Education to reallocate Shs 300 million from PAF to the sports sub-sector.  This is still little, given the activities of the sports sub-sector, including taking sportsmen and women out of this country. However, we are also concerned and we appeal for accountability and transparency for the internally generated funds and funds from international bodies. 

Quite often the sports sub-sector receives funds from FIFA and many other bodies but these are funds, which are never declared to us. We also note that they collect some revenue from Nakivubo, Nambole. Not at any single moment have we known about this internally generated fund. 

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, about education, on page 8, the committee noted the following critical budget shortfalls:

1.	That Shs 13 billion for the wage bill for primary school teachers because of salary increment. 
2.	 That there is a shortfall of Shs 3.65 billion for the wage bill for secondary school teachers who are already posted.
3.	The Shs 5 billion to cover the shortfall within Makerere University as a measure to stop the fees increase.

The committee therefore, feels that we need to get a commitment from Government of how this shortfall will be provided for.  Right now the figures, which I am due to read do not include these shortfalls.  Madam Speaker, you are also aware that yesterday we were getting indicators of our political roadmap. The Minister of Finance talked of some terms, which some of us could not interpret. I do not know whether our constitution allows that, but he will be in position to tell us what he meant.

So, we were not in position and I am not in position, Madam Speaker, to recommend the approval of the budget of the Ministry of Education and Sports, until we know the fate of the salaries of primary school teachers. What happens to the teachers who have already been posted, bringing about a shortfall of Shs 3.6 billion?  I also wish to get an undertaking of where the Shs 5 billion for Makerere University will come from. Madam Speaker, can we go to Health?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, honourable chairperson, you had indicated that you were only going to give highlights, but you are actually going paragraph by paragraph, including explanatory notes. So, I do not know. We have three reports to do today.  I do not know whether you can summarise as a Mathematics teacher.

MRS HYUHA:  Madam Speaker, I take your guidance and these are the highlights.  If I had read priorities under the primary sub sector, it would take a whole day, but I picked only one on wages.  I went to secondary; I picked on wages and recruitment.  These are just highlights. Neither did I even tell you the activities of the Universities of Makerere and Mbarara. I have just told you that there is just a crisis in the budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable chairperson, you are the one who said you are giving us a summary, but then you read every single paragraph of the pages, that is what I am saying.

MRS HYUHA: Okay, I take your guidance. You will be impressed by my performance on Health.  On page 9, you can quickly see their achievements in the previous financial year. Their performance was at 95.5 percent. They were successful with malaria control, internal residual spray and insect treated nets and reproductive health as you can see. 

On page 10, we have details on infrastructure and construction.  This financial year, their key top priorities on expenditure are going to be on; essential medicines and health supplies, reproductive health, human resource, the construction of staff houses and professional development.

On page 11, they will still emphasise malaria as a major cause of morbidity and mortality in this country. To accelerate the reduction of mosquitoes in homes, an earnest drive has been undertaken to acquire DDT for residual spray inside houses.  Environmental health is also among the top priorities.
 
However, our observation about Global Fund to fight AIDS and TB following the Pricewater House Coopers’ audit, Government will conduct a thorough investigation with a view of streamlining the fund management, if mismanagement is found.  The committee fully supports the Government’s action.

On welfare and attitude of health workers, the committee was informed that the attitude of some of the health workers really leaves a lot to be desired, despite the Government’s effort to improve their welfare.  The ministry however, developed a manifested strategy to improve the attitude of health workers. This will include continuous professional development, regular supervision, result oriented performance management and appraisal.  In addition honourable members, the health workers’ code of conduct manual has been produced and circulated. Professional councils will be strengthened and empowered to ensure that all health workers adhere to that code of conduct.

About Mulago Complex, the committee was informed that the process of preparing the costed business plan for Mulago Hospital has been initiated and the preliminary short term to decongest Mulago has been developed.  The committee recommended this process and it should be speeded up.  But we noted that this financial year, what is budgeted for drugs was only Shs 5 billion, of which Shs 500 million is for private patients. The balance is for the general section of the hospital.  The drugs budget for private patients will be generated from Mulago private wing.  The committee recommended that the issue of drugs should be taken seriously.

The committee is concerned about the under funding of Mulago Heart Institute, yet there are increasing patients. The committee recommended that this institute be given adequate consideration in the next financial year.  The committee also further noted that the drugs and services in the institute were very expensive. There is a big outcry from patients and that is why we recommend a subsidy in this area.

Madam Speaker, the committee was informed that there is overall performance and progress in Butabika Hospital rehabilitation project. To-date, it stands at over 80 percent with eight months to the end of the project.  The detailed progress report as well as the staffing situation is in the attached annex in the policy statement.

The committee was informed that there is a criteria of establishing hospitals. We wish to inform this august House that according to the Ministry of Health, the determinant factors are the population to be served and not the district administrative boundaries.  I should underline that for the members to take note.  It is based on population and not district administrative boundaries. That is why according to the new term, hospitals are now referred to as general hospitals. We no longer call them district hospitals.  

About the Budget proposal, you can see those details. Let us go to Gender on page 14.

The performance of Ministry of Gender is that during the FY 2004-2005, Parliament approved Shs 23.2 billion for recurrent and development expenditure. Only Shs 15.5 billion was released, leaving core activities under funded.  For instance, Industrial Court is still with no statutory budget for operations, which constraints its funding.  There is even no wage provision for members of the Industrial Court. The total supplementary budget received last financial year was only Shs 172.455 million for recurrent activities.  We are informed that the principles for review of labour laws were submitted to cabinet for approval. 

Honourable members, you can read about the key priorities of the ministry in this financial year. There are finalising a policy on the elderly, Equal Opportunities Policy Bill, they are to purchase 11 motorcycles and 937 bicycles for women councils in the 11 districts. 

On Page 15, we have outlined the development activities. However, I want you to note that the ministry’s allocation this financial year totals to only Shs 17.7billion compared to Shs 23.4billion which they received during 2004/2005. We are told that Shs 7.2billion will come from donor support.

The provision of funds for traditional leaders is a new development. We were informed that a total of shs 600 million has been provided for this purpose, under the Department of Gender, Culture and Community Development. Each cultural leader recognised by Government will receive Shs 5 million as interim arrangement, waiting for the enabling law to operationalise Article 246 of the Constitution.  The Minister of Gender is probably in position to give us a list of those leaders who are recognised.

About the National Women, Youth and Disability Councils, I want you to note that during the previous years, these councils were given an average of shs 1 billion. Shs 693 million has been allocated for women councils, shs 693 million for youth councils and only shs 253 million for persons with disability. These figures have all been reduced, bearing in mind what they each used to get. The Committee noted that funds for women council reduced from shs 1 billion and recommends that a list of how the money was distributed be made available. We recommend that the new districts, which were approved this financial year be included in that list of distribution of this money.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether I should read the figures for approval. Or should we first discuss? I want your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to know first whether there is no discrepancy between these figures and the corrigenda, which was issued by the ministry. I do not whether you have checked.

MRS HYUHA: The Budget office and Clerk’s office tried to harmonise.  We received a corrigenda and the only discrepancy is these new figures, which are not provided for. As I informed this august House, whereas we discuss matters of education and health, when it comes to disbursement of funds for the wage bill, they go to local Government under code 500. Therefore, if we approved figures per representation as we did yesterday, it means we are excluding shs 13 billion and shs 3.65 billion, which are not provided for. When we make this pronouncement minus these shortfalls, we shall have a crisis sometime. I suggest that we should have Government’s position before I read these figures.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we shall deal with them when we get to the Committee of Supply.  You can leave them for now.

MRS HYUHA: So, I do not read them now. Our stand is that we are in position to read Health and Gender. However, until we hear from Finance, we cannot read those of Education.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, you can read them out but we shall not pronounce ourselves today.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I now beg to move that the following votes be approved: 014 Ministry of Health of shs 30,370,107,000 recurrent expenditure and shs 231,302,232,000 development expenditure.

134 Health Service Commission of shs 1,648,366,000 recurrent and shs 41,667,000 development expenditure.

161 Mulago hospital of shs 24,687,066,000 recurrent and shs 1,496,000 development expenditure.

162 Butabika hospital 0f shs 3,159,397,000 recurrent and shs 50,350,058,000 development expenditure.
  
Madam Speaker, regional hospitals have only recurrent expenditure as follows:
163 Arua hospital of shs 2,230,161,000
164 Fort-Portal hospital of shs 1,949,493,000
165 Gulu hospital of shs 1,904,669,000 
166 Hoima Hospital of shs 1,688,850,000
167 Jinja hospital of shs 2,917,785,000
168 Kabale hospital of shs 1,815,101,000
169 Masaka hospital of shs 2,291,542,000
170 Mbarara hospital of shs 2,786,558,000
171 Soroti hospital of shs 2,053,164,000
172 Lira Hospital of shs 2,460,466,000 
173 Mbarara Hospital of 2,189,396,000

Madam Speaker, for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, I beg to move that vote 018 Gender, Labour and Social Development the recurrent shs 6,255,404,000 and shs 12,215,088,000 for development expenditure be approved. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you chairperson.  I have perused the report and I have established that 11 out 25 members signed. The members can now debate.

11.30
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the work well done. I will start with Education. I thank the Government for UPE. In a special way, I thank the Minister of Education for the work well done in the implementation of this policy.   

However, we should not forget that the major implementors of UPE are the primary teachers. If these teachers are not satisfied, I envisage a situation where standards will decline and parents will ignorantly decide to move their children from school to school, or even taking them out of school completely. I believe this can happen.  It is very unfortunate that according to this report, the Government cannot meet the shs 200,000 increase that was pledged by the President. We should not forget that the cost of living in this country is very high. Our teachers are not satisfied with the payment they get.  

Madam Speaker, it is clear in the report that up to now the Ministry of Finance is not even sure where the money will come from, for the provision of the shs 150,000 that has been agreed upon.  I believe the minister will give us some clarification about this.  If shs 150,000 is supposed to be the increment for this financial year, we want to know whether when it is effected, the teachers will get their arrears. It should have started in July 2005, so I believe the minister will tell us whether when it is effected the teachers will be in position to get their arrears.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank the President for his intervention in the fees increases of Makerere University.  However, I would like to express my people’s concern. We appreciate that Makerere University put up an initiative of posting the admission lists in the newspapers. However, this has also caused a lot of confusion to our children.  Their names appear in the newspapers and yet when they go to the university, the names are not there. I do not know how this can be rectified.

Madam Speaker, about health, I would like to appreciate the Government’s effort to provide funds for drugs. However, I am surprised, that lack of drugs in health centres is still a very big problem especially in the villages. We do not want our people to regret why cost sharing was scrapped. When there was cost sharing, our people would get some drugs.  Even Mulago Hospital, where our people should rush for the solution has no drugs. We know that cost sharing on the other hand would not have been the best alternative, because some of our people could not afford it.  However, if we approve these funds, we would expect drugs to be in these health centres.

Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the yellow star programme implemented by UPHOLD. It is carrying out monitoring and evaluation services in health centres and it is doing a good job.  I would like the minister to tell us whether the problem of lack of drugs is due to poor funding or due to lack of monitoring by the health officers at the districts.

Madam Speaker, finally, I would like to comment about Gender.  The chairperson has read to us the amounts of money that will be sent to the youth, women and the disability councils. I have not been satisfied with the performance of these councils in the past because of the meager resources they get from Finance. If these funds have been reduced further, I would like the minister to give us a reason she read the figures that will be sent. She did not give us the reason these funds have been reduced to that level.  I thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister would like to make a fundamental statement on the issues raised by the chairperson before we continue. Try to ask questions and be brief.

11.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka): I thank you, Madam Speaker.  Honourable members, the chairperson raised very important issues on page 8 of the report. I would like to respond as follows:

About the budget for the Ministry of Education and Sports, I would like to urge the House to approve the budget now. The shortfalls of shs 13 billion for primary school teachers, shs 3.65 billion for secondary schools, and shs 5 billion for Makerere University adding up to shs 21.65 billion, will be mobilised during this financial year.  We shall also save from the payroll clean up exercise, which is being undertaken. His Excellency, the President –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let him indicate to us where he is going to get the money because we need to know.

PROF. SEMAKULA: This is where the money is going to come from: the cleaning up exercise and then overall budget adjustment during the budget extension.  As for the primary school teachers, they are already receiving their shs 150,000. Therefore, I urge this House to approve the budget as provided; Government is committed to providing all these funds. I thank you.

11.37
PROF. VICTORIA MWAKA NAKIBONEKA (Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the committee and the chairperson for their report. I want to comment on the prioritizing of science vis-à-vis arts. That is a good way forward but I think the transition should be smooth because we know that in the rural areas, most schools are privately owned and they do not have laboratories at all. If they do, they have a small office where they put the equipment and they call that a laboratory. Now if you go full blast because the Government schools are being funded, we are forgetting that in some sub-counties we do not find a single Government school.

Alternatively, the private or community schools, which are seen as progressive should be assisted, or they should waive the taxation so that they also come up and they are able to be on the same line as Government secondary schools. For example in Luweero, I can just mention two Government schools - big ones, which are Ndejje Senior Secondary School and Luweero Senior Secondary School. Otherwise the other ones like Katikamu, Bugema, Sakku, Mulama, Bulusa, name them - they are all private. If we overemphasize the Government schools, we shall be losing and we know that primary 7 leavers are quite many and they need to be catered for.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, about the quota system; that is also a very welcome aspect but I want to reiterate to hon. Seninde’s submission that the way the names are being forwarded leaves a lot be desired. First of all, they submitted a list in The Observer newspaper, which had so many mistakes.  Even the courses they are quoting do not exist. I have received quite a number of parents coming to complain that the names were in the newspaper but they are not seen in any public university in Uganda. They told me when they went to check, they told them, “In order for us to check for you, pay shs 150,000 and we check to see whether you are on the list or not”. They came to me and reported.

I went to Makerere, they were not there. I went to Kyambogo, they were not there. I went to Nakawa, they were not there. So, there is a problem. Much as there are 16 people going to university from the different districts, you may find those who are supposed to go there are not actually the ones going. We know our problems in Uganda and we do not expect miracles as we are just starting. I beg the ministry to take special interest in the way that quota system and admissions are being administered.

Madam Speaker, on the PTCs and community polytechnics, I think our policy is self-defeating.  You cannot have 9 million pupils enrolled in UPE and then you are cutting down PTCs, you are cutting on community polytechnics, when these are the major entry points for UPE leavers. All pupils are not going to senior secondary schools and even if they were joining secondary schools, after Senior 4 or even after Senior 6 - one getting BBC is a drop out; he will not go to university unless he has money to pay. I think we should stress this and lower entry points.

May I inform the House, Madam Speaker, that those institutions which are supposed to be entry points for Primary 7 are now HSc? We have more polytechnics, which are no longer for primary seven but for senior 4. So, the primary 7 leavers are really down there.  

Go to the PTCs, they were for ordinary level but now they are for advanced level. There has been a change in the admission policy. Now there is JAB, which does the admissions, but you find people from HSc are the ones applying and they have been given - I have concrete evidence from Nakaseke PTC - and they are not funded. The little money that is given - they even send the children home before the term ends. If the admissions are not really done properly, what are we doing? 

We are saying science laboratory and what have you, when down there, there is nothing. Let us smoothly do a good job rather than wanting to be seen to be doing so much when actually things on the ground are not going on well.

Madam Speaker, on the welfare and attitude of health workers, I will say a little - they are frustrated. If you are a doctor, you have no gloves in the maternity, there is no rubber - these rubber sheets, not even a razor blade, there are no scissors and women go with their polythene papers to be put on the bed and so forth. The medical staff is also frustrated because people come when there is nothing. Let us be serious. Let there be equipment in the small units that are there, let there be drugs in the small units which are there. Otherwise these people just write prescriptions and that is their job. Then you go out and then you look for your drugs and then we are proud we are providing free medical services in the country. Is that really free medical service? 

About the heart institution, people are fund raising - you see them begging on television everyday and we had requested in this House that consideration be made for us to get our own equipment here. We have the medical staff. We have well qualified people who are down there in South Africa, in India who could do a good job here. If we have our own machines, they will be willing to come back. I think that is an issue for consideration.

Madam Speaker, about the district hospitals, I accept the submission of the chairperson, but I just want to bring to the Minister of Health’s attention that with the creation of Nakaseke District, the two hospitals are in Nakaseke - Kiwoko and Nakaseke hospitals and I beg that the ones in Luweero like Kasaana Health Centre, Nyimbwa or Koko be upgraded so that at least there is something in the larger part of Luweero.  Luweero has 13 sub-counties and Nakaseke has only eight. Yet Nakaseke with eight sub-counties has two hospitals, while Luweero with 13 has nothing. That is something for consideration, honourable minister.

Lastly, in the Ministry of Gender, I remember receiving a circular in my pigeon hole - a letter written to the Minister of Gender to explain to the Members of Parliament how money is distributed to the women councils, to the youth councils and to the councils for persons with disability. Up to now, we are waiting. We have not seen that circular. But that distribution of money leaves a lot to be desired. They send it to the districts and then the districts are the ones to write the cheques for the women. They tell the women not to open up accounts and it is the community workers who are actually administering the funds for the women councils. 

Definitely, I do not know how many of us here know how this money actually is being used. I am very inquisitive and I have tried to see what is going on. But what I am requesting is, let the minister do what the President requested to be done and let that circular come out district by district, explaining how much money was released like the Ministry of Education does. 

I really thank the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Local Government because every time they give us a list of the money, how it has been released and we are able to follow. But Ministry of Gender makes it their own secret. We do not know why they are keeping it a secret and they do not give us information on how that money is being administered. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, really let me ask you not to make submissions. Just ask questions because the report has explained all the probleMs Just ask those areas briefly where you want attention and we shall give everybody three minutes.

11.48
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to hear from the Chairperson of the Committee the issue of the public university in Eastern Uganda.

The second concern is on Karamoja - the school-feeding programme. You know most children in Karamoja go to school because of food. Now, if it has stopped, what is the fate of the children in Karamoja?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, I think the chairperson wants to say something about that.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I did not get the question. What do you want me to say about the public university in Eastern Uganda? I have given a statement from social services. What is not clear on that and then what is not clear about the school-feeding programme?

MR OKUPA: What I just want to know is when the public university is taking off in Eastern Uganda and where it has been located.  

On the school-feeding programme, on page 3, you talked of the programme that was not implemented. So, I just want to find out what is the fate of the areas where children go to school because of food? The food is the centre of attraction.

MR ERESU: Can you clarify what you mean by saying students go to school because of food? Is it because of food that they go to school to eat, or they go to school but they are also fed?

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Okupa. The information I want to give to the House is that there are some parts of the country, like I am told in Karamoja, where food is a very good mobilization for children to come to school. If you are not going to give food, then the children would rather stay out looking for what to eat.  

Secondly, in the disturbed areas, the northern parts of the country, the question of school feeding is very important if you have to keep the children at school. When the Select Committee report was presented here, we argued the case for the school-feeding programme for these children. Otherwise, they cannot concentrate, they are starved, and they are better out of school looking for what to eat than sitting there. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is clear.

DR NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, this information is very vital because I sit on the UN Hunger Task Force and we did a lot of studies. In many countries, what the hon. Alaso has said is actually true. Even in my constituency, we did a survey and we found that only 10 per cent of the children take food to school and most of them sleep in the afternoon. So, it is not only in Karamoja, in fact every constituency here would benefit a lot from the school-feeding programme. What we are recommending in our report is that the school feeding should be based on locally grown food so that we stimulate the markets and demand so that you stimulate agriculture as well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the question of food and children is clear.  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I was just brief in my question. But I think it has been put clearly.

The other one is a clarification on last year - I remember there was the issue of the science awards.  What has happened this year?

On Page 4, about the secondary school sub-sector, you talked of the 54 laboratories in various secondary schools and directed us to see the list attached. Unfortunately, we are not seeing the list. If you could provide us with that list, possibly we could be able to raise more questions.

Madam Speaker, the number of issues that the chairperson did raise - I think we are much more interested in hearing from Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Education, like why appointment letters were withdrawn from some of the teachers.  Kasilo Sub-county is one of the victims of this matter. The issue of the balance of the shs 3.5 billion - what happened to it? Last year, we approved 76 schools for grant aiding. We only got 56. What happened to the others? Are we suspending grant aiding? We want to get more information from that.

Last year, I remember in this House we were told that Ministry of Finance was to conduct an audit on the finances received from private students to Makerere University, but up to this day we have not received the audit report of that institution and others where we are having these private students. Can we get clarification from Ministry of Finance? What happened and when are we getting this report? - Because the feeling of the Members of Parliament is that it is possible that this money is being diverted. It is being abused. It is being mismanaged. That is possibly why there are problems in these universities.

On health, this issue of the heart institute.  Madam Speaker, now and again, it is now five years, this Parliament has been asking Ministry of Finance, asking the Government to provide for the heart institute – “Provide enough money, provide the heart machine to help” - We are not doing this just for ourselves but for the country. This is an urgent issue because so many people are falling sick. The heart diseases are increasing and even some members of this House have that problem. Can the Ministry of Finance help us this financial year, get money and have this issue facilitated to help us save lives?

Last financial year, there were delays in the delivery of drugs to some hospitals and some health centres. Kasilo County Health Centre was one of those where drugs delayed for about three months.  But it was very unfortunate that the Minister of State for Health, General Duties, could go to Kasilo and tell people from Kasilo “It is your MP who has not picked the drugs”. It is embarrassing if a Government Minister can do that, yet it is a failure or a delay by Government to release drugs. 

I think the ministers should desist from these political statements if they are to survive in the political arenas of this country. Tell the truth, if there has been a problem, do not go around saying, “Your MP has not come”. That is not the work of the Member of Parliament. Ours is to appropriate money and the money goes to the districts. That is the role of the Member of Parliament. But for a minister like hon. Mukula to go to Kasilo and say, “Your MP has not come to collect drugs”, - What a shame!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

11.56
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (Youth Representative, Central): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to start with the issue of sports in education on page 2. When I was looking at the various departments, it was indicated that sports does not have a fully-fledged department and therefore it does not have a vote of its own. With the minister of state in charge, but minus a department, and with a Sports Policy in place, I want to find out from the minister why it has taken so long for the sports sub-sector to have a vote of its own in order to expeditiously handle issues of sports in this country.  

Madam Speaker, the chairperson said that she was very happy that Ministry of Finance has provided shs 300 million from the PAF programme, but she also noted that in the previous year, they had budgeted for shs I billion. In the Financial Year 2003/2004, the minister committed the Government that since the Sports Policy was in place, they had started with shs 1 billion and that subsequently in the preceding financial years, they would be increasing the money. But instead of increasing, it has reduced by almost 70 per cent. 

Madam Speaker, shs 300 million - I was trying to look at the performance of the sports sub-sector, in this very budget alone of this Financial Year, because they had to look for funding elsewhere. You realize that almost the shs 300 million is already used. Government gave Cranes a bonus of shs 12 million, Cranes went to Ghana and spent Uganda shs 96 million; the World University Tournament took shs 59 million. Cranes in two weeks time is going to host Burkina Faso in the World Cup qualifiers and it is taking shs 58 million, leaving a balance of just shs 18 million out of the shs 300 million that has been budgeted for. 

So, I am inquiring from the Ministry of Finance, what will happen to the other sports disciplines like volleyball, rugby and the rest. And if shs 300 million can be finished just within a short period before we even pass the budget, what else will be done? I think Government should increase the goodwill, should handle the issue of sports in a rather systematic and strategic approach.

Madam Speaker, when Government provides for money just to attend fixtures without necessarily developing the sport from the grassroots, it leaves a lot to be desired. Uganda last participated in the finals of the Africa Cup of Nations in 1978, and todate, Uganda Cranes just stops in the group matches. I want to find out what Government has in store?  

Secondly, the committee chairperson wanted to find out how the funds from FIFA and those that are generated locally are used because there is no strategic or systematic mechanism for Government to monitor this. You realize that most people in the sports administration in this country behave like kleptomaniacs. I think the Government has a lot to do and I would be hesitant to support approval of this budget without increasing funding for sports.

Madam Speaker, I want to end with the issue of funding for youth councils. In the last Financial Year, we were very happy that for the first time Government was sending money as conditional grants to youth councils and it was shs I billion that was sent. But reducing it to shs 600 million is reducing the morale of the young people and the women because these youth and women councils were dead and were just being rejuvenated - and all of a sudden money is being withdrawn or is being reduced drastically.  

Madam Speaker, when you look at the releases of the Ministry of Education, it was 99.5 per cent, then Ministry of Health was 95 per cent, but at Ministry of Gender, it is something like 66 per cent release from Ministry of Finance. We want to find out why the releases of Ministry of Gender are not as other ministries. Within Ministry of Gender we realize that these youth and women councils are being marginalized.

When you introduce another vote of traditional leaders, I think that should not be a cause to reduce funding for other programmes. For the issue of traditional leaders, I think the Ministry of Gender should design a better mechanism of how this money is dispersed other than bringing traditional leaders to line up and get cheques of shs 5 million. I think a better mechanism must be put in place to disperse this money. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.  

12.02
MR ASANASIO KAYIZZI (Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a few observations and comments to make. The first one is on page 3, where I would like to know why we should excite our people over nothing. On page 3(iii), is this a good reason why this programme failed? Could the minister throw more light about this one?  

The second observation and comment is on page 4(ii) where they are talking about the provision of bursaries for the needy bright students. This bursary scheme for the needy bright students is being abused. You find that the heavyweights in the political circles are the ones benefiting. What has the minister done to ensure that the targeted group really benefits?

The third one is that the committee rejected the provision of instructional and science materials.  There are very many white elephant laboratories, which were constructed under the EDF programme. Why should we construct more new laboratories without equipping these ones?  

Madam Speaker, I have not seen the committee’s observations and comment on the release of UPE funds as if there is nothing wrong going on. Like in my district, head teachers are complaining of late releases and reduction in the amount remitted.  Could the minister tell us whether she is aware of this?

My second last observation is on page 6 on the additional shs 5 billion. Will this additional money be consistent? Can we be able to get it even in the next financial year not to be used just to sail us through this campaign? We want the assurance from the minister whether this shs 5 billion would be consistent even in the next financial year. With those few comments and observations, I wish to stop here. 

12.06
MRS MUNYIRA WABWIRE (Woman Representative, Busia): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take the opportunity to thank Government for the commitment at last to set up a public university in Eastern Uganda, demonstrated by finally creating a project code as we were informed. But, Madam Speaker, I would like to bring to your attention and the attention of the minister and the whole House the following concerns. 

I do not understand why Government is dragging its feet towards actually starting the university because when you get to the proposed first campus of the multi-campus university; all the structures are in place at Busitema in Eastern Uganda. What Government would really need to do is just to avail money to start. Forty million shillings is no commitment. I really think Government needs to do a bit more than just putting in place shs 40 million and proposing that this university should take on the first students within a period of three financial years from today. 

Madam Speaker, it is very difficult for the people in eastern Uganda to keep sending their children to other regions far away, to public universities like Mbarara, or here in the central and to Gulu. It would be better for another public university –(Interruption)

MR MIKE SEBALU: I would like to seek a clarification from my honorable colleague. The university of Eastern Uganda remains a national institution, which is supposed to admit all students from the country. I am not aware the policy is to regionalize education whereby members of a particular region have to be admitted in a particular region. My clarification is, if someone from eastern Uganda is admitted in Makerere, is she about to put up a serious campaign that they do not take up the admission? Because she is saying she does not want them to go to other regions. Can I seek clarification on that?

MR KIGYAGI: I understand hon. Munyira is a graduate. I am seeking a clarification on which university she went to. 

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to give information to the colleagues who are seeking clarification from my colleague. The information I want to give is that when there is a university in a region, it motivates people in that region to go to school. When there is a university in a region, it means that people who come from nearby can even foot and do not need to hire vehicles.

Madam Speaker, when there is a university in a region, it cannot be like another place that does not have a university. Giving the example of Makerere, the land around Makerere University has appreciated so much.

MR SEBALU: Madam Speaker is it in order for my honourable colleague to misunderstand my statement because when I sought a clarification, it did not imply that I do not support the creation of the university. But the reasoning that students cannot go to other universities is what I was questioning in my clarification. Therefore, is it in order for someone to impute bad motives on my part as if I do not want a university to come up in the eastern region when actually I support it? But I stand to allow people a choice when they are admitted to other universities to be able to go there - even people from the Central region or Southern to go to the Eastern region because it is a national institution. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, she was not imputing wrong motives. She was only helping hon. Munyira to satisfy everybody why there is a need for a university in the East.

MRS MUNYIRA: I thank you, Madam Speaker for making that clear to my honourable colleague. I would also like to add that my honourable colleague should realize that there are many more people down there who would wish to access university education but they find it very expensive to travel to other regions. Others who can afford can go to other regions but those who can also not afford could still walk from their homes and pay for the tuition if the university was within reach. I really appeal to him to support the idea and the quick starting of the university in Eastern Uganda. (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But she has made her point, why do you not allow her to finish? (Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I think the point of the Eastern university is so important and we are also concerned that when our colleague is articulating the issue, we have got to support her wholly so that we convince everybody who is concerned with this issue that the people of the Eastern region are anxious to get a development pole in form of a university. Whenever a university has started in the world, it has become a development pole. A development pole means people around that university research about the problems, which are key to the area, the minerals around the area and even the style of the people so that those people are brought in. 

You remember Makerere, when it was started, it started by growing from around here and already it is a big university in the world. We think that Mbarara University, which has started there, is going to become a development pole. Gulu University, which has started in the North, is going to become a development pole. We think being a region with 5 million people, it requires having a semblance of a development pole and the Government must come forward and actually start this project seriously so that people start sharing equitably in the Matunda of independence.  (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let her make her presentation. I will give you a chance.

MRS MUNYIRA: I thank you, my honourable colleague for that kind of information that you have offered to the House. Madam Speaker, I would also like to find out - the chairperson while presenting, assured us that Government has a commitment to look around or to reallocate shs 500 million towards kick-starting the university in Eastern Uganda. But I would like to comment or to note that I do not see any commitment in this because this money is not in the budget and according to the report that she presented, there seems to be many issues that require money to be looked for within this budget. 
For example, to go towards teachers’ salaries for primary education and for secondary education and also for Makerere, I do not see where Government is going to get this money that has not been reflected. That shows further that there is no quick commitment towards starting the university in Eastern Uganda. 
Considering what my colleagues have contributed to this issue, we realize that there is great need for this facility in the area. I would like to appeal further to Government to put effort and also realize that this is not a facility that we would be repeatedly reminding them to put in place.
Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on the issue –(Interruption)-

12.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, as you know I am a university professor and my entire career has been in universities, and therefore, I do have a personal interest in seeing that we do have as many public universities as possible in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, the statement from the report I think is very clear, but I would like to provide the following additional information, which I think would help honourable members to appreciate that government is committed. A provision of shs 500 million for the establishment of the University of Eastern Uganda in the fiscal year 2005/06 - we did discuss this with the Ministry of Education and Sports and we agreed that a reallocation of shs 500 million would be made from project 0943 entitled, Emergency Construction and Rehabilitation of Primary Schools to the above-mentioned project.  

Then also from 0946 – support for university of Eastern Uganda. Since this is a PAF, the funding will be reimbursed through supplementary sources to restore the PAF. Government is committed and we have even indicated the vote where money is going to come from. We have agreed with the ministry. I think with this reassurance, members can proceed and discuss other issues. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.17
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Madam Speaker, after a joint meeting between Ministry of Finance, Education, Social Services and Public Service, the Minister of Finance in charge of Investment, Prof. Semakula, made a commitment in responding. I have a communication here of what he has been stating and the programme they are proposing to reallocate from project 0943 – Emergency Construction and Rehabilitation of primary schools. 

Within the budget, the Ministry of Education had provided shs 2 billion. So, I was certain that this money is within the budget where they are going to kick off shs 500 million to reallocate to a public university in the East to start. With this commitment, which has also been put on Hansard, I do not think finance will have an excuse of not releasing the money because it is already provided for within the budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Members of Parliament and especially the Committee on Government Assurances note the commitment relating to that university and the source of the funds and monitor it during the year?

MRS MUNYIRA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the presentation, the honourable chairperson told us that the requirement to set up a hospital is a population of 200,000 people and a bed capacity of 60, but considering the population that we have in Uganda of 25 million people, when I divide that by the 200, I think government still has work to do and I do not think it would be wise for government to relax thinking that maybe since the hospitals are now general hospitals, the population is covered. I think there is still a big gap.  

Madam Speaker, colleagues have talked about money for women councils. This money gets down to the districts and you find that there are no proper guidelines on how this money should be used. The money ends up being utilized for allowances for community development officers who go down to the field to work with women groups. It would be good if the ministry came up with a clear guideline so that we are also able to follow up and know what this money does when it gets down.  Otherwise, when we look at the results from this money, we might find that it is not serving the purpose to descend down there. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.20
MR JOHN ARIMPA KIGYAGI (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. I have only these few observations - performance in primary schools. We have provided buildings, desks are there, books are there, salaries are improving, and water and toilets are available. Now, I call upon the Ministry of Education to push for good results, because there is no excuse now since the facilities are in place. The policy should be to push for good results because some of us came from rural schools. These rural schools can also come up now.
 
My second observation is on the diversion of the money meant for emergency rehabilitation of primary schools. I appreciate the need for the Eastern University and I support it wholly, but I would call upon the Ministry of Education to look for alternative funds to replace this one. Bad weather will come, schools will be blown off, there will be disaster, and we can get an earthquake. What will you do when the roofs and all these structures collapse during the course of the year in these primary schools? An immediate alternative should be found.

On the school-feeding programme, I do not understand why this programme was suspended. This Thai company, which is supposed to takeover the Dairy Corporation, is not the only one that can supply milk. We have private firms like GBK - we have these other firms, which are producing milk. These firms can come in now and supply this programme. It is not necessary to wait for privatization of Dairy Corporation to provide this milk to these children. I think this is an oversight and I think it should be looked at. 

In the health sector, Madam Speaker, I thank the Government for transferring Mbarara Hospital back to the Ministry of Health, but a few problems have emerged. If you look at the budget, you will find that they have only provided for about shs 10 million for the upkeep of the machinery. As I speak, the CD scan is down, the ultra sound machine is not working, and most of the laboratory equipment is not working. This shs 10 million provided in the whole financial year is not enough to cater for this machinery. Secondly, the procurement of this machinery - some come from France, others from Germany and so there is no compliance. There is a very big problem. 

The second issue on the hospitals is that the allocation of money is based on the bed capacity of the hospital. If you went to Mbarara Referral Hospital now, people are under the beds, outside on the verandas. The allocation of money should be based on the present situation on the admissions and not on the bed capacity - since the hospital was built - because that is a very serious issue.

On the chronic shortage of drugs, I think something has to be done. When you go to the sub district hospitals, the drugs are not as much as they are in the main hospitals. What is the problem? Is the allocation small? What is happening? 
The Ministry of Health should really try to - I have been in these sub district hospitals, at least three quarters of the time they have the drugs, but if you go to the referral hospitals, 90 per cent of the time they have no drugs. What is the problem? Is the allocation small or there is a big problem?

Mbarara Hospital had a plan drawn in 1997 to be expanded. In the budget, apart from the recurrent budget and salaries, there is no provision for expansion of this hospital. I am sure the committee visited this hospital some time back, because I saw it in the papers - the conditions are appalling. Those structures are too old. You have turned it into a referral hospital, I do not know what will happen but something has to be provided for, for the expansion of that hospital.

In the new budget, Madam Speaker, there is some money, which has not been provided. I think the reason was that during the budget process, this hospital was still under Mbarara University. Now, there are items like the board, which have to come on board. That it is a referral hospital now and independent from the university. There is money for the guards and security, bank charges, so money totaling to about shs 60 million which is urgently needed has to be found and has to be provided as supplementary. Otherwise, it will be difficult to operate in this hospital. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

12.26
MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Allow me also to thank the committee for a very comprehensive report, a report that has contained most of the major and sensitive areas in the ministries under consideration although in certain areas there are missing links, which I will point out in my debate.

Madam Speaker, I want to begin from page 2, under the achievement of last financial year. I just want to request that where possible the ministry concerned should work as hard as possible to widely circulate the information about the lifting of the ban of teacher recruitment. I say this because there are many teachers who have not known about this and they are loitering all over the places looking for an answer, looking for an opportunity for jobs, when they are actually trained and they can make good teachers as well. 

I want also to suggest and ask about how appointment letters are always given to these teachers. In the past, the first appointment letter to a teacher stipulated terms and conditions of his service, which would include his salary, promotion terms and all the basic information that is required. I would want to know from the ministry what they are doing about this because I know there are problems these days. Teachers are complaining about going for upgrading courses only to come back without any recognition apart from the effort you have made from upgrading yourself from one grade of a teacher to another. I would want to know the policy of government on this particular aspect.

Madam Speaker, on page 3, we are talking of the primary sub sector. Promoting a teacher’s salary from shs 130,000 to shs 150,000 is an increment of shs 20,000. These schools are scattered all over the country. Most of them are here as well. Now, taking an account of shs 150,000 as a salary per month, that is 30 days, it therefore means that a teacher is going to use shs 5,000 per day. We, Members of Parliament, whatever we are getting, we know better. Can we really imagine shs 5,000 to keep a teacher in Kampala for one day? I think this is a bit unrealistic.

MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Thank you colleague for giving way. The people who are responsible for making policies and making sure people get increments do not have their children in these schools. So, what happens really is almost none of their business.

MR OMODI OKOT: Unfortunately, these are the people some of whom are involved in making this budget.  You can see the most unfortunate part of it. What is good for them is not good for the teachers. It is unfortunate. 

It is even worrying, Madam Speaker, and so gloomy when you read a statement currently within the Budget of the Ministry of Education and Sports and there is a shortfall of shs 13 billion. What are we going to do for this? It means the situation is even made grave and gloomy. The teachers must really tighten for the worst to come.  

Madam Speaker, I want to say something about the school-feeding programme. Members before me have earmarked about it but I would wonder if the Thai company was the only one, which is to provide for this programme. We are talking of a school-feeding programme, one of the components of the feeding is milk but there are other components, which we have to consider. When negotiations and discussions with a company providing only milk fails, what about other options? 

Indeed, Madam Speaker, I imagine that if this programme was to be realized, after seeing the situation in the war ravaged areas, Northern, Western parts of Uganda, I think the Government has got to do some more survey and it must be immediate in order to salvage the worsening condition -(Interruption)

MR ATUBO: Madam Speaker, on this question of milk as a feeding programme, this company from Thailand was supposed to get milk - I think we should be serious to devote some degree of self interest where we want to market production of milk in one part of the country and provide market in another area. I think the motive of getting this feeding programme particularly for milk was not genuine and clean. As hon. Omodi has said, feeding in school is not just a question of milk. The feeding programme in the war-ravaged areas was not necessarily based on milk but even on porridge. 

I am aware, Madam Speaker that there are international donors that were ready to assist in some of these war ravaged areas by feeding those children. The Government even went to the extent of signing some contracts with these international bodies, which unfortunately have not been implemented.  

However members of Parliament from these areas should sit down, do their homework and contact these international donors so that we can come out with the facts because the facts are there. This way we shall be able to tell this Parliament and the Government that these are the international donors we have identified, they are ready to give this and ask whether the Government ready to sign or go on talking about inflation, milk and other things.  Otherwise the school-feeding program is necessary in many areas especially where the children are disadvantaged.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please wind up.

MR OMODI OKOT: Thank you. The question I would like the ministry to inform this House about is what next? This is because the statement on the process was not complete. When will it be completed and what is the fate of the program at present? I would like the concerned authorities to take charge of this.

There is also the question of school fees for children in IDP camps. This has been a menace that has gone on throughout the year. I remember when the policy was put forward that the figure that was first suggested never went through and even the figure that was later agreed on was not remitted fully. So what is the future of this school fees?

I would also like to talk about the recruitment of teachers in the newly granted secondary schools. The policy with Ministry of Education is that Government will aid one secondary school per sub-county. Although 76 schools were approved for this aid, only 56 were actually taken up leaving a gap of 20 schools. This is despite the fact that more districts have been approved and as a result there will be more new sub counties. What are all these sub-counties going to do?  

I think the ministry has got to answer the reality of this problem. As I speak, I have also got two sub-counties in my district that do not have secondary schools despite the fact that I have been making efforts to this effect year in, year out for five years –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: I want to inform my honourable colleague that even in the case of those 56 schools that were approved for grant aid, not all of them are actually getting this aid. There are cases where the Ministry of Education has actually published the names of such schools as being grant aided. For instance I have a school in Soroti called Kiyere Secondary School. If you go to Ministry of Education you will find in all their communication that Kiyere S.S is grant aided. 

They have even gone ahead to send children there like addition lists for senior ones for the last two years. Despite all this they have not grant aided this school. It makes the whole process so confusing and one might even ask oneself if somebody eating the money intended for these schools and making Ugandans believe that they are not grant aided. There is something shoddy about all this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please wind up.

MR OMODI OKOT:	Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, you can now see that the magnitude of this problem is great and needs immediate attention. Some members are saying that if there is no secondary school in my sub-county then that means I did not go to secondary school. May I inform them that Uganda was national during the time I was in school and I could go and study anywhere in the country.

Madam Speaker, I want to talk briefly about the information on page five where the committee recommended that the Ministries of Finance and Public Service give an explanation. My question is when will this explanation come? Wont it be next year around this time and what damage shall we have gone through? Could this information be scheduled and if possible given right away so that we can arrest the situation before it goes off hand.

Also about teachers –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, other members also want to contribute.

MR OMODI OKOT: Can you allow me to say one or two things?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

12.37
MS GERTRUDE CHELANGAT KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for its report. I have some grievances from my district. 20 years ago we in Kapchorwa were able to get Kapchorwa Teacher’s Training College. However it is very sad that as I speak Government has not constructed any structures in this place. When you go there, you find students scattered all over the place and they are staying in mud and wattle houses. 

This is a serious matter and I would be grateful if the ministry would tell us when they are going to put some structures in this TTC. It is even more saddening that this is the only TTC we have in the whole of Kapchorwa and Bukwa districts as I speak.

Madam Speaker, there is another issue that involves Ministry of Health. We have had Kapchorwa Hospital since Obote 1 regime but as I speak, it has no exclusive maternity ward. Other patients share the maternity ward that is there. Each year Government has been promising to put up one but to-date there is nothing. Honourable Minister of Health, the people of Kapchorwa want to know when you are going to construct a maternity ward. Although we are happy that you have constructed a number of health units in the district, the main hospital still lacks a maternity ward. 

Furthermore, there are some doctors in Kapchorwa who are working in very difficult situations without roads and in the midst of insecurity. Is it possible to give these people what we call hardship allowance in order to motivate them? One time I was in Bukwa, which is now Bukwa District. It is a very difficult place to live in, cattle rustling is rampant and there are no roads. The doctor in charge of this area would come all the way from Pallisa. Because of these harsh conditions he was always threatening to leave the job. Now if such a person could get some hardship allowance I believe this would help a lot and we would be very grateful. 

I also have a problem with the policy of Makerere University and that of other public universities. I find it so painful to see that every student studying at Makerere University is qualified to be a student there yet you still find cases of students being segregated. Some students are Government sponsored while others privately sponsored despite the fact that all of them have qualified. 

Is it possible to change the policy and say that everybody pays for himself or herself so that Government can use these funds to improve on facilities and welfare of lecturers at the university? This will also help in treating everybody equally. Every year we hear of problems in these institutions yet you find that actually most of these students who are Government sponsored hail from rich homes and it is the poor ones who are paying. I plead to Government to look into this policy and let everybody pay.

Madam Speaker, each year the intake of UCC is declining yet there are institutions that are producing people who are not only job seekers but also job creators. I wonder why you are reducing the numbers each year. If you take a place like Soroti, it is very far but still you find only about 11 students from there that are Government sponsored. This is despite the fact that Soroti has gone through many hardships because of Kony invasions. Where do you expect these parents to get the money to sponsor their children?

Lastly Madam Speaker, I request the Minister of Education to take note of the fact that we get so saddened when we hear always that the best performing students are always mainly from the Central region. I do not believe that this is because the Central region is the only one that produces bright children because all Ugandans are bright. I request the ministry to improve on its inspections because the further these teachers are from the centre, the more relaxed they are. Sometimes they forget to teach and do other jobs instead.  

At one time we were very surprised when the ministry gave money for supervision and for buying atlases and thermometers only to find that the teachers had not bought these things and all this had come as a result of poor inspection. If they strengthen inspections I am sure we shall improve on the standards of learning for our children.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.45
MR PAUL LOKERIS APARITE (Pian County, Nakapiripirit):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My contribution based on page three concerns education, salaries of teachers and teachers who upgrade. As you may be aware, Karamoja has no education and most of the students there tend to go for education courses to become teachers. After Grade 111 they struggle using their meagre resources to upgrade to Grade V and maybe even to a degree. 

Despite all this they still come back to teach and not for any promotion or increase in salary. Moreover they teach under the supervision of a Grade 111 headmaster who is earning over Shs 300,000 while with their degree or diploma they are earning only Shs 100,000. I really do not know the rationale behind this. Can’t the Ministry of Education create positions for these people who struggle very hard to improve themselves by going for further education?

About the Eastern University since Karamoja is a tenth of this country, I think it would be better if we had an annex of this university in Karamoja to encourage the Karimojong to study to university level. This would be of great importance to us to have university services in Karamoja.

Thirdly -(Interruption)

MR ATUBO: Madam Speaker the problems of Karamoja have been due to isolation, neglect and the attitude Ugandans have towards Karamoja. To reverse this negative attitude, lack of exposure and contact with Karamoja, the greatest revolutionary step the people of Uganda can do is for Government to locate the main campus of the Eastern University in Karamoja. This will force other Ugandans to go there and mix with the Karimojong. The Karimojong will also get to know about universities and like it. This is a drastic step that somebody has to take.  

If I may add that there is a university in Mbale, Iganga, Ankole and Soroti. It is only Karamoja that is still lacking a university. Therefore I call upon this House and my friends from Karamoja to lobby very strongly for this Eastern University to be located in Karamoja with its headquarters there as well. Thank you.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you very much my colleague hon. Omara Atubo for advocating for the development of Karamoja. Indeed we need to be assisted on the issue of education so that Karamoja can abandon its bad activities that have been disturbing the area for a long time.

Another issue is the fact that Nakapiripirit district has always been the last in O’level examinations. This is because we lack the facilities to encourage these students to perform well. I wonder whether the ministry can put some of these facilities in Nakapiripirit as well. I know that there is a programme under the Irish that is going to assist Karamoja schools. Could the Ministry of Education put in more strength to ensure that this district comes up? 

About health, I am very happy that Abimu hospital and Kabong hospital have been taken care of. Also I see on page 10 and 13 of the report that the ministry has plans of constructing a hospital in every district. Since Kotido has been divided into three districts, it is now Kotido and Nakapiripirit districts that are remaining without hospitals. 

If some of the health centre four’s like Kotido health center four and Tokora health center four which is at the center of the district could be upgraded to hospitals it would really help us. This is because Moroto and Mbale hospitals where we refer our people are 70 miles away and you can see how desperate the people there are.

On page 15 there is a plan to renovate 13 community centres in West Nile that will be used as social space for young people. I wonder how young people will be able to travel to West Nile to access facilities from these community centres.

MR WOPUWA: The 13 centres that are mentioned are located where the minister comes from. You should be able to know that.

MR LOKERIS: You can see how unfair we can be and how we really misuse our offices. Because to me I could –(Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and to thank the honourable for giving way. I would like us to be fair to the minister. The Government of Uganda established that community centre in West Nile before the current minister who happens to be a daughter of West Nile was appointed. So it is not fair to attribute the fact that this centre is to be renovated simply because the minister comes from there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I know from the chairperson whether this is a national programme where other areas like Karamoja will benefit from this?

MS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, this was a serious issue that was discussed in the committee and I want to pass this question over to the Minister of Gender for a response.

MR BITANGARO: Rt honourable Speaker, I will respond when the time comes.  

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You can really see the concern we have. In each of our sub-counties there are community centres that need to be rehabilitated. As I speak the beneficiaries of adult education are studying under trees and suffering. Why don’t you rehabilitate these sub-county community centres so that these people can attend classes there? That is my concern, otherwise I appreciate much of what has been written in the budget report of the Ministry of Gender.  

12.55
MS RUTH TUMA (Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you very much, Rt honourable Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the good work that they have done. I would also like to commend Government for thinking it fit to establish a public university in Eastern Uganda. This is the only way that the people of Eastern Region will feel that they are also sharing the national cake.  

I would like to comment on the achievements of the health sector that are mentioned on page 9 and the control of malaria, vector control and reproductive health. I concur that this sector has done a good job as regards malaria although I am not very sure about the area of reproductive health. We have a lot of problems concerning pregnant mothers and my question is, what steps are being taken to ensure that health units in remote areas of Uganda are getting services, birth control education and anything else that is related to reproductive health?

I would also like to remind the Ministry of Health that last year we talked about helping these units access solar power. I would be grateful if the Ministry of Health considered this as one of their priorities for this financial year. This will be a very welcome thing for all our loving people and patriotic Ugandans.  

On the allocation for Jinja Hospital, I have noted that you have allocated only Shs 2.9 billion for this hospital despite the fact that Jinja Hospital has two big hospitals in one that is the children’s hospital and the main hospital. On top of that this hospital is a referral hospital. We get a lot of cases in these two hospitals so I don’t know how far this money that has been allocated will go. 

As I speak we have been asking for a generator for the main hospital but to date this generator is nowhere to be seen. We are still suffering from blackouts and every day, -(Interruptions)- yes, I live near the hospital and every day we spend atleast one hour without power. I do not know what the Ministry of Health is thinking about Jinja. Why is it that Jinja Hospital is marginalised? It is high time we were thought about because people are due to lack of power.  

Last week we were very lucky because we got a donation of some hospital equipment but we lack –(Interruptions)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform the honourable member holding the Floor that actually Jinja is not marginalized in terms of power. Power fluctuation is all over the country and as you are aware one of the members of this House that we later lost had to be supported on a generator in Mbarara. So this power problem is all over the country and not just in Jinja alone.

MS TUMA: Yes, but Jinja should not be suffering because power is generated in Jinja. The minister even stood here and said, “I am going to take a generator to Jinja to ensure that you do not have these problems”. But this has not happened. That is why I am saying that Jinja and the entire Busoga Region is marginalised.

Another point I would like to share with the minister is about gender. When I look at the Ministry of Gender, it has a youth council, women’s council and disability council but no children’s council. We have always talked about it. What has happened and when is it going to be effected? We would be interested in knowing about this. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.00
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join others to thank the committee for the report. I have a few comments to make and one of them is on Ministry of Health. In the report on page 13 they say, “Health centre four’s in strategic areas along the highways and remote areas will have additional facilities like x-rays, casualty units and maybe even ambulances”. 

Madam Speaker, all the accidents along Masaka Road occur in my constituency between Kamengo and Nsimbe Estate. Almost everyday there is a life lost on that road due to accidents. As I speak, our Health centre four at Mpigi has no ambulance, no x-ray and even the doctor comes just once a week. I request the ministry concerned to make sure that this Health centre four in Mpigi gets an ambulance at least. We have made appeals to the Minister of Health and I even visited the Permanent Secretary personally and he promised us something but we have not got anything yet.

I would like to know from the Ministry of Health about the money allocated to NGO Health Centres, especially those manned by churches or mosques. This is because it is a lot of money yet I do not see how this money benefits the people since the services are not free in these centres –(Interjections)- I am saying this because I have people who are complaining about this so just listen to me –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I have been listening very attentively to hon. Mutuluuza and he is saying these hospitals do not offer services to the people. I know that the Ministry of Health sends support to these centres. In fact our region has a very good hospital called Lwala Hospital, which is an NGO hospital. It is effective and very supportive to the community. Therefore I find this statement a bit disturbing. Is he in order to make such a generalized allegation about these NGO hospitals? Probably he could have been very specific about the one in his constituency if it is not helping people.  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mutuluuza, you know what you are saying is extremely grave because I believe the Government offered to support these hospitals since they were already rendering services to the population. This situation may only be in your place because I believe other places are receiving services.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, may I substantiate? I am not saying they are not offering any services. What I am saying is that they are not offering free services. If money is allocated to such a hospital to say fight malaria, I expect patients to pay subsidized rates but this is not happening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Chairperson of the Committee.  

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker like hon. Alaso has indicated, I find that statement very disturbing. The Committee on Social Services has had an opportunity to visit Government hospitals, Government Health units, NGO hospitals and NGO Health units. I want to put it on record that when we compared the two we found that majority of NGO hospitals are very efficient, very clean and offering excellent services. 

When we visited Ongino NGO hospital in Kumi District we took a whole day analysing the situation. We found that these hospitals are greatly subsidising costs for patients suffering from illnesses such as malaria, caesarean section and hernia. If it had not been for them patients would not manage. Therefore hon. Mutuluuza, unless you can give a specific example let me just say that we also used to have such a feeling until we went out to the field. 

Before we used to base our assumptions on reports about a few Kampala NGO hospitals where we would hear that a dead body was retained because such and such a fee was not paid. But when we went out to the field, everything was to the contrary and I want to encourage this August House to continue supporting NGO hospitals and health units.

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. I just want to give information that in my constituency we have an NGO hospital called Amudat Hospital. Government gives money to this hospital every month and I remember their April release was Shs 22 million. But as we speak if you go to Amudat Hospital people are buying catheters outside the hospital. They have to bring one to be given either a drip or blood transfusion, so my colleague is correct.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to understand something. Are you saying that since Government offers support treatment should be completely free, is that what you are saying?

MR MUTULUUZA: No, Madam Speaker. What I am saying is that it is true these NGO hospitals offer better services than Government hospitals. However if money is sent to fight malaria I would expect patients who go to these NGO Health centres to get free services for that purpose. Another thing –(Interruption)

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to give information to my honourable colleague that when Government gives money, they do not give enough to meet all the costs.  Because of this patients who go to NGO hospitals have to make minimal payments.

CAPT. MATOVU: Madam Speaker, hon. Mutuluuza should not be hanged or misunderstood. He has a point and the chairperson also has a point, but what is the middle line?  It is true these NGOs are doing a commendable job in this country, especially where Government does not reach. To avoid duplicating services Government has given ambulances to some units like Kololo, Mengo and Namirembe. 

I have seen the policy statement and Shs 16 billion has been committed to these NGO hospitals and other training schools. We want value for our money. For example we want Namirembe to say, “Before Government came in when we were limping alone, the cost of treating malaria was Shs 10,000 for an out-patient. But because of this new package of an ambulance, new staff taken on and the operational budget catered for to the tune of Shs 748 million, the cost of treating malaria is now Shs 5000. Because of this intervention a pregnant woman will be treated free of charge”. I think we should listen to his case. We need Ministry of Health and Government to ensure fair play by coming up with a Memorandum of Understanding that ensures value for money.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you honourable colleague for that information. Madam Speaker, I want to leave this point here. It is now up to the ministry concerned to trace this money. 

Secondly I got a list of the money that was sent in 2002/2003 financial year to these NGO health centres from the Ministry of Health. Out of the total amount of money that was released I found out on the ground that actually less than half was delivered to these health centres. I wrote to the permanent secretary through the then Minister hon. Wabudeya and waited for a reply as to why some of the money did not reach these NGOs. Up to now I have not got a reply. 

Another point I want to raise –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: There is some information I want to give my honourable colleague. I am knowledgeable about this because I am the Chairperson of the Hospital Management Committee of Kabarole Hospital, which is under the Church of Uganda and I am conversant with how this thing works. There are conditionalities that the Ministry of Health has put on each of these NGO hospitals to ensure that they give accountability. 

If for example following a quarter you do not give an accountability of how the money was spent to their satisfaction they can withhold some money until that accountability comes. [Mr Okupa: “Global Fund”] Well, like Global Fund as you are saying. As long as these health centres do not provide this information to the Ministry of Health, they will continue getting allocations but not the releases. So, we should also follow up these health centres in our constituencies.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you for that important information.  The minister in charge of that ministry is here and one time even came to my district and thanked the health workers there for job well done. But the money that was released from the ministry is not reaching those NGOs health centres. Madam speaker, my time has been wasted –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Secondly Madam Speaker, another issue I want to raise is that I had a chance of visiting internally displaced people last week and this is what I found on the ground.  The people in IDPs’ around Lira Municipality are not even aware that there is provision for UPE in Uganda. I request the Minister of Education to go to camps like Arute, Railway Zone and another one whose name I have forgotten.  Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you for giving me this chance. Madam Speaker, I wanted to be clarified on something. The honourable is talking about Lira but we are elected from different areas whose Government programs we are well aware of. Do you mean to say that the leaders in that area do not know that there is UPE and that they are not able to sensitise their people on the UPE programs?

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, we are elected as members of Parliament and that is why I went to Lira. I represent my people but I went to Lira –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Mutuluuza. What she was asking is that is it really possible that all the members who represent those people are not aware of those programs and have never informed their people? That is what she is asking.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, I asked them. As you know an IDP camp has a population of about 2000 to 3000 people and nearly 55 percent of them are children and almost 45 percent are below the age of eight.  These children do not have access to school –(Interjection)- let me finish because I want to tell you what is on the ground as I was there last week. Now, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS AKELLO: I would like to thank hon. Mutuluuza for his contribution and to clarify to the House that I am not sure which camp he went to because Madam Speaker and honourable members of this House, I have been to those camps in Lira.  In fact, for example in July – I am sorry he has walked out but I was with hon. Omara Atubo. 

We gave out a lot of materials to the children who had performed very well as a reward to recognise their performance. We gave out blankets, trophies, pens and books to encourage the children to participate more effectively in the next primary leaving examinations. So to say that they are not aware that there is UPE in Uganda is gross misinformation.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, the problem is that members are not listening to me or allowing me to finish my statements. In my constituency we are even arresting people whose children are found on the streets during school time. When we went to these IDPs we were told that without Shs 4,000 to pay to the nearby schools a child could not access education there. This is what I request the Minister of Education to go and find out.  

Now, the issue of secondary education Madam Speaker –(Interruption) 

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you my colleague and Member of Parliament from my constituency, Mpigi. I want to inform you, Madam Speaker and honourable members of this House that I have been to Erute and to the Railway Zone Camp. While there I found classes going on with books supplied from the Ministry of Education. Furthermore we have in the Budget about Shs 1 billion meant for paying fees for children whose parents are in the IDP camps and we have done this through Government for about two years now. 

Probably outside this House I will find out the source of his information because it is not true that they do not know anything that is going on. If anything they are performing very well as the minister has said. I thank you.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you for that. Madam Speaker, I went with another Member of Parliament from Buvuma and our clerk Ms Byoona and we got this information from the IDP camp leaders. When hon. Alaso report –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mutuluuza, did you say that you went there two weeks ago before the schools had closed?

MR MUTULUUZA: Even if the schools were closed, we asked the people there and that is the information they gave us –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have a reason for asking. If you are really saying that Government is telling lies and there is no UPE, I want to know whether you went there during the school season. The matter you have raised is very grave and extremely serious if indeed it is true that we are appropriating money there but there is no education.

MR MUTULUUZA: This is the report we are getting from the leaders of the camps. Now on the issue of these internally displaced people –(Interruption)- let me finish.  

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I thank you so much for this opportunity. The honourable member has said that they went with their committee clerk and other committee members. As a result I believe they are supposed to produce a report, which report they can bring on the Floor with facts for us to debate. This is because if you tell us you met the camp leaders, we shall discuss this on merit basing on the report that will be provided by the committee other than just discussing issues. We have to remember that we have a deadline as far as budgetary approvals are concerned.  Thank you.

CAPT. MATOVU: Madam Speaker, yesterday in the report of Public Service and Local Government it was clearly reported to this House that Grants to the Northern region come back to the treasury. It is here in the report. First of all this money is released late due to the fact that the camps are miles away and there are problems of transport and security.

Secondly, last year when I was on the Social Services Committee we visited Lira and there was a forum of Northern Uganda that brings together all the teachers from that region. They told us that there is a problem of insecurity in the camps and because of this the movement of children and their teachers are not coordinated. They gave us an example of children from Pader who were in camps in Lira.  

As a result you find that funds go to Pader but the children are in camps in Lira. Then you find the teachers there are teaching under a tree with about 2,000 children.  Now, whose children are these from Pader? Where are the teachers, the UPE money and the chalk? It is a challenge.  Hon. Kabakumba is here to prove that children from Gulu sometimes cross to Masindi simply because it is a bit secure and it is in the rear –(Interruption)- Let me finish, if we compete we shall lose the case.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, I believe honourable members are free to contribute on these policy statements and I am sure ministers will have ample time to respond. (Applause)  It seems as if whenever an issue is raised, the minister wants to come up and gag the member. Is this proper procedure, Madam Speaker? Why don’t the ministers wait since some of these issues are revelations that were not put in their policy statements? Why don’t members put forth their cases first then the ministers respond?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that ministers will have time to respond but when something is so fundamental the ministers must come quickly and answer otherwise members may pick it up and continue along the same lines.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, the honourable member is talking about camps in the North and we also have examples like in my constituency where there are so many schools that do not have teachers. The situation is so bad that we have one or two teachers in a primary school that goes up to primary seven. We even have cases where the UPE funds have not reached certain schools.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the issue hon. Mutuluuza raised was that people in the camps have never heard about UPE. That is a very fundamental matter because UPE has been going on for about seven years.  

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, you are right but when the ministers answer they are not giving us information pertaining to the specific camps that the honourable member has been talking about.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister in charge of Northern Uganda is there and she was about to give information.

MS AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I usually want to promote harmony and I do not like to argue unnecessarily with my colleagues. At the same time I do not want my colleagues to give information that gives the impression that the Government of Uganda is not looking after her people in Northern Uganda, because it is wrong to do that.  Therefore I insist on giving this information so that honourable colleagues can debate from an informed position.  

What I want to clarify to hon. Matovu and to my other colleagues is about children who are from Pader and find themselves in Lira or those from Lira and who find themselves in Apac. We have established what are called learning centres on the ground in order to cope with problems of displacement. We have these learning centres in every district in the North. In fact unlike ordinary schools and classrooms, these centres are places that have been built to accommodate displaced children. 

Irrespective of where the teachers or children are, they at least have an opportunity to go to school. I am not saying it is an ideal situation but it is the situation that has been forced on us by the insurgency in Northern Uganda and we are coping with it as best as we can. I want to thank you.

MR MUTULUUZA: Finally Madam Speaker, when I talk of sharing the national cake this is what I mean. When I went to those camps and saw the situation under which those people were living, I felt embarrassed. I feel really sorry for them and that is why as a national leader I am raising these issues. (Laughter)

On the issue of secondary schools, last financial year we had agreed that every senior secondary student in the internally displaced camps would get a sponsorship from Government. Government has told us that there are 39,770 students being helped. However when we went there it did not seem like this was the case. In fact one of my colleagues hon. William Nsubuga offered a scholarship to one of the students there who had completed primary seven but had nowhere to go because of lack of fees. 

There were about 25 of them and through sympathy hon. Nsubuga offered one student a place in his school at Seeta College. I am even wondering whether Government will pay him or any of us that money since we gave those disadvantaged students some money for education.

Lastly on the issue of Makerere University, I have noticed that the university increases tuition fees almost every semester. Yes, those who are there tell us. If it is not the official tuition fee then it is other fees like examination fee, paper work and so on. 

I want to find out whether this money they collect from students is deposited on consolidated fund so that it is again given them to look after these students. Because if it is a Government institution, why do they charge money and they do not limit it to the consolidated fund? I want that clarification. I thank you very much for the time you have given me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, honourable members, I know this sector is very important to every body but we need to conclude this. So I call upon the ministers. I will start with the Minister of Gender. No, no, excuse me, hon. Mutuluuza, you ask questions and then you disappear.  Honourable members, I think this is extremely embarrassing. A member who has asked questions, and wants answers has walked out.

1.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE (GENDER AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Samuel Bitangaro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a very good report. I also want to thank my colleagues for the excellent contributions they have made as well as the concerns they have shown.  In the interest of time, I will go ahead to answer the questions as they were raised.  

One was raised by hon. Seninde and she is not satisfied with the performance of the youth councils, disability councils and women councils.  She wanted to know why the money was cut from 1 billion to 693 million.  When the money was reduced from our ceiling, because we wanted to provide facilitation for traditional leaders and because of our resource envelope we had only to get it out of our ceiling.  We provided Ugshs 600m for the traditional leaders and we had to get it from all the three, women, youth and disability councils.

Hon. Mwaka, she expressed dissatisfaction on the way money belonging to youth, women and disability councils is disbursed.  Yes, it is true that this money is disbursed directly to the districts.  

We recall that during the amendment of the women statute we provided that money would be moving from finance directly to the districts.  The only money that comes to the ministry is money that runs the secretariat of the women, youth and disability councils, but the rest goes straight to the districts. But you were wondering why the ministry does not provide information about the release. I concede we should do that. We shall be providing that information about the release.

PROF. MWAKA: Could you please respond to the circular, which we received in our pigeonholes, a letter written to the ministry by His Excellency the President requesting for a detailed report? I had requested that when will that report come so that you respond to the presidential request.

RTD MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Actually it was not a request; it was a directive.

MR BITANGARO: Yes, the request was to our ministry to provide that information to the President, which we have done. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, apparently, the President copied the directive to members of this House and I think in your response they expected you to do the same.

MR BITANGARO: I had already promised that we are going to do that- yes, I thought I conceded that we would in future provide- (Interruption)- yes, I said that I concede. We shall be giving you information. This also applies to the report that was not copied to you. Thank you.

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much Madam Speaker and the honourable Minister for giving way. Honourable minister, in your response you said that money for traditional leaders you had to cut from women, youth and disability.  Honourable minister, what criteria did you use to pick on these three? What is the direct relationship between funding for traditional leaders and youth, women and disability councils? Because I imagine this is a deliberate way of demoralizing the youth, women council structure and in effect making them die naturally.

MS SENINDE: Supplementary, Madam Speaker.  When I was seeking clarification, I remember the Minister had also just pointed it out. I said we have not been satisfied with the performance of these councils.  

The Minister has not given us a proper reason though he just explains that this money is just reduced because of the traditional- honourable Minister, I just want to understand, do you now expect these councils to perform if you have reduced the money? If they have not been performing well initially, how do you expect them to perform?

Secondly, you have not even given the guidelines as to how they are supposed to get these monies. We have observed that at the district it is the gender officers who use this money in most cases.  Now, how do you expect our councils to perform? Women and youth councils and disabilities have been asking us as Members of Parliament. We do not have clear answers to give, honourable Minister. I am not satisfied with your response.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to know from the honourable minister because the way he is giving this response, our request for a status report. This sounds so evasive, there seems to be something the Minister really does not want us to know because is none committal on this matter.  If His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda found it fitting that the legislature that conducts oversight function on his ministry, this ministry of Gender should be privy to this directive that was given to the minister of Gender on the status report on the women council funding.  If he found it fitting, can the Minister tell us why he still finds it not fitting to seriously undertake to give us this report?  

Madam Speaker, if he does not explain, my feeling is that the Minister just wants to cross over this matter and continue. It is hard to think that the Minister of Gender would like to marginalize women because he does not commit himself. I want to think he is deliberately marginalizing the women in this country.  He should give us the timeframe, actually it is just a matter of copying the thing to us; he can bring it even tomorrow morning.  Otherwise, we will stand here and block the approval of his budget.

MRS KASULE: I remember the women councils used to be marginalized in funding. I remember women under the leadership of the Rt. Hon. Deputy Speaker, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, put up an effort and pressurized the President to pay more attention to these councils.  The President gave a directive that let there be one billion for each.  

It was after the women and the youth put in an effort under leadership when the problem came of paying traditional leaders because of the no goodwill of the ministers. I now believe that is why they even went for that because they were not happy with the directive from their head.  Can the honourable minister convince me that that was not so?

MR BITANGARO: I thank the members for their concerns.  You said you are not satisfied with the reason why we had to reduce the money from one billion to Ugshs693 billion.  I can only explain that the reason was inadequacy of funds.  Our resource envelope is such that we do not have more than one billion, which you could use to give out to all these councils.  As a result we had to cut from our ceiling, of course this does not mean we have less commitment of the women, youth and the disabled.  We are very aware that is our mandate and even in the little resources that we have we disburse the monies to them.

As to the report, which was not copied to you, that was an omission and I regret the omission. We shall avail it to Members of Parliament. I can say within in one week’s time. 

Hon. Namayanja Rose was not happy also that we reduced the money from one billion to Ugshs 693 billion.  I agree entirely that even me I am unhappy about it but is there much I can do other than spend what I have. I can only cut your coat according to the cloth you have.

Hon. Namayanja –(Interruption)

MS MWAKA: Madam Speaker, that being so, may I suggest that this be treated as a loan from the women’s vote? So that when the cultural leaders get their vote our money is returned to us, because there is no connection?  Why women, because women and culture we are always bungled together?   

MR BITANGARO: Unfortunately, it is not part of my mandate to treat monies as loans. My mandate is to spend the money that is allocated to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  It is a good suggestion; I will take it up with the people whose mandate it is to allocate money, the Ministry of Finance –(Interruption)  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, some time back the Women councils were not established simply because there was no money appropriated for the activity.  Luck came and there was a supplementary. While we were examining the supplementary schedule some women MPs came and talked to us – you remember, Madam Speaker – we appropriated that money from one of the votes which was going to be a big beneficiary of the supplementary.  But when these things continue, I think that is why we are getting outbursts and concerns from especially women members that this area is not being attended to.  

The clarification I am seeking, Madam Speaker, if there is a resource constraint why can’t the Minister come out and say so instead of promising?  Because once we have appropriated, where are they going to get the money?

MS KIRASO: Honourable members, I would like to invite you at an appropriate time when you have these big books - I know they are tedious to keep carrying around - to find time and look at this Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. How much money is appropriated for that Ministry and the activities, which are carried out?  

I think Prof. Mwaka Victoria one time found out that in this ministry the money that actually goes to real activities, which are expected to be performed by this Ministry, was 18 percent of the budget, that was last financial year or the other year.

This financial year if you look more closely you will find that the real money which goes for activities is about 10 percent and on that one we will not blame the Ministry because the Ministry was established, ministers were appointed, Permanent Secretaries are there and the secretaries and all these big officers and whatever.  

When you look at this book it is very saddening that is why I want you to look at it, vote 018.  You can also look at other votes, even the co-operatives you were talking about yesterday, you will find a lot of money going to general staff salaries, allowances, advertising and public relations, workshops and seminars, books, computers, welfare and entertainment, name it.  

So, the whole programme for Government if we do not want to offer lip service to this population of Uganda, Hon. Prime Minister, we have to revisit the way we are doing things whether we are serious or not.  So, I thought honourable members you should look at the activities under this ministry and other ministries. Thank you.

MR BITANGARO: Thank you hon. chairperson for that very useful information. I think it has enlightened members about the plight of the ministry but that is not to say we are not doing our best. We are doing our best within the circumstances; it is just that we do not have the money to spend.

Then, hon. Namayanja Rose raised something to do with traditional leaders, that there should be a better mechanism of availing facilitation to traditional leaders rather than have them line up at the Ministry to receive the facilitation.  Well, this is a matter for the respective Kingdoms and traditional leaders. I would expect maybe some of them to send their representatives rather than probably lower their dignity and come to the ministry.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, honourable minister.  Mr Minister, Government pays staff in Gulu in Bundibugyo and elsewhere but they do not have to come to ministries even so they do not have to come to Bombo. There must be a mechanism of transferring this money rather than seeing a King coming to line up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But, honourable minister, I want to know, did these Kings actually come to your ministry?

MR BITANGARO: No, I want to explain that, Madam Speaker.  You see this is the first time money was being availed under that mechanism. I do not recall any of the Kings coming to line up at the ministry. But if any came really it is because their people represented them. But we shall find the mechanism indeed by probably having them receive the money through the banking system.  Although, maybe in some cases there may not have been –(Interjections)- yes probably in some of them, not all of them, of course a good number have-

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  When someone wrote in Bukedde that the traditional leaders were requested to come and line up for money, I got in touch with the ministry, and in particular the Permanent Secretary, and the Permanent Secretary made it clear that he never requested the traditional leaders to come for their money, but he asked their private secretaries to collect the money.  I was interviewed, I cleared it on CBS, but in the afternoon they spent literary the whole day, Mambo bado quarrelling and abusing us yet I had cleared this matter.

Additionally, Bukedde apologised because I summoned the person who wrote it. I summoned William Pike in my office and there was written evidence, which showed that traditional leaders were never requested to come and collect their money, but this is foolish politics by certain individuals.  

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, I do not know the criteria used to determine the allowances of these traditional leaders because, imagine a Sabaluri to get Ugshs 5 million and Ssabasajja Kabaka of Buganda also is given Ugshs 5 million. Madam Speaker -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Mutuluuza, I will not allow anybody to say anything, just stand up and withdraw what you have said.  Hon. Mutuluuza, please stand up and withdraw what you have said.

MR MUTULUUZA:  Madam Speaker, I just requested -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Withdraw what you have said. 

MR MUTULUUZA:  Madam Speaker, I would rather walk out rather than withdrawing- I am sorry to say this.  I asked for criteria used whether it is the size of the Kingdom, the population or what.  But, Madam Speaker, I find it very difficult.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, have you read the Constitution?  Are you aware that under the Constitution no person is above the other? Have you read the constitution? Have you?

CAPT. BASALIZA:  Madam Speaker, I would like to move under Rule 59 that a member should be no longer heard.  Rule 59 says, “If a member persists in irrelevancy or tedious repetition or uses objectionable words and on being called to order fails to retract or explain the words and offer an apology to the satisfaction of the Speaker, on any member…”.  So, Madam Speaker, I move a motion that a Member should no longer be heard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, the statement you made is in breach of the Constitution. I have guided you, can you please withdraw what you were saying.

MR MUTULUUZA:  Madam Speaker, I withdraw. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, Minister, please.

MR BITANGARO:  Hon. Lokeris wanted to know what criteria was used to choose 13 community centres in West Nile for rehabilitation. This is the response.  West Nile, these community centres were rehabilitated under a programme called “Programme for Enhancing Adolescent Reproductive Life”.  

The following are the districts: Gulu, Iganga, Kiboga, Tororo, Bugiri, Bushenyi, Mukono, Kibaale, Kayunga, Mayuge, Arua, Lira, Moyo, Adjuman, Kitgum and Moroto.  Earlier alone, the rest in other districts, the community centres were renovated using UNEFPA and EEC funds.  Iganga for one, Kiboga and Tororo they were renovated. So, these were the ones remaining and that was the criteria, it is not because the Minister comes from there.  

This PARO programme was established before hon. Bakoko became a Minister, it is not her who pressed or chose West Nile district to access the PARO programme. I suppose hon. Lokeris has got the explanation.

Finally, I would like to thank members for enriching this debate and for their contributions. I thank you.

1.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me the Floor. I also thank the Chairperson for the report as well as the members who have contributed to this debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Minister just give me a minute. I have just received a notice that the President would like to meet the Committee on National Economy and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development at 2.00 p.m. this evening at State House.  So, if the members are here, they are given notice.  Minister, you can proceed.

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, quite a number of members raised issues. I largely note many of them, but I will comment on issues, which were specific.  I also need to say that the chairperson’s report was really a summary and highly abridged. But if you go back to the statement, it is very rich and it highlights most of what you would like to know. 

Hon. Seninde opened the discussion on the lack of drugs especially in health centres, and other members in the discussion echoed this. I would like to explain it as follows.

As a ministry we are not yet satisfied on the level of funding for drugs and other supplies.  Noting that on the average we would need a funding level of US$3.5 per capita, and we are just slightly above that.  However, I am happy that members like hon. Kigyagi and others appreciated what is going on especially in rural areas where the drug situation has largely improved and this is what you see on inspection.  

Most of our units have essential drugs and essential drugs have been defined and you have to go to the list to see what essential drugs are.  These are the ones, which we handle in our society.  So, if you go to the health centre looking for the drug like these drugs for blood pressure and others, you may not get it because it is not on that list.  Now there are two ways of getting drugs into –(Interruptions)

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, the minister is talking about drugs and because of the finance we do not have a lot of them.  I wanted to seek clarification whether we also have anti-rabies drugs and tetanus cream in many of these places. 

On 2 August 2005, I lost my father because he had an infection of tetanus. We looked through all these hospitals. We went up to Kenya that is where we got the drug.  By the time we got it, he was dead.  Even Mbale Regional Hospital did not have the drug.  I wanted to seek that clarification, Madam Speaker.

MS MUNYIRA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, I would like the honourable Minister to clarify to us. When I go down to do monitoring at NGO hospital they open their store of drugs.  But when I get to the Government Health Centre IV, you hardly find any drugs and when you talk to the population they are always complaining.  I would like the Minister to clarify how this money is passed down.  Does NGO hospitals get their cash to buy their drugs and how does the Health Centre IV fail to have any drugs at all?

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like the Minister to explain to us in simple language what does he mean with “essential drugs for the common diseases”?  Because, Madam Speaker, in most of the health centres in Bugiri District, even in Busia, people always have to go and buy chloroquine; people are always buying panadol.  What then is essential?

DR KAMUGISHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  If I had been given time to finish this then some of these clarification would have been handled.  So, I beg to be allowed to explain this point that all our units in the country have been allocated funds for drugs and these funds are at the National Medical Stores, and this is what we call the credit line.  

Additionally every district is given PHC funding, Primary Health Care Conditional Funding and 50 per cent of that money is supposed to go to the purchase of drugs.  Now what you find more often than not- and this will explain quite some units- you will find a good stock of drugs and in others you do not.  

We have had to change a system.  Formerly we had a system which we called the push system where the stores determined that health units need drugs, therefore, let us send drugs to the countryside and in so doing, they would not know which units need which drugs, especially where others are very busy and others are not.  So we changed to another system called the pool system.  In other words the units determine their requirement and send their orders to the National Medical Stores.  Now the National Medical Stores packs what has been required and sends it to that district.  

Now what has been happening, we have experienced some management problems in some of these districts.  In that some of the units the heads of these units put their orders a little bit late.  That is one reason and we are trying to rectify this through intensified supervision.  

Now if a requisition comes a bit late, then they will miss that cycle and they have to be sent their to get their drugs and there could be a delay that lead to a temporary shortage, but the drugs will still come.  

So the other problem is that most districts use the 50 per cent, which they are supposed to use on drugs for other things and they do not buy drugs with this money.  Meaning they do not supplement what comes from the National Medical Stores and this causes a problem.  You know these districts are decentralized and you know they have a lot of a lieu way.  So these are some of the ways.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, when we are considering divestiture of medical stores, we discovered two things:  One of them being that medical stores procure drugs cheaply because of bulk purchases.  We also discovered that they purchase drugs from reliable pharmaceuticals, and that they deliver these drugs at there own cost to where they are destined.  But the local authorities do not want this arrangement because they want to have cash. I think that is why the Minister is saying that the 50 per cent that was left to them is not being utilized. In fact we had recommended that actually they deliver the drugs. 

The other advantage with National Medical Stores is that they give credit to Government, which these businessmen in the pharmacies do not give.  So the clarification I want from the Minister, after discussing this with you, why did you now decide to develop a policy half way because it is giving a loophole for those people not to purchase drugs or purchase inferior drugs.

MR KIGYAGI: Madam Speaker, the information I have is that I know where the problem arose.  National Medical Stores were not delivering the drugs in time so there was a lot of drug blackout.  

I will quote a district like Ntungamo where I was. They decided that when there was a delay with the National Medical Stores they would purchase from the regional centres and since they started that system the drug blackouts in the district went down.  So there was a problem. I do not know whether the National Medical Stores has improved its delivery, but at one time it was causing a big problem and there was a lot of drug blackouts.  

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, I think there is a lot of bureaucracy in this procurement system and the whole blame should not be put on the health centres.  On 30th last month I was visiting some of the health centres and I did put this to the medical officer.  

I think it is the National Medical Stores, which has a problem.  They do not send the guidelines in time. And even when the health centres put in their request the National Medical Stores says those drugs are not available.  So, by the time they are available that is when they say they have already delivered so they should go for those drugs. And at that particular time they were no drugs at Ikoba Health Centre 111 where there is a maternity, and what they did was to push forward that kind of money when people do not have drugs to use.  

The releases are made quarterly so you can imagine. For this particular case it is National Medical Stores, which delayed to act, but the health centres were ready with their requisition and nothing was given to them.  So, I think there is a problem with the National Medical Stores.  Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, please respond.

DR KAMUGISHA: I thank the honourable members for their comments.  I had started with problems on the recipient side that is the health units. I was not going to exonerate the National Medical Stores where there is also a problem, which we have been addressing.  
 
The National Medical Stores has just been undergoing restructuring and that is now completed. We think that their operations will be better than they have been in the past.  For a little while they did not have a board, but now they have got a fully-fledged board which is in place. 

Then also there came in another law by the PPDA, and by the time they harmonized their procedures with the ones of PPDA, there was a delay also in the procurement.  But now the situation has been streamlined and we expect these delays to be reduced.  Of course they may not have every item all the time.  

The guidelines is that if a particular item is not there then they will go to the Joint Medical Stores in Nsambya and get that guideline.  Some of our people sometimes do not follow these guidelines; they just go back to the countryside.  These are some of the issues that cause some of the shortages. 

But as I said we are intensifying supervision and guidelines.  Our management committees have been cautioned to also take interest in this matter. So, I hope that joint effort will yield some good results, which will accrue to a better supply of drugs to the countryside.

Hon. Mwaka raised the issue of maternity centres, which lack some equipment and this affects reproductive health.  I need to assure the honourable member and others that reproductive health is one of our priority programmes and supplies within that programme we will continue to be addressed. And in our budget we are going to procure more kits so that things like gloves will be supplied to all our units so that those who come to deliver the facilities are in place for them to do so without a lot of problems

Again Hon. Mwaka together with hon. Okupa raised issues on the Heart Institute.  This institute is located in Mulago, but it is an autonomous institute, which we have had an opportunity here to share with you that it is doing a very good job and still does a good job; and they have been doing fundraising. 

As I speak now quite a good number of their equipment is modern and functioning and they have got a very good stock of drugs. There is no hindrance for anybody here or outside to lend them a hand especially since it is an autonomous body.

MRS KULANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification.  If that is the case that the Institute is well facilitated, in the media we read about people going to India and looking for assistance, if these facilities are there, why are people looking for assistance and why are they going out?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I do not think that is the case, if it is the case then why are they fundraising?  We all know that we send our patients here to South Africa and India. Let me pick South Africa as a good example because these days everybody seems to be going to South Africa.  Here in Uganda we have the best doctors, but what we do not have is the equipment. And understandably Government was advised not to accept equipment because they will cause some economic imbalance –(Interjections)- yes, some macroeconomic instability.  

But let me ask the Minister in his wisdom because if somebody is buying a ticket on South African Airways and is going to spend US$6000 just because there is no equipment here in Mulago, why can’t the Government accept this equipment either on loan or purchase them so that people can pay here in Uganda rather than flying to South Africa and India?  

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the practice here in Uganda is that you find the person who is manning a TC scan is the same person having another TC scan in town.  Can the Minister explain how they are handling this situation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I do not want us to really re-open this debate. Let us just hear you and then the Minister should answer.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the Minister is admitting that they have failed to fund this by saying if there is any person who can give a hand on this matter. This is a very important thing that affects everybody. 

You realize, honourable Speaker, that one of our colleagues is not here in this House for quite a long time, Col. Bogore, because of his heart problem. Here we are saying we have all the resources, we have all the doctors and yet these issues cannot be handled. Do we have to wait until some big man dies and then we look for money?

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, I think I need to clarify so that I am understood properly.  In the past this institute did not have any working equipment.  Gradually they have been acquiring some equipment especially for diagnosis. They acquired recently a more modern equipment and they are now able- if you go there at least evaluate your condition. So that even when they are referring you to another centre they know what the problem is.  

What they are not able to do now is surgery like open-heart surgery and this is where they now need to move.  They have trained staff and now what they need is this equipment so that all the surgery can now be done here.  In other words, gradually it has been upgrading to the extent that now what lacks are those equipment to make it fully operational. So, I was not saying that they have everything now, they do not, but there have been improvements over the time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable Minister, the way you are responding you are saying that the institution is self-propelled one day when they get those things you can go there and get surgery.  I think what the members want to know is you making. Is there any effort to help them to secure this equipment so that operations can be done here?  I think that is the concern of the members.

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, this institute has been running independently but Government supplements their money –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, is the Minister in charge of this sector in order to suggest that these organizations, or to state that these organizations are autonomous when actually they have no control of their budget, they have no powers to budget and to do as they want? Actually you are the one controlling these institutes; you are the ones who have got the powers. Since you have all the powers those institutes therefore are not really autonomous and therefore, they cannot do as they like about their fate.  

Is he in order to insinuate that these institutes can do as they like when actually he has fated them himself with his policy? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, minister, you are in charge of all the health facilities and we expect you to be able to account for what they are doing and to assist them. So you cannot disclaim ownership of these institutions and their growth. Can you, please, tell us are there any plans or you can leave them to propel themselves until they either collapse or they grow?

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, this unit is under the Ministry of Health and in fact need to say that all activities, which are related to health, are under Ministry of Health whether you are autonomous NGO, independent, you still have to come under the general umbrella of the Ministry of Health so is the heart institute. 

The reason why I was calling it independent is that it has got an independent board and they can raise their money to supplement the activities there, but that is not to say that Ministry of Health has no hand in it. I think this is very clear.

I think I will go to other part which hon. Mwaka raised about Nakaseke that the creation of Nakaseke district has lead to Nakaseke and Kawoko –(Interruption) 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I believe we are here not for the sake of being here. When we ask questions we want answers, Madam Speaker. The issue raised by members myself inclusive we need answers before we finish the equipment in Mulago and now you are going to Nakaseke.  I think the Minister should he systematic and respond to our issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, let me say this once again. Members want to know whether you really have any plans to assist this institute to secure the necessary equipment to conduct operations here. Do you or you do not have?

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, the answer is yes, we have plans to support this centre to acquire more equipment so that even the open-heart surgery can be done here.  But what I was saying is that at the moment our funding is not able to cater for all the activities that we would like to see there.  But we are ready to support this centre, Madam Speaker.

MRS SENINDE: Madam speaker, I would like to thank the Minister he is trying to explain and to tell us that they have the plan.  But if he does not give us a time frame at least as to when they expect to have that place one can have plans over 30/90 years. But we need to know, at least tell us that probably in the next five years we hope this to have been done other than leaving us just like that. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, maybe, the Minister of Finance who is here can make a commitment because a Minister of Health now maybe is in fix. Can we hear from the Minister of Finance?

PROF. SEMAKULA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Honourable colleagues the Ministry of Finance is ready to listen to whatever proposals the Ministry of Health has in order to improve.  When they have a proposal to make improvements to equip the institute we shall be very happy to discuss it. 

MR LOLEM:  Madam Speaker, I get perturbed when the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes and says that whatever budget the Ministry of Health will bring – and yet here they even know the person who is handling finance is not a rock.  So, my clarification is, when - and yet you are under funding the Heart Institute in Mulago, what plan do you have, what budget do you have in this financial year and in the next financial year for the Heart Institute in Mulago, other than saying the budget has to come from the Ministry of Health?

DR KAMUGISHA:  Madam Speaker, we know what should be done at the institute and all the resources needed there have been written down and costed and what remains now is to mobilise the budget. 

So, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is fully aware of what is required there but you know, I need to say that it needs sums of money, which may not be catered for immediately.  But it can be phased so that you know that within a period of five or so years, most of it can be obtained. However, we know what should be done there and all the efforts are being done to look for that equipment.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I have listened carefully to the submission made by the minister and the concerns made by the members.  I think it would be fair and maybe prudent to ask the responsible minister within a month’s time to come here with a concrete plan, well synchronised together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as to what they intend to do in this institute in a months’ time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, I think you appreciate the problems the patients are having in this country over this matter, what do you say?

DR KAMUGISHA:  Madam Speaker, I accept the guidance that on this particular issue I come back with more details at a later stage (Applause) One month is okay.  

Can I proceed with hon. Mwaka’s other question about a district hospital in Luwero since the other two will now be in the new district of Nakaseke? 

As you know, the chairperson has explained the situation about district hospitals. Now we are more for general hospitals where the criteria is on population density and our main thrust is on Health Center IVs so that we know if they are located in each county or constituency, then the majority of our people can be reached with reasonable services.

At the moment many of these health centers are being operationalised, construction has been completed and equipment is being supplied to about a half of them. There are those where we have already fixed equipment and others, which we have not yet although procurement is going on.  Now, once this has been done, then the question of whether this hospital is located in a particular district will not arise as long as people within that geographical area have got a general hospital where the Health Center IVs can refer their patients. 

So, to sum up this for hon. Mwaka, our thrust will be to operationalise the Health Center IVs in Luwero district, once they are fully operational, then we shall continue providing and looking into the necessity for more regional health centers in the area.  So, Luwero will for sometime get referral services from Nakaseke and Kiwoko.

Honourable Okupa raised the issue on the Heart Institute and I have already explained, he also raised an issue on drugs and I have already explained.  I am sorry about what happened, being incriminated as the cause of delay of drugs, I am sorry about that.  I was not aware.

Honourable Kigyagi talked about Mbarara Hospital.  The Ministry of Health has just taken over Mbarara Hospitals, it is true, starting with this financial year and I want to assure hon. Kigyagi that, the Ministry of Health will look into all the concerns at Mbarara Hospital including the supply of equipment like X-rays in order to make sure that it is fully operational.  

We have just taken it over, we are now in the transition process and I want to assure you that everything will be done to make sure that it provides the services that it is meant to provide. We may not expand it this year, because the expansion of most of our units will depend on how fully operational the Health Center IVs are.  When they are full operational, then we shall be able to access the capacities for both inpatients and outpatients.  

Some units may look crowded now, but when these Health Center IVs take off the load from them, and Health Center IIIs take off the load from Health Center IVs and IIs likewise, we might have a different picture and that is what will lead us into where we need to provide additional services or expand.  So we may not expand Mbarara at the moment, but we shall make it fully operational through supply of equipment.

Honourable Kulany raised an issue on Kapchorwa hospital, that they do not have a maternity ward.  This issue is with the Ministry of Health engineering division and we have been looking to ways of providing funds to put it up.  But at the moment we are also concerned with making sure that the maternity services in the hospital are at least improved, and then a ward can come at a later stage.
The hardship allowance: This is an issue we have been discussing for quite sometime between us, the Ministry of Public Service and Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We have not yet finalised the matter but we have made that request and I think it is being studied maybe the Ministry of Public Service one of these days will finalise it for us. But it is not only in Kapchworwa; we have got quite a number of hard to reach areas where we are not able to attract staff and we have to motivate them additionally so that they go there, so the discussions are going on with the relevant ministries.
  
Honourable Lokeris, thank you for thanking us for the work we are doing at Abim and Kabongo.  We would like to improve services at these hospitals. Now, as I said earlier on, in the meantime, we would like to operationalise all the health centers in Nakapiripirit. Then, simultaneously we are working on a criterion for referral centers and once it is completed, then we can see how to shorten the distance from Nakapiripirit to Mbale or Moroto but definitely we shall provide the referral service in that area.

Honourable Tuma about Jinja hospital, I want to thank you for mobilising a generator for us and that one will go along way improving the services that we are providing but we had already lined up one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. minister, I do not think she has mobilised a generator for Jinja hospital, there is no generator, they are demanding a generator from you.

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, she is not here in the room but I had shared this point with her two days back.  Jinja hospital has been requesting for a generator and there is a list of generators coming under the Orient Project and one of them was destined for Jinja but she has confirmed to me that through a friendly source, they have had a donation of a generator which is now in Jinja and that is the one for which I am thanking her.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have your responsibility as Government to provide a generator for Jinja Referral Hospital, these donations are not our concern and this is a hospital used by the whole of the Eastern Region.

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, this donation will not jeopardise our resolve to provide the generators when they arrive here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I find it unsatisfactory hon. minister because the generator was promised and pronouncements were made at Jinja hospital one year ago. We were told that it is there, I find this donation business unsatisfactory. The people in that area want a generator from you -(Applause)

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, I was here when hon. Tuma was contributing and I heard her clearly saying that Government had promised Jinja hospital a generator and the people have been waiting, they have not seen one up to now, so it is not true that she was satisfied that she got a generator from another source.

MR WAMBUZI: Moreover, Madam Speaker, the generator, which might have been donated through the sourcing of hon. Tuma, might be 10 watts or 10 kilowatts whereas Jinja hospital requires 300 kilowatts worth of a generator. So, I would like the minister to promise us that he is actually sourcing for a generator of the correct power not this, which is for candles, which has been donated. 

 I think it is very important at this point for the minister to clarify to this House that he is going to source for a generator of the correct power so that the all the wards and equipment in the hospital can get power.  Short of that, they might donate us a generator of 1 kilowatt, which cannot really do the job.

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, it is a pity hon. Tuma is not here but I want to confirm that my ministry is purchasing among other things generators and one of them is destined for Jinja hospital and it has been accessed and it will be the correct generator for Jinja hospital but it is also true that she mentioned that last week, yes, I wanted to be on record, I must record it, she mentioned that last week, she got a donation of equipment including a generator and I have thanked her for this.

Honourable Mutuluuza raised issues on accidents on Masaka Road and specifically mentioned Mpigi hospital, Health Center IV. I want to assure the hon. member that when the Orient equipment comes, the x-ray would be supplied as well as an ambulance; there are some, which are on the way coming, so Mpigi will receive this.

I thank the hon. member who talked about the NGOs and the NGO hospitals in relation to the comments made by hon. Mutuluuza. We are very happy with these units, which are doing an extremely good job. 

We have been urging them to continue reducing their charges and the information I have is that their services are highly subsidised and they will continue doing so as we continue to support their effort.  Therefore, I thank this House and the committee on Social Services for their keen interest in visiting these NGO hospitals and accessing the work going in there.

Madam Speaker, I think this is the end of my comments which were raised by the members, I want to thank all of you for raising these issues and for the interest you have shown in the health services of this nation, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Except hon. minister, there was some debate on what you call essential drugs and there was a specific question on whether you have anti-rabies and tetanus drugs in hospitals.

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, on the issue of essential drugs, I mentioned that the word, “essential drugs” has been defined and it is a whole list of drugs, I cannot enumerate all of them but they are drugs, which have been found to be effective against the common diseases.  

Now, you may go to a unit and one of the items has run out for example anti malarial - these are on the essential list- you may be having malaria and you go to a unit where there is anti malaria treatment, but that is not to say that it is not important.  What has happened is that they run out fast and we have been urging our people to – that is why we have said that 50 percent of these – pick - should be on drugs so that in the event, if an essential drug runs out, they can quickly supplement these stock outs.  

I am very sorry about the anti rabies vaccines which led to the death of our colleague but we have allocated about Ug shs 400 million this year to buy anti rabies vaccines so that most of our units can be supplied with these vaccines.  We have also appealed to our sister ministry, which looks after dogs and cats that we should work together to reduce the prevalence of rabies in this country and they have also promised that they will vaccinate the small animals, which are reservoirs for this rabies virus.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS MEHANGYE: Point of clarification on the anti rabies virus –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he says he is providing Ug shs 400 million to buy the drugs.

MRS MEHANGYE: Madam Speaker, what I wanted specifically is – thank you very much – is in which hospitals because we know they are not in every little hospital like in Kamwenge.  But in which ones do we look for these drugs?  Because in my district, Kamwenge, a hyena bit a woman as she was trying to protect the goat that it wanted to eat. The woman was scratched and badly wounded by this hyena.  She went to Fort Portal regional referral hospital, this drug was not there, she travelled to Entebbe - and you know the resources of these local people - she travelled to Entebbe where she was given a doze or something and they said, “ The drug is finished, sorry we cannot have more.” 

So the poor woman went back to Kamwenge and when she became worse, she came back the same round but did not get the drug and died.  So what I wanted specifically to know in order to avoid wasting time is, just in case of being bitten by a dog or such a wild animal, from which hospital specifically do you get this drug?  Thank you.  

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, all hospitals and Health Centers IVs, will be supplied with this anti rabies vaccine.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when is the time of supply because you are saying they will be supplied so that members can know?

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, the UG shs 400 million, which I mentioned are provided for in this budget meaning as soon as approval is made, the orders are going to be made and the procurement process will start.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister is speaking about the criteria for allocating resources, be it medicine or equipment but these things are not very clear for instance recently, the Ministry of Health was giving out ambulances and you could see ambulances given to some hospitals and other hospitals which are in critical condition not getting which leaves one wondering what criteria he uses. 

Because I am looking at these figures if you are talking about a general hospital servicing 200,000 people, I have Kitagata Hospital, which serves the entire district as a district hospital with no ambulance.  I have Suku Health Center IV, with no ambulance and when you talk about essential drugs, the criteria is not very clear, why don’t you make it known so that we know.  For instance, now that I have raised these two issues what answer can you give me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. members, now you want to reopen the debate.  Honourable minister, you said as soon as you pass this budget the drugs will be available in every Health Center IVs?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I am told the minister considers only members of the Social Service Committee and the ministers, let him explain.

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, when they are allocating things like ambulances and all these other facilities, members of the Social Service Committee and ministers get first priority.  I have Bududa Hospital, we have been asking and asking but up to know there is nothing. Come next year I will join the Social Service Committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you know what you are saying is quiet serious.  You are actually saying that these members of the Social Services Committee are corrupting by acquiring things, which are for the whole country.  

MS ALISEMERA: Madam Speaker, what the hon. member is trying to allege is not true, because I am from Bundibugyo District I have two Health Center IVs and I have not received any ambulance from government. 

The ambulances, which I have, I got them from a donor like what Tuma Ruth has got.  If I got ambulances from a donor it is not like I have got them from the Ministry of Health.  So, maybe they saw what we got from our friends abroad and think it is from the Ministry of Health - United Nations Population Fund. It is not the same thing.  Thank you.  

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, let me clarify on the anti rabies vaccine.  The information I have just received now is we have got stocks of this vaccine at the moment, which are being supplied to all hospitals and the Ug shs 400 million which I mentioned earlier on will be additional to supply future supplies so that we have got a regular stock of this vaccine.

On ambulances as you know some were supplied, others have been ordered and I think those units, which did not have, will obviously get.  

The big hospitals will receive proper ambulances not multi-purpose vehicles as those, which have been supplied to health centers.  Thank you.

2.45
MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, GENERAL DUTIES Mr Okumu Ringa): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson and her committee for her report, which is very well presented.  I have a few issues to respond to: One, I would like to state from the onset that my ministry which manages the human resource in all the sectors, pays salaries and wages on the 28th of every month and we have adhered to that process, and we hope we shall continue to ensure that even at the district level they receive these pays and disburse them in time.

Madam Speaker, the committee in their report on page four item 3.2.1 on which bill for secondary education –(Interruption)-

MR OKUPA:  Madam Speaker, the hon. minister has told us that by every 28th of month employees get their pay.  I just wanted to know from him whether the Arrow Boys also fall under Public Service because for now there are so many 28ths of several months they have not been paid.  So can I know from him whether they are also within Public Service because these are seven months and they have not got their salaries?  

MR OKUMU RINGA:  Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Okupa for raising the point.  But I would like to inform the House that my ministry handles the following categories of employees.  We have traditional civil service that is from the ministry headquarters, we have the police and prisons.  We have teaching service that is primary school teachers, secondary school teachers and tertiary. 

We also have those employees in local governments and Universities and those under conditional grants.  So the UPDF or auxiliary forces, which may fall under the UPDF, do not fall under the category of those who are paid through my ministry. So the issue raised by hon. Okupa may be held and he raises it when the committee on defence and internal affairs presents their report.

Madam Speaker, the issue raised by the Committee on Social Service on page 4 or item 3.2.1 Wage Bill for secondary school teachers, I would like to report that my ministry gave a comprehensive report to the committee in a communication which was delivered yesterday, and we clarified on all the issues. 

 More importantly the issues raised were one, the amount of money, which was Ug shs 9.9 billion which was approved for recruitment of secondary school teachers. As to how that money was used, indeed we gave a comprehensive explanation as to how the money was used from July 2004 to June 2005 new staff were recruited, the total of 1479 staff were recruited and during the same period 169 staff accessed the payroll.  

So during this financial year for which this money should be accounted, we have 1648 staff in the secondary sector that access the payroll, and this amounts to a total 6,471,810,120 shillings.  Of course, this is a short fall from Ug shs 9.9 billion of about Ug shs 3.3 billion and this money normally when it is not used, it reverts back to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

So it will be the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give an accountability of how that money is used.  But I know in the normal budget process that money just goes back into the pool in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for re-allocation of utilisation in the following financial year.

On the same page, Madam Speaker, page four, 3.2.2 this has been answered, and the issue which is on page five is teachers’ education and particularly the issue raised was on the matter of how the payment for teachers- the deficit of Ug shs 13 billion how this will be financed.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to report to the House that in a protracted and consistent discussions held with all stakeholders under the chairpersonship of His Excellency the President, the salary for primary school teachers was agreed to at Ug shs 150,000 as the minimum pay; and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development undertook to ensure that this new scale is implemented with effect from the 1st of July this year, and I am happy to report that all teachers from all districts of this country are now receiving that pay. (Applause) 

Thank you for clapping because this is a fundamental change; and indeed we have also agreed in our discussions that the Ministry of Education and Sports through the Education Service Commission will work on the scheme of service.  Scheme of service here means that there should be a system or a process through which when one joins the services, has hope to progress in order to earn more money.  Currently the scheme of service has a ceiling, which makes many teachers not have any hope of progression upward.  

So it was agreed that the Education Service Commission, Public Service Commission, the Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and UNATO would work together to work on the process so that in the next financial year the scheme of service and the salary increment in the service would be implemented based on that.  

So the issue being raised is that there is a deficit of Ug shs 13 billion.  I would like to state that as people who manage the Wage Bill, we have received the fraud-loaded amount. By fraud-loading, we mean that the budget has been availed to be accessed so that whatever is in it now, will be used and it is incumbent on the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give an undertaking and indeed they did, that the deficit of Ug shs 13 billion, which appeared will be provided for during the budget cycle.  

This Ug shs 13 billion in my mind when you calculate may represent payment of salaries during the months of May and June this financial year.  If the Ministry of Finance gives the undertaking, I believe we have enough time to have that money even access through what we call the contingent fund.  This is on education. 

On the Ministry of Health, I would like to assure the House that issues relating to pay for the Ministry of Health have been rationalised.  The problem, which was the single salary structure, was harmonised and we are in harmony with the work for the Ministry of Health. 

But the issues which are still pending are issues of recruitments which are essential in the various health centers as the minister responsible for Primary Health Care has stated.  We are working on this and the Health Service Commission, which is responsible for recruitment in liaison with the district service commissions are working on this.  

As far as the ministry is concerned, I would like to assure the House and the entire work force, that we are working persistently on the pay reform policy which is going to be a global policy to look into the pay structure in the Public Service and Public Sector, and to harmonise it so that we work towards strengthening human resource capacity in all sectors for effective service delivery.  These are the issues I noted, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the members.   Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you, minister.  

CAPT. MATOVU DAVID:  Madam Speaker, I may not get the answer, but at least for the record.  Something on maintenance and services of this high level technological equipment in hospitals, like the CD4 machine. 

 This is a machine of about four million dollars.  But the other day when we were - I think in Masaka, Mbarara, Buhinga, they are not working up to full capacity.  Why?  No agents, why?  No technician, where is he supposed to come? Is he coming from Nairobi?  So as you procure, have that one in mind. 

 The other one is about to support researchers and research institutions.  Research is crucial to our work, but most of them survive on writing proposals.  They are beggars running up and down.  The case in point is like Rakai project, they do not have even a single coin from Government and they are doing crucial work. 

Lastly, when you are planning for infrastructure, these Health Centre IVs should provide for mortuaries.  A mortuary is the last office of respect to our people.  But most of these hospitals, go to Masaka, go to Rakai hospital, there is no mortuary.  Dead bodies stay with patients in the ward until their relatives pick them. Thank you.

MRS TUMA: These Health Centre IVs have no water, Madam Speaker, and I hope they are going to do something about it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.  I hope the minister has noted.  Can I ask the Minister of Education and Sports to respond to her sector?

3.05
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank my colleagues for having responded and given very constructive comments to Education Sector.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to beg that I give what I can term “Omnibus” answers.  Because 12 Members of Parliament responded to the sector’s issues and in very good details which were very constructive.

Madam Speaker, the issue of teachers’ salaries has been covered and I appreciate the input by my colleague.  So that one I will only say, that we as a beneficiary sector, we are very happy that the teachers have been assured that some increment will be made on their salaries, and many of them have gone back to the classrooms and are doing quite well.

The second issue, which has come up several times, is about the admissions to public universities.  As you would remember, Madam Speaker, this academic year, Government wanted to put an emphasis on sciences and I was here to explain the details regarding that programme.  I am very happy that members are anxious to know what has come out because it was a trial, a pilot and initial venture. 

I would like to say, Madam Speaker that I will come up with a comprehensive report on how this new policy of admissions has been implemented in the public universities.  So I will not go into details, but I am very happy to announce that at least every district in the country has been able to identify and sent a student to a public university in this country, which I think is a very major break through as far as access to university education is concerned.  But I promise and pledge to bring a report on this.  

The second issue is about Makerere University increase of fees.  Well as you already know the President intervened and ruled that probably this academic year, Government or the University should not increase the fees. 

But I would like to inform the House that a visitation committee is in the process of being nominated.  The visitation committee will be nominated by the President to look into all aspects of management, funding and academic structures of the universities and then through their report we shall know exactly how Government can move on sponsoring and managing public universities in this country.

The next question, which has been referred to by many members is the issue of sports in our country.  I am happy to again remind the members about the Inzikuru event and many other successes and records the country is breaking at this point, and I want to assure you that the Ministry of Education and Sports is committed to improving the management of the sports sub-sector in this country.  So Madam Speaker, the policy is already there which is very good, it has gone through all the processes and we have a games and sports policy in place.  

Suggestions and draft plans have already been made in the department because right now when the minister is not there no body is there.  But we have already started dialogue with the Ministry of Public Service and I believe by next year, we shall have a department in place.  

Improvement in management: One Member referred to internally generated funds from the sports sub-sector from Namboole and Nakivubo stadia and then others.  The beginning of improving the management of sports in this country, I think, will result into very good results on this.  You remember the big saga in FUFA and I want to inform you that the process of reviving management of football and other sports is going on and shortly we shall be in a position to know exactly how we can move forward on the management funding and any other administrative issues regarding sports in this country.
FIFA: I must commend them for being very kind that is in global organisation.  On our invitation they came in and we have sat at a roundtable and they have made an input into how we can improve on sports in the country. 

But probably on that issue I must point out that with the capitation grants for UPE schools, secondary schools and the other institutions, there is a component, a percentage, which is aimed at promoting games and sports in each individual school and probably through your monitoring, you should find out how schools or institutions use this money.  But at least at school level and college level there is a percentage of money, which goes towards supporting games and sports.

The next major question or issue has been the Public University in the East.  I stand here with a little bit of pleasure that at least some money has been coined from the sector ceiling, and we plan to start the preliminary activities, which will lead to the establishment of the university. 

This has been a process relating to all the universities we have had, we do not just open the gates but we start with preliminary programmes leading to the opening of the university.  So with that reallocation in our sector budget, work will start soon, and then probably by the next academic year we shall be able to open the gates of the one of the faculties or several faculties in that university.

Hon. Okupa put a series of questions: “When is the University opening?”  That is next academic year.  “Where will it be located?”  It will be a multi-campus university in the Eastern region, meaning that some of the existing institutions in that area will be forming faculties and departments so that most of the areas in the Eastern region will benefit. 

Then I would like to mention also regarding that university that it will be implemented in phases.  If we start with two or three faculties then the others will develop through the medium-term and long-term plans, but at least we have got money to start.

Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and education in the North: I think the Alaso Report was very good and quite a lot of information came up and, Madam Speaker, we wrote responses to what was raised in that report, which has not been presented to this House, I believe because of the very heavy schedule we have had as Parliament. 

But the Ministry has got a report and I would like to say, probably to give the needed details to my colleagues, I will pledge again to bring that report to show what the Ministry of Education and Sports has so far done and what it is planning to do to make sure that we promote education in those areas.

Education in Karamoja: I am happy that my colleague, hon. Lokeris, brought up these issues and I take this opportunity to inform the House.  In Karamoja now we are promoting what we call early childhood education, those infants should be mobilised at the age of four, five and six so that they begin thinking about going to school, so that programme is already there. 

We have the famous Alternative Basic Education for Karamoja (ABEK).  Madam Speaker, I had to travel to South Korea last year to talk about ABEK in Karamoja, and I was very proud when the whole global community appreciated that Uganda is doing everything possible to have people access education, so ABEK is going on. 

We have the Irish Programme, which is promoting post-primary education, and lastly we are considering affirmative recruitment for teachers in Karamoja, whereby we think if there are sitting teachers they should be given priority and if they are people who qualify to be appointed as teachers they should be given affirmative action so that we can stabilise staffing in that part of the country. 

Indeed, Madam Speaker, we have got what we call incentive salary awards for teachers who are serving in that area.  So the area is taken care of very well and it is a focus of the ministry’s programmes to make sure that we promote education in the Karamoja region.

Madam Speaker, there has been in the papers recently that there is no money for admission of students at National Teachers Colleges (NTCs) and Uganda Colleges of Commerce (UCCs).  I am glad that a reallocation has been approved, so we shall now work out the admissions to these tertiary institutions on Government sponsorship.  

However, I will add that with the resources available it is only a percentage of the recruitment that can fit into the Government sponsorship scheme.  But we have window one and window two at all tertiary institutions now.  If the money we have cannot cover the entire enrolment in an institution, those who have got money are admitted to come and study on private basis; and this I must say, colleagues, has really boosted access to education in this country.  

I was a member of the Makerere University Council for 15 years, and every time we wanted to open the doors for private students we thought there would be riots and hell would fall.  But when we opened, now people are struggling to get in through private sponsorship.  So I think running two windows: one for the Government where students get education at the rate which Government can afford to pay; two those who can afford to mobilise funds also have that chance.  So at least we shall be admitting first years in tertiary colleges, but the percentage will depend on the amount of money available.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we want to close this chapter; we have been here for quite sometime.  Minister, please conclude.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you, I am about to complete.  Science policy and construction of laboratories: Madam Speaker, when early this year Government through the Ministry of Education and Sports announced this science scheme, it was in good faith and with very strategic objectives because Uganda has got the lowest enrolment in science areas in the region in Africa. 

The average in Africa is 36 percent of the enrolment in sciences; in Uganda we have 15 percent.  All the universities and schools we have, only 15 percent of those young people are taking sciences, and at that rate we cannot really make any headway in the modernisation, the industrialisation and anything we want to say, so Government came up with this bold stand. 

But I am happy to say, Madam Speaker, that since that announcement much has been done at school level and we are very happy with the stakeholders in education because laboratories have gone up, equipments are being secured, old boys and old girls have come up - I was in Mwiri the other day and money was being fundraised to put up all these infrastructure, so I must be grateful to the stakeholders. 
Madam Speaker, and honourable members, the sectors got what I can term a master plan to make sure that this policy of science in schools is realized.  Within the master plan, we have what I can term as multiple programs, which include teacher education, refresher courses and many other aspects.  

Here, I would like to mention investment in STPU. STPU is our factory in Kyambogo, which manufacture science equipment.  We have invested heavily this year so that that factory can produce science equipments, which can be accessed at low cost.  So, a master plan in the medium term will help us realize the objective of this program.  Indeed as I speak, 54 laboratories are being constructed countrywide and by December this year, they will be completed.  

Of course, as you see in our report, we are seeking funds to equip and find instructional materials to run those laboratories.  So, that program- well, people have said that we should have gone about it slow and systematically. But the more we wait, the more they will ask what we were doing, because having only 15 percent of all our youth in schools and colleges, taking science is on the lower side.  

But people are also adding, “will you find jobs for these people?”  The idea is not the jobs. The idea is to make a science culture in this country, so that we can utilize the environment and any other resources through a scientific approach.  Of course, ICT is catching up with us and we are already getting into the ICT. But it requires some scientific base. 

So, I would like to – I have given an omnibus sort of answer, but I believe that most of the major issues have been covered.

About Makerere, one Member raised a question, asking about the money, which Makerere or any other universities are earning internally?  The new law in place authorizes these institutions to use that money at base and account for what they call appropriation in aid.  So, they collect the money, and use it. But they must account for that money instead of banking it in the national coffer. 

So, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you so much, but as I conclude, I am sure the Chairperson of the Committee will come up with a statement regarding the last paragraph on page 8. (Interjection)- yes, but I am just reminding that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Minister she is going to.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: I think our budget will be approved. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, the question on private schools is not answered.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of what?

MS MUGERWA: Secondary schools.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Madam Speaker, I apologize to the Member. She was saying that private schools couldn’t meet the requirement for science education.  I want to assure the Member that in fact, as I said, many people have responded positively it and particularly the private schools, which are very busy now installing facilities and getting equipments for sciences.  

But indeed, we know that there are some private schools in the rural, poor areas. Definitely, the Ministry is looking at all the aspects of the facilities at these schools and we are soon coming up with a program, whereby one laboratory will serve 4 or 5 schools around the area, because there is need to improvise. Others have already improvised and they have what they call moveable laboratories.  So, we are walking out a program, which I think will cover the country and we shall realize this program. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, I hope since more things have been said, I hope you will be brief. 

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Ms Hyuha Dorothy): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank the honourable members for their support and observations.  However, before I respond to the requirement of the Ministry of Education, I want the records to be correct.  

Hon. Wopuwa raised an issue on the allegation that the ambulances of the Ministry of Health are purchased and that only Ministers and Members of Social Services who benefit. 

This is wrong, and I want the records to be cleared. So far, into financial years 150 multipurpose ambulances have been purchased and 38 Suzuki ambulances of UNFPA have been purchases. But you will realize that some of these donor programs lay in certain regions. Once they operate in certain regions, whether UNFPA is operating in Bundibugyo, Mental Health Program is in Arua, or Soroti, you are not going to adjust the program which agreements were signed. 

Two, 150 multi-purpose ambulances were purchased. We have 214 health centres- fours. Therefore, we expect the following plan of Ministry of Health, that 214 should benefit, which means that if 150 have been given, 63 are yet to benefit and the money is within the budget. 

Madam Speaker, if I can give a few examples; hon. Gole for Budaka; Budaka Health Centre got four; he has never been a member.  Hon. Nkuuhe, he is from Isingiro south. He is neither a Minister nor a Member of Social Services, but his health centre got four. Hon. Rwamirama of Isingiro from Isingiro North he is neither a Minister nor a member of social services but his health centre got four. Mild May Centre of hon. Issa Kikungwe’s Kyadondo also benefited. Mengo of hon. Kayongo, and before hon. Mayende become a Minister, they got; the list is long. Therefore, that is a serious allegation, which should be withdrawn, among others.  I think the honourable –(Interruption)

MRS RAINER KAFIRE: Madam Speaker, the one who raised the issue has just joined Parliament and we have been here for 10 years. We are just getting the multi-purposes. Be patient, the budget is stretched, but you will soon get your ambulance.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, for purposes of the Hansard and for the integrity of this Parliament, I would like to ask hon. Wopuwa to withdraw, because it borders on corruption.

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, even that statement from hon. Kafire. I think it is not very accurate and fair, because ambulances or other government facilitates are not allocated to Members of Parliament. They are not given because you have been here for 5 years or 10. I am sure that there is a government program.  I think that statement also needs to be looked at so that –(Laughter)

MRS KAFIRE: Madam Speaker, I feel that the lady is just answering what I said. But all I said was that the honourable member should be patient since our budget is stretch. You will soon get the ambulance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, I thought that the Government was providing these services for the people. I do not think they say that there is a good Member of Parliament, we should give here, because you will give the impression that maybe those who shout more get quickly and those who do not shout do not get.  

So, as far as I am concerned, we in this Parliament allot resources to the country and not to members of Parliament.  But that matter borders on corruption, I want you to withdraw it.

MR WOPUWA:  Madam, I have withdrawn the statement and I also pray that Bududa Hospital will next year be –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, I am sure Members will support the appeals of the Bududa people.

MRS HYUHA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  From Ministry of health, they have pledged a comprehensive plan about the heart institute.  This, we should leave under the Committee on Government Assurances, because we have now passed over to Parliament to make a follow up.  

But I also wish to inform this august House that the issue of distribution of vaccines and drugs for rabies has been a serious concern and we have requested the Minister of Health to improve on the administration.  Whereas we receive monthly reports that these drugs and vaccines go to districts, on the contrary, rarely do you find vaccines for rabies either at district headquarters or in hospitals.  So, this is an administrative matter and since honourable members have emphasized it, I hope the Minister has taken note of it.  

Madam Speaker, on women councils, youth and PWD, I thought Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development together with Finance, would have taken this issue as a reduction, so that when moneys are found through other means of supplementary or whatever the case, the votes of women councils, youth councils and PWD are replaced like we have seen the situation in Ministry of Education.

Lastly Madam Speaker, the issues –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Madam Speaker, as the chairperson concludes, there are some serious issues that had been raised last financial year and this year; and I have just gone through the report carefully. I thought she would at least mention the issue raised by Professor Mwaka.  It was observed that government does not have enough resources to take to finance both PLE and secondary education and we recognized the role played by secondary schools. 

So, we had proposed that Government should come up with a scheme of providing incentive to the schools and I do not see you coming firmly on this point. 

Second, is the issue of politicians using service vehicles for the officials of service sectors, which renders the role of supervision almost, left to the politician and the beneficiaries.  What happens at the moment is that, these vehicles, which are sent to Local Government, are taken over by politicians; the role of supervision is not done.  So I expected our Chairperson to come out strongly on these issues.

MRS HYUHA:  Madam Speaker, since the honourable has clearly put it before I came to that point, I am not going to repeat, the Ministers concerned should take note, so that they consider that these are issues we have been discussing in the budget committees, raised to His Excellency the President through our system and we expected a response.  

I believe that Ministry of Education and Sports, when they consider purchasing instructional materials and equipment, should also consider that our children do not only go to Government schools, but they do go to private schools as well.  Some of them go there because we have not provided the facilities and therefore, we should plan for them. 

Then there is the issue of UNEB fees to people in private schools. We equally discussed with the Minister of Education although we did not get a feed back, but this is a reminder to remind her.

Madam Speaker, Public Service has responded to some of the serious issues, which we raised as a Committee and they have made a submission, Public Service and Ministry of Finance. Among other big concerns was how the Shs 9.9 billion, which we approved in this august House, recruitment of teachers and also grant-aid in secondary schools.  In the submission of the honourable Minister of public service, to my Committee, he clearly explains and gives details, which I am going to lay on table, on how the Shs 6.4 billion was utilized. 

He clearly states, “This leaves a balance of about Shs 3.4 billion, which Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should explain.”  This means that Finance was in position to pass over to Public Service Shs 6.4 billion, to give an explanation of how Shs 6.4 billion and details of the number of teachers who were recruited and how much was spent.  

And therefore, we feel that within out basket, we still have Shs 3.4 billion shillings. Ministry of Education should continue with grant aiding another for 20 more schools and also recruit more teachers and those teachers who were recruited and their letters withdrawn should be reinstated, because money is available.  

So, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MRS BITAMAZIRE:  Madam Speaker that issue of letters being issued and withdrawn was a technical error and the Education Service Commission has already written to say that they had their technical mistakes in their offices that led to that. They are already reviewing the situation with a view to rectifying it.  It was not due to shortage of funds.  Thank you.

MR KOLUO:  Madam Minister, we have been told of some three points; something billion unutilised, out of the Shs 9.9, and yet we have schools, which are not grant aided. 

Can we be assured in this House that the balance of the 20 out of the 76 will be grant aided?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think that is what the chair was also – that was a proposal.

MRS HYUHA:  Madam Speaker, the rightful Minister to answer before I proceed is Finance, because Public Service has put their case clearly.  They tell us how many teachers were recruited and accessed the payroll, and how much money was passed to them to control the wage bill of secondary schools and therefore, we need an explanation of the Shs 3.4 billion, so that education is given the leeway to grant aid another 20 schools as approved by this august House and recruit more teachers.  So Madam Speaker, before I move, probably Finance could shade more light on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Minister of Finance – I think both Public Service and the other Ministers have said that you are the one who knows where the Shs 3.5 billion is and that it has hampered the recruitment and grant aiding.

PROF. SEMAKULA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, honourable members. The Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services wrote to us raising issues that we thought we had answered satisfactorily.  

On the issue of Shs 9.8billion, which was approved for recruitment of secondary school teachers, in the Financial Year 2004-2005, the response is as follows.  These funds were part of the Budget of Shs.76.15billion, which was programmed for fiscal year 2004-2005. But the fact that the out turn is Shs.79billion clearly shows that the entire wage bill was disbursed, including the Shs.9.9billion.  We attached an MTEF, yes, of fiscal year 2002-2004 up to 2007.  The outturn for fiscal year 2003-2004 was Shs. 66.77billion, which constituted the base for fiscal year 2004-2005.  It was however adjusted to Shs.76.15billion on the account of additional shillings 9.9billion in fiscal year 2004-2005. This met the recruitment at the time of budgeting. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable Minister. The questions were specified; is that money available? Can the additional schools be grant aided? Can the teachers be recruited?

PROF. SEMAKULA: The recruitment- yes. We formed a commitment on that Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, there is supposed to be a clean up of the payroll and has been a directive from the Head of State, because of the presumed ghosts practically everywhere. The Minister of Public Service as well and the Minister of Education have agreed on that exercise and we agreed that once they have completed that exercise, we shall proceed to provide the money and the recruitment can go on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And grant aiding.

PROF. SEMAKULA: Madam, let them clean up the payroll first.

MR KOLUO: Madam Speaker, I clearly asked about the balance of un aided schools of the 76 in the list and up to now, I have not got any explanation to that effect. Can the Ministers concerned explain?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: The honourable Minister is proceeding. It appears he has powers to distribute resources, which is not true and I think we should save him because his role is to identify the resource and maybe the cabinet. Maybe, the head should tell us how it is going to be apportioned, but otherwise, it seems he is trying to look for money. I do not know from where.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable Member, if you read the report of the chairperson, she was saying that we do not approve of the budget of education until the Government tells us where the other is going to come from and that is what we are trying to resolve.

MR SABIITI: About a week ago, there was an announcement from the Ministry of Education that they cannot recruit because they do not have money.

Two, that even the teachers that are already on the payroll cannot access funds because they lack Shs 3billion.  

Now, given what the chairperson is saying, I remember very clearly that this money was identified in the budget for last financial year.  

Now, the honourable Minister of Finance seems not to understand this particular question, which has been posed.  Can the honourable Minister tell this House whether these funds were released or not?  If these funds were released to the Ministry of Education where is this money? If it was released to the Public Service Commission, where did this money go, so that the question is answered properly?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, just before the Minister of Education touched on grant aiding, there was issue, which was raised here about the grant aiding school, which hon. Alaso raised and she named the school, Kyele Secondary school, which hon. Koluo represents. It has been grant aided for the last two, three years, but on the ground, there is nothing. Check in the Ministry, they say that the money has been passed and yet there is nothing on the ground. Can we be clarified on this Kyele Secondary School?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are asking more questions, Kyele of course was raised and I think it requires an answer, but now, I hope you will not bring new matters because we want to close this session to go for lunch so that we can come and deal with others.

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I was just seeking clarification from the Minister of Finance whether it is possible to anticipate how much money is going to be saved as a result of cleaning the payroll.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, since the Minister is consulting, I beg that we adjourn the House and come- yes; he does not have the answers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we did agree.

PROF. SEMAKULA: Madam Speaker, on the Shs 9.9 billion there is a letter, which I have just seen here from Public Service referring to Shs 3.4 billion, which I had not seen. What our attention had been drawn to was, Shs 3.65 billion, which I gave an explanation about this morning. We gave a commitment that it shall be released. 

Now, as regards the Shs 3.4billion, this has not been drawn to our attention, and I think I shall have to consult on this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we did agree that the figures would all be dealt with at the Committee of Supply. So I hope that between now and then, the Minister will have come with an answer but you can conclude.  He says that he is going to consult and we agreed that all the figures would be handled at the committee of supply. I hope by that time, you will have come with a proper answer, but I want you to wind up so that we can finish with social services.

MRS HYUHA: Did you say that we should conclude this matter later?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All the figures will be handled during one session.

MRS HYUHA: Okay.  So, Madam Speaker, I want to lay on Table the response of the Ministry of public service about that Shs 3.4 billion, which finance has to give a response.  I also want to lay on Table a response from Finance, regarding the allocation of Shs 500 million for a public university in the East. The raising of ceiling of Ministry of Education by US $1.2 for IDB loan to construct polytechnics and then the reallocation of Shs 300 million from PUF budget line to sports sub sectors, which they have communicated.  I want to lay it on the Table for Government Assurance to make a follow up.  

Madam Speaker, I also wish to lay on the Table a list of the rural girls mixed secondary schools, which Ministry of Education is going to construct or has started constructing, about laboratories in this country and libraries.  I am going to I am going to lay the list on the Table and the Clerk’s office will have to photocopy them so that Members get copies.

I want to remind Members that these lists were agreed upon during the 6th Parliament, when the IDB loan was passed. It is just a construction; you are not going to adjust anything because they are implementing an agreement.  So the ADB Islamic development Bank loan for polytechnics is 14. They were already identified in 1998 and the construction has just started.

Madam Speaker, Ministry of Finance has indicated a the shortfall of Shs 13 billion –(Interruption)

MR MUZOORA: About those labs you are talking about, may I know whether in addition to those, which were identified during that 6th Parliament, the pledges of His Excellency the President regarding labs is included in that list?  

MS MASIKO: Thank you very much Madam Speaker and chairperson.  You have indicated that the list was agreed upon, to that extent, I agree. But I remember correctly for the case of Ikooba Girls Secondary School; it had been allocated a laboratory and a library.  I am the chairperson of the Board of Governors of that school and we have been informed that they are going to construct only a laboratory.  

Now, if that list was agreed upon, where is the library?  Could it be the case that the list is still flexible and we can shift the laboratories and libraries to other schools?  I would like to be informed when our library will be given back and when the construction will start?

MRS HYUHA: Those are administrative matters, which the Minister can answer.  So, hon. Minister, you can respond because the list came from your Ministry.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much Madam Speaker.  I want to say that we are now implementing ABD (2) and that is the program for which we have been asking for counter funding but at the same, time we are working out in advanced stages, ADB (3).  So these are serial programs and I would not like to say today or tomorrow, but at least we have a plan to keep on working on these prograMs  

Yes, I am being advised that there was a shortfall in the budget due to the higher costs of constructions and some laboratories or libraries had to be reduced from the numbers we expected, this is from my technical officer.  So the plan will be modified and then constructions will be rescheduled.  I thank you. 

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much Madam Speaker.  I was on the point of the wage bill- the shortfall of 13 billion.  The Ministry of Finance has made a commitment here, it is in Hansard, that they are committed to raise an extra Shs 13 billion to cover up the shortfall in the wage bill of primary school salaries after the increment from Shs 130,000 to Shs 150,000.  Therefore, I also leave that under Government Assurances Committee for follow up.

The other commitment made by Finance is that the shortfall of the wage bill of teachers in secondary schools in post who are already on payroll of Shs 3.56 billion– (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Point of clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no hon. Members.

MR SABIITI: This is technical, it is very important –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, some of you have just arrived this afternoon.  Please hon. Member conclude.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I was saying that the second commitment made by Ministry of Finance, which is on record is that the shortfall of Shs 3.56 billion for the wage bill of secondary school teachers who are in post that they are going to find within savings and they have committed themselves, they also talked of clean up of payroll – (Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Point of clarification –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, when are we going to end this Session?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the issue I am raising is technical, I need to be educated on how you get a shortfall in a wage bill. It is statutory. How?

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, that ‘how’ is technical. Let Finance help me answer that then I conclude.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, as far as I know, a salary of a public officer is one, mandatory and two statutory. It is pegged on the consolidated fund account and there is no way we can be informed on this Floor of Parliament that there are no salaries for public officers.  We need an explanation.

PROF. SEMAKULA: Madam Speaker, we met in the committee and the chairperson raised quite a number of issues. But it seems that there is a discrepancy in figures here.  When we met in the committee, the teachers involved in the question, which is arising were 1978, and it was on that basis that a calculation was made, Public Service were present.  

When we left, Public Service went and wrote to the chairperson that the number of teachers are not 1978, but 1600 and -(Interjections)- no that is where the difference comes in, yes.  I shall have to go and consult about that, because the issue was never raised to us.

MRS LUMUMBA:  Madam Speaker, on the question of the chairperson, I am a Member of the committee.  The shortfall of the Shs 13 billion is salary for primary teachers.  When he talks of the 1900 teachers, those are secondary school teachers not primary teachers.  So the Shs 13 billion shortfall is for primary teachers’ salaries.

MS KIRASO:  Madam Speaker, may I propose on a point of procedure that since these figures seem not to be adding up and the issues are not being appreciated, because from what hon. Justine Lumumba is saying, it seems to be different from what the Minister is talking about. We are not going to pass this budget now.  

May I propose that we give the hon. Minister of Finance time to consult with the Ministry of public service, so that before we go to committee of supply to pass this budget, there is a statement on all the other outstanding issues, which have not been exhaustively answered.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay.  So please honourable chairperson, we have a solution, you can conclude your remarks.

MRS HYUHA:  So Madam Speaker, under the Ministry of Education, there are three clear things.  The first one is shortage of Shs 13 billion for wage bill of the primary school teachers. The second is a shortage of salaries of teachers in post Shs 3.56 billion the third one is Shs 3.4 billion meant for a grant aid and recruitment of more teachers. 

There are three clear issues; I am I want to leave the Floor because we have presented our case and the Minister has given us a response. Unless if he followed as we argued, he would be in position to conclude ours by just reflecting on his earlier position that he has made a commitment on and if he has made a commitment, it is on Hansard. We can now recommend for the approval of the budget because it is already on Hansard. This is what I was bidding to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let us allow him to organize himself and appreciate all the figures, then he will come back to us.

MRS HYUHA:  So, I should not read the votes of education as I did for health?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, just read them. They are on record. We shall sort them out in totality.

MRS HYUHA:  So, Madam Speaker, with the commitment of finance and they will continue to commit themselves. Now, I beg to recommend to this august House that under Ministry of Education and Sports vote 013 Education – but certainly yesterday I told you that the salaries are not voted under education, they go to local government. 

We do not vote them here, Shs 57,310,145 billion for recurrent and Shs 59,729,275 billion for development.  Under vote 132 Education Service Commission I beg to recommend to this august House that we approve Shs 2,427,017 billion for recurrent and Shs 50 million for development. 

Under vote 136 Makerere University I beg to move that Shs 33,472,427 billion but of course this is minus the Shs 5 billion, which the Minister has commitment him self on, and a recurrent of Shs 18,389 billion for development, Shs 18,389,968 billion, then vote 137 Mbarara University Shs 6,560,294 billion and then development Shs 56 million shillings.

For MUBS vote 138 I beg to recommend that budget of Shs 4,188,391 billions be approved for recurrent, there is nothing for development and vote 139 for Kyambogo University, I beg to recommend that a total sum of Shs 10,994,478 billion shillings be approved for recurrent and Shs 280 million for development. 

Vote 140 UMI a total sum of Shs 397,252,000 be approved and nothing for development.  Then Gulu University vote 149 a total sum of 3,152,821 be approved for recurrent and for development 1.4 billion shillings for Gulu University.  Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay hon Members, -(Interjections)

MRS HYUHA:  Eastern University does not have a vote yet although it has a project code which means that, that project code will be reflected under ministry of education headquarters 0.13 because there is no vote yet. They have a code but they do not have a vote. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But Parliament cannot open a vote here.

MRS HYUHA:  So, Madam Speaker, probably the issue of vote for public University in the east that is how we even moved for Gulu for quite sometime and also Kyambogo until we had to request finance. But I think that is an issue we leave in the hands of finance and also a vote for sports to establish a vote for sports sub sector so that they stand a chance to bargain now that they have a sports policy.  Madam Speaker, hon Members I beg to move and I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I want to thank the chairperson and her committee and all the ministers for attending to this very big sector of social services.  
Now hon Members, we still have one report to handle, so I would like to suspend the House for one hour; we come back at 5.00 p.m. to deal with defence and internal affairs.  So the House is suspended until 5.00 p.m.
(The House was suspended until 5.00 p.m.)
(On resumption_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon Members I want to thank you for coming back and to say that we shall try not to keep you very long; let us aim at concluding at 6.30 p.m. latest. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Speaker and honourable Members, I beg to present to you the Report of the Sessional Committee on the Ministries of Defense and Internal Affairs’ budgetary proposals for the financial year 2005/2006, pursuant to Article 90 of the Constitution. I beg to move.  

We have a documentary from the Ministry of Defense, which is already set. I pray, Madam Speaker, that it be disposed of first. I will be mentioning something about that in the report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

5.17

(A video presentation was made.)

5.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Amon-Reeves Kabareebe): Madam Speaker, that documentary is part of this report. (Applause)

While considering the Ministries of Defence and Internal Affairs’ budgetary proposals for financial year 2005/2006, the committee studied and analysed the policy statements. The committee reviewed the policy statements of the two ministries and interacted with the ministers and officials of the two ministries. This is already the summary of summaries and I think I will only be picking areas, which I feel should be emphasised. 

The Ministry of Internal Affairs’ Votes for consideration include the following: 144 – Uganda Police; 145 – Uganda Prison Service; and 009 – Ministry of Internal Affairs.

The review of the key programmed areas of 2004/05 is indicated and in the Police, the key areas of concern are:
a) 	The construction of Police Headquarters, which was expected to commence. The estimated cost was Shs 19 billion;
b) 	The passing of the Police Statute (Amendment) Bill; 
c) 	The construction of more accommodation to improve the living conditions of staff; 
d) 	To increase the transport fleet for districts, urban and highway patrols;
f) 	The recruitment and training of cadets and police constables; 
g) 	The purchase of 42 motorcycles, six vehicles of less than 2000cc, 47 vehicles of between 2000 and 3000cc, two vehicles of above 3000cc and two canoes;
h) 	Renovation of the dilapidated barracks.

In the Prisons, the key activities were: 
a) 	The construction of new maximum prison at Kigo;
b) 	Modernisation of prison farms;
c) 	Recruitment and training of warders and wardresses; 
d) 	Renovation and expansion of prison wards; 
e) 	Purchase of five mini TATA lorries, and 
f) 	Purchase of 8 motor vehicles.

Ministry of Internal Affairs at the headquarters:

a)	Planned to acquire six motorcycles and seven vehicles;
b)	Put in place the national registration and citizen identification programme.  

For the Government Analytical Laboratory, there was a plan to purchase a DNA machine, the figures appropriated for 2004/05 are as in the table, and the supplementary appropriation in the recurrent supplementary expenditure gave an additional Shs 6,354,474,000. This was approved to cover up the shortfalls of staff salaries and to provide some facilitation to the auxiliary forces and purchase of fuel. 
 
The development supplementary expenditure also gave an additional Shs 4,563,537,000. This was approved to cater for the procurement of Armed Personal Carriers (APCs) to escort the relief supplies of the World Food Programme to the war ravaged areas. The amount as was by that time is what we have in the table and the achievements during 2004/05 in the Police Force are:
a) Completed construction of Mbarara and Kibale police stations, operations and communications unit. 
b) 	Construction of four blocks of houses at Ntungamo and four blocks at Bundibugyo police barracks, each block holding eight families.
c) 	Purchase of land at Kiboga,
d) 	Construction of one office and accommodation block at Semuto, 
e) 	Re-roofing Gulu Police Barracks, 
f) 	Completed construction at Busunju Police Station, 
g) 	Constructed one accommodation block for Mbarara police Station,
h) 	Purchased 16 single cabin pickups for operational work, 
i) 	Purchased one canoe for marine operations, 
j) 	Purchased 16 motorcycles for special branch, 
k) 	Recruited 100 cadet officers, 89 community officers, 14 medical workers and 1,289 probationary police constables.

The national analytical laboratory started the process of procurement of the DNA machine.  

In the Prisons Service there was recruitment of 700 prison warders and wardresses, 10 cadet officers and 11 social workers.  Rehabilitation of five prisons of Mbarara, Namalu, Luzira Upper Prison, Kotido and Ndorwa.

The Amnesty Commission resettled 1,500 reporters, implemented the peace agreement between the Government and the UNRF II, and acquired three double cabin pickups.

The national community service issued 2,590 community service orders and purchased 22 motorcycles for community service programme.

The Immigration Department installed four border monitoring systems in Malaba-Busia, Entebbe and the headquarters; remodelled office accommodation for community service and immigration staff at the headquarters and started construction of office block at Malaba immigration post.  

The following are the pending or ongoing activities during 2004/05: 
a) 	Procurement of DNA machine, 
b) 	Construction of office block at Malaba, 
c) 	Establishment of the Directorate of Immigration and recruitment of 41 immigration officers, 
d) 	Procurement of the Gas Chromatography/mass Spectrophotometer,
e) 	Construction of Mbale regional testing centre, 
f) 	Construction of prison wards in Rukungiri and Apac districts, 
g) 	Programme for strengthening prisons training school with support from the Netherlands Government, 
h) 	Construction of Jinja main prison to transfer condemned prisoners from Luzira Upper Prison.

The planned activities for 2005/06 include:
Internal Affairs plans, at the headquarters; in finance and administration; to purchase one pick-up, office equipment, office furniture, monitoring and supervision and renovation of the ministry main block.  

The immigration department plans to:
a)	Recruit staff to fill posts in the directorate of immigration.
b)	Purchase ten sets of radio calls to provide communication between border immigration posts, regional offices and the headquarters.
c)	Computerise the department and set up a data bank in passport and immigration registries.
d)	Construction of office accommodation at Mirama Hills border post; and
e)	 Purchase one double cabin pickup and ten motorcycles. 

The Government Analytical Laboratory plans are:
a) 	Completion and furnishing of equipment of Mbale Regional laboratory, 
b) 	Procurement of scientific equipment like the comparison microscopes, VSC and ESDA, 
c) 	Construction of Mbarara Regional laboratory, 
d) 	Training of staff in DNA genetic analysis and gas chromatography and mass spectrophotometer,
e) 	Procurement of 3-phase, 50KV standby generator; and  
f) 	Furnishing and equipping the library.  

The Amnesty Commission plans to:
1.	Review amendments to the Amnesty Act,
2.	Complete the implementation of the peace agreement between government and the UNRF II,
3.	Resettle 12,000 backlogs of reporters and 6,0000 reporters,
4.	Meet operation costs of the commission.  

The National Community Service plans to:
a)	Recruit staff to fill various vacancies,
b)	Training and sensitisation of stakeholders in all districts,
c)	Purchase a vehicle for the commissioner,
d)	Purchase 22 motorcycles for monitoring programme activities in the districts,
e)	Computerise the MIS system in the districts,
f)	Purchase furniture in the districts. 

The NGO Board plans to:
a)	Purchase office equipment,
b)	Purchase a vehicle and motorcycle for monitoring activities,
c)	Revamp and update the NGO database; and
d)	Train staff.  

The National Focal Point on Small Arms and Light Weapons plans to:
a) 	Train and build capacity for law enforcement officers, 
b) 	Carry out public awareness, seminars and workshops; and 
c) 	Purchase one pick-up vehicle.

The Uganda Police Force plans to:
a) 	Recruit and training 4000 probation police constables,
b) 	Survey land for various police stations,
c) 	Complete buildings which are non-residential in various places, 
d) 	Complete the construction of residential buildings for staff at Busia, Malaba, Sembabule and Kibale, 
e) 	Purchase 13 single cabin pickups, 4 double cabin pickups, one fibre glass canoe, and 4 anti-riot vehicles.
 
The Uganda Prisons Service plan to do the following:
a) Construction and renovation of prison wards and staff barracks, 
b) Capitalisation of Namalu and Ibunga prison farms,
c) 	Support the efforts of the staff self help scheme to construct low cost houses,
d) 	Recruitment and training of 700 warders and wardresses, 
e) 	Purchase of four TATA Lorries, three escort pickups and one bus for transporting prisoners to court,
f) 	Purchase of radio communication and anti riot equipment. 

The amount of funds required by the sector are indicated in the tables. However, those figures in the last column of page 11 have to be corrected. 

In the second column on Uganda Police Force, the total of Shs 81,682,0000,0000 is not correct. It should be Ss 76,548,997,000. In the Uganda Prisons Service below that, the figure given was Shs 21,530,550,000. The right figure should be Shs 22,319,794,000.

During consideration of the three-year macro-economic plan and indicative revenue and expenditure framework in May 2005, the Budget Committee made the following recommendations on the sector:

The Budget Committee proposed the reallocation of Shs 120 million to be made from the ministry headquarters to the national community service programme.

The committee recommended that government makes substantial investment in strengthening the police force in terms of recruitment, equipping and housing.  
The response from the ministry was that the shortage in funds makes it impossible for the ministry to undertake comprehensive investment in the Police to achieve the required the targets.

The committee recommended that the law dealing with recruitment, management and operations of the auxiliary forces should be put in place. 

I think they were referring to the Private Members’ Bill on the same. The response was that the enactment of the UPDF Act and the expected Police (Amendment) Act would address issues related to the auxiliary forces. I think that was a mistake because the UPDF does not address the LDUs.

The committee recommended that a one-off payment of Shs 700 million required for compensating the land on which Kawempe Police Station is located should be provided as a matter of urgency.  The response of the ministry was that His Excellency the President had directed that this land be paid for. Unfortunately, the ministry cannot provide for these required funds within its current budget.

The committee had also recommended that a comprehensive programme to rehabilitate prisons be put in place over the medium term. The ministry responded that the ministry had a comprehensive investment plan for rehabilitation and construction of prisons. Due to the under funding that has been experienced over the years, it has not been possible to implement this plan. So, those are the exchanges that took place between the Budget Committee and the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

The following policies and programmes emerged:
a) 	Providing the police services in the newly created districts.
b) 	Taking full charge of law and order in Northern Uganda as the UPDF leaves. Here we are assuming that the rebel activity shall have been wiped out.
c) 	Discharge of auxiliary forces as the war in Northern Uganda comes to an end. This is the mobilisation of the LDUs.
d) 	Provision of security for the forthcoming general elections.  
e) 	Preparation for the Commonwealth Head of State meeting scheduled for 2007.  
f) 	Taking over the Prisons when the Prisons Bill is passed.

The following are the recommendations on the budgetary proposals:

The Ministry should be allowed to secure funding for the Police    headquarters. It was observed that the ministry had secured donor funds to fund the project but the ministry was advised not to continue because the funds would distabilise the macro-economic stability. The Police will be celebrating a century in this financial year, without headquarters. The Police headquarters are currently housed in the Police Training School, Kibuli.

The ministry ceiling should be adjusted to enable it recruit and equip the Police to enable it undertake its central role of keeping law and order and meeting new challenges and emerging issues like taking a central role in keeping law and order in Karamoja region; taking centre stage in keeping law and order in Northern Uganda; providing adequate security during and after the forthcoming elections; prepare for the Commonwealth Heads of State meeting; and providing personnel and equipment in the new districts. 

The ministry should explore the possibility of relocating from its extension in Mutukula to a more strategic location and give room for proper planning and expansion of Mutukula town.  

The ministry should adhere to its commitment to procure the DNA machine, latest by September 2005. 

The new initiatives that have been brought on board namely: the Community Service Programme and National Focal Point should be meaningfully provided for in the next budget.

The land on which Kawempe Police Station is location should be secured.

The committee observed that the UPDF Act that was passed does not address the issues on the proposed legislation on auxiliary forces. The committee, therefore, recommends that the proposed Private Members’ Bill on Auxiliary Forces be cleared by the relevant authorities.

The Ministry of Defence performance in the Financial Year 2004/2005, and the planned programmes were as follows:
a) 	To eliminate insurgency and restore peace in Northern Uganda.
b) 	To implement the information technology program
c) 	To carry out disarmament exercise in Karamoja region.
d) 	To implement the Defence Review recommendations.
e) 	To operationalise the Senior Staff College at Kimaka, Jinja.
f) 	To build four new battalion size barracks and eight new medical reception centres.
g) 	To enact the UPDF Bill, 2003.
h) 	To establish a war memorial centre. 
i) 	Survey and acquire land titles for the ministry’s land.
j) 	To implement the standardisation of army vehicles.
k) 	Main streaming of HIV/AIDS concerns in army activities.
l) 	To pay off all domestic arrears.

The amounts of funds appropriated for the FY 2004-2005 are indicated in the table, and they are in billions.

On recurrent supplementary expenditure, we have an additional Shs 3.2 million, which was approved to facilitate the purchase of fuel. The amount of funds released by the Ministry of Finance, are indicated. 

The following were the sector’s achievements during 2004/2005: You remember the purpose was to eliminate LRA activities but the achievement was that they curtailed LRA activities. So, they are not yet eliminated:

They curtailed LRA activities that had spread to North eastern Uganda, and returned peace to most parts of the region.

The disarmament exercise resumed and cattle rustling was reduced.

The UPDF Act was passed into law.

The Senior Command and Staff College admitted its first intake of 31 officers, one unfortunately passed away and 30 were successfully passed out on 5 August 2005. May his soul rest in peace.  

The defence corporate plan was finalised and operationalised.

Ninety percent of the works on Hima barracks have been completed.

Continued with the construction and rehabilitation of barracks in Butyaba, Kasenyi, Pagimo and Lolo.

Twenty-six officers and 550 militants were also retired.

The pending or ongoing activities for the year 2003/2004 were: implementation of the standardisation of military vehicles is in its initial stages; mainstreaming of HIV/AIDS concerns in the army is on-going; the ministry has embarked on the establishment of the integrated resource management information system; and the disarmament exercise continues.  

The planned or proposed activities for 2005/2006 are:
·	Elimination of the remaining insurgency in Northern Uganda.
·	Automation of human resource and pay records.
·	Improvement of soldiers’ welfare.
·	Standardisation of vehicles.
·	Survey of the ministry’s land.
·	Implementation of the UPDF Act.
·	Retirement of officers and men who are due for retirement.
·	Implementation of the defence review recommendations.
·	Construction and rehabilitation of barracks.

The amount of funds requested by the sector in the recurrent expenditure is Shs 337,235,624,075. In the development expenditure it is Shs 11,844,375,925.

During the consideration of the three-year macro-economic plan and indicative revenue and expenditure framework in May 2005, the Budget Committee made the following recommendations on the sector:
 
That Shs 15 billion should be allocated to meet the 10 percent salary increase for the officers and men of the UPDF. The arrears of Shs 52 billion should also be phased in the medium term. This was an increment in 2000 and 2001, which was paid to government workers. Unfortunately, the Ministry of Finance did not provide for the Ministry of Defence. So, our soldiers have been lacking this money for the last four years. 

The Ministry of Defence responded as follows: the 10 percent salary increase requirement of Shs 15 billion cannot be accommodated within the current MTEF ceilings. It will be necessary to adjust the Medium Term Expenditure Framework ceiling of the ministry, if the increase is to be implemented.

The Budget Committee was concerned that the Ministry of Defence was continuing to deduct housing allowance. This is why that documentary became part of this report. We needed Members of Parliament to see that there are achievements. So, I read it again; “The Budget Committee was concerned that the Ministry of Defence was continuing to deduct housing allowances from all officers and men, or all officers and militants of the UPDF, to fund construction projects and reiterated its earlier recommendation that this is wrong and must stop, since construction of barracks is a responsibility of government.”

The response from the ministry was: the provision of Shs 3 billion per annum for construction of barracks every financial year is hardly enough to commence construction of a barracks and yet accommodation is a vital component of the welfare of soldiers.  

The achievements gained from the Shs 7.2 billion deducted from soldiers’ housing allowance were the construction of barracks. The quality of accommodation to be provided by the constructed barracks is better than the accommodation the officers would get at Shs 5,000 per month.  

The ministry had made serious strides in constructing barracks, and it will soon become irrelevant to provide for housing allowance. All officers and men will be accommodated within the barracks. That is why we brought in that documentary for you to see the achievements and make your comments.

The committee recommended that government brings on board the neighbouring countries in a joint disarmament exercise. Kenya is already on board. Sudan and Ethiopia should also be incorporated. The committee further reiterates that Karamoja disarmament is a law and order matter and as such should be transferred to the Police for implementation.  

The ministry responded that they were addressing the issue of Karamoja in many ways namely: 

1.	An action group for Turkana and Karamoja had been agreed on between Kenya and Uganda. One of the main targets is to commence the disarmament of Turkana and Karamoja simultaneously. A committee had been set up and asked to cost the action plan. After the costing, the variance between the cost and what is provided for in the running budgets for two countries would be determined. A number of development partners, including the Danish Government and the UNDP, were willing to contribute.
2.	The issue will be part of the agenda for the next meeting of the defence ministers of East Africa.
3.	The next meeting of the IGAD Defence Ministers will also consider the problem of illicit arms flow in the region.
4.	The ministry was increasing the capacity of the UPDF to handle cattle rustling in Karamoja.
5.	The Office of the Prime Minister was co-ordinating other development activities as part of the integrated approach to Karamoja question.
6.	The committee recommended that the Mubende rehabilitation centre should only be used for rehabilitation of disabled combatants for eventual reintegrating in the forces or communities.
7.	The committee was also concerned that there are many soldiers who have reached retirement age but cannot be retired due to lack of funds. This matter should be addressed urgently.

	The response from the ministry was that it is there to release officers and men who have made a contribution to the forces and qualify for discharge. This would provide room for fresh recruitment. However, due to logistical constraints, this exercise cannot be carried out at one go, but rather in a phased manner, as and when funds become available.

The new policies of the Ministry of Defence are:

1.	Participation in the international peace support initiatives.
2.	Implementation of the loans and welfare scheme.
3.	Rehabilitation and construction of the UPDF general headquarters and Ministry of Defence respectively.
4.	Participation in the regional initiative to implement the disarmament programme.

Observations by the committee: 

There had been a belief by a section of the population that the Ministry of Defence would pay pension to former combatants of the King’s African Rifles. However, it should be noted as follows:  

The ex-KAR are not entitled to any pay from the Government of Uganda.  

The KAR ex-servicemen were employed under the terms and conditions of service of the British.  

Under the terms of service and conditions of service, the ex-service men did not qualify for pension, according to the British standards.

The Ministry of Defence has undertaken to refund transport costs that were incurred by the Kings African riffles ex-servicemen who went to Bombo to register for pension.  

The arrears for auxiliary forces, up to the month of June 2005, would be cleared. At the same time, a verification exercise was going on to establish the actual strength of the auxiliary forces.

Recommendations on the budget proposals: 

The remuneration for professionals in the UPDF should be adjusted to the level that is paid by Government in other departments. 

The committee noted that, for example, in the medical profession medical officers in the Ministry of Health double what their counter parts in the Ministry of Defence earn. I will give you an example. A senior medical officer in the Ministry of Defence earns Shs 636,864; his counterpart in the Ministry of Health earns Shs 1,183,584.  

I will jump and I give you another example. Senior nursing officers in the Ministry of Defence are paid Shs 315,506. In the Ministry of Health their counterparts are paid Shs 671,000 exactly twice as much.

In all categories, if you go to the Senior Public Health Dental Officer in the Ministry of Defence, he earns Shs 342,000 and in the Ministry of Health he earns Shs 714,000. If you go to the Senior Health Inspector, he earns Shs 342,000 in Ministry of Defence, and in the Ministry of Health he earns Shs 714,000. So, all categories are here.

We are, therefore, recommending that they also earn like their counterparts in the Ministry of Health. Incidentally Ministry of Defence has lost five doctors; I do not know whether they are aware. In the last recruitment they did not interest any doctor to join them apart from three medical assistants who have now discovered and want to escape. So, unless they do it expeditiously they will not have any qualifications in the army and yet this is an army, which is supposed to be attracting professionals.

The proposed re-allocation to cater for salary increment of 10 percent of the UPDF should be adhered to. We were arguing much about this simply because the UPDF are not like other servants of the Government because the following reasons. One, they cannot go to court. Two, they cannot demonstrate and they cannot riot. So, it is this Parliament to make sure that they get what they want, otherwise they will never benefit from the Government they serve.

Further, the Ministry of Defence should liaise with the relevant ministry to have the salary arrears of the UPDF paid since actually it is for 2000/2001. It should be cleared otherwise now it has accumulated to Shs 52 billion.

The regional initiative approach to disarmament exercise and the Turkana regions should be wholly embraced and implemented.

I conclude, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I beg the House and recommend that this House approves the budget of the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Internal Affairs as follows: 

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence, recurrent expenditure Shs 338,474,141,000; and development expenditure Shs 11,666,134,000.  

In the Ministry of Internal Affairs on vote 009, I beg the House to approve Shs 33,753,519,000. Vote 144 - Uganda Police that is the figure I gave you at the beginning, Shs 76,548,997,000. On vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service, the figure I gave you is now Shs 22,319,794,000. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. I have examined the report, six of out 17 members appended their signatures, they constitute just over one third, so the report is eligible for debate.

6.20
MR DANIEL KIDEGA (Youth Representative, North): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. This is the most important item of this budget to my people. I would like to start by thanking so much the ministry for their very scientific presentation to this House. I also would like to thank the committee so much for the good work.  

I come from the North and specifically mid-north where there are a lot of probleMs I would like in a very special way to thank so much the UPDF officers in the North for the work they are doing for our people. (Applause) Madam Speaker, the Fourth and Fifth Division commanders, that is Col. Mugisha and Col. Etyang and –(Interruption)

CAPT. BASALIZA: Mugisha is no longer a colonel, he is a brigadier.

MR KIDEGA: Thank you so much for that. But, Madam Speaker, what I am emphasizing is that in the last one year there has been a lot of improvement in terms of operation in the North. There is a bit of calm and the relationship between the civilians and the army has greatly improved. 

One of the things that impressed me so much about the commanders on the ground. You must be aware that recently there was a Cholera outbreak in certain camps in Gulu District. I went to two camps. One of them is called Omii, there were no transport facilities from the Ministry of Health, no communication but the UPDF officers there voluntarily would carry victims of Cholera and use their own communication gadgets to help these civilians and ferry them to where they could get medical services. I think this is a very distinguished service that these people are offering to our people.  

The other extra load, which the UPDF people in our place are doing, is they escort civilians to go and harvest crops from their gardens. This is something that is not done in other parts of the country. So I thought it was important for us to genuinely appreciate the services being offered by these sons and daughters of Ugandans living in the disturbed areas. So, on behalf of my people I would like to thank the Division Commander of Fourth and Fifth Divisions for the good work they are doing for our people.

The second issue is the language. It so happens that occasionally some commanders make mistakes on the ground but you find politicians, some of them are from this House, they use very bad language when they are rebuking these soldiers and this fuels bad relationships between the Army and the civilians. So, I think it is important that we, as people in this sector of governance, should use appropriate language when we are disagreeing with the Army or doing certain things in rebuking them because this really demoralises the soldiers.  

I was a member of a select committee whose report has not yet come here, that went to investigate the hiccup that happened in Acholi Bur and other places. I think when the report comes here we might be surprised a bit. So, it is my humble plea to the politicians that they should use appropriate language when rebuking the mistakes made by the soldiers.

To the Ministry of Defence, some of the things that I have found out are that it is also fuelling bad relations between the civilians and the Army. For example, the UPDF are not angels per se. I went in Omii; I found one LRA soldier had killed a girl and the whole camp was disturbed. So, I think there must be very accurate measures taken by the ministry to compensate such families who have lost persons out of reckless behaviour of the soldiers to make sure there is harmony between the civilians and the soldiers.  

I met some soldiers on the ground who bitterly complained about the way their fellow comrades are treated. When a soldier dies at a battle or on the frontline, if you are not of a certain rank, you are not taken home. These men and women of UPDF are very bitter. They are saying they are serving the country and if they die at their job they let their bodies be taken home. I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Defence to address this matter.  

I particularly met some soldiers from the Fifth Division who bitterly complained to me that many of their friends have died and their wives are not being taken care of; their bodies were not even taken home! Imagine this was your brother or wife or husband who has died and you don’t see the body! I think this needs careful attention.

Finally, one of the problems we have in the North is the question of decongestion of the camps. I would like to appeal very passionately to the Minister of Defence that the number of detaches in the North and more specifically Gulu, Kitgum and Pader must be multiplied. The people are demanding that they want to go nearer to their land. I quote two places, Otwe and Guruguru people who left their very fertile land behind. They feel that otherwise if there were detaches in those two areas they would go and live in those places and at least cultivate some food for themselves. I would like to thank the Minister of Defence once again, the committee and more specifically the UPDF officers. Thank you so much.

6.24
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and the Ministries of Internal Affairs and Defence. As every member here may agree with me, we are increasingly seeing an improved report from those two ministries. There were many things that are not in the report today. You know ghost soldiers, people running away with billions of money, expired food and all that. I am happy, Mr Chairman, that this is not the case in this year’s report. I would like to commend the leadership, both political and the technical people in those very ministries. 

However, we have been talking about strengthening of the Police Force and to my dismay the committee recommended that government must take substantive investment in strengthening the Police Force in terms of recruitment, equipping and housing but due to shortage of funds this cannot be. I would like government to come up strongly on this because in not more than seven months away we shall have general elections all combined together, presidential, parliamentary and local councils on one day, 12 March 2006. So, I would suggest that action should have been taken yesterday, not today, to ensure that we have enough security in place because all along it has been complained that we have been using other forces, the military in the elections, militarising our elections. So, I thought government should have taken a caution on this and we make sure that we have enough police force in place to take care of this.  
 
In tandem with that, I have appreciated the visual assistance we have had over the UPDF constructions, but you should go in tandem with the Police; you should go in tandem with Prisons. Once you develop the UPDF, its barracks and its accommodation and housing, you will be causing an enclave. The others will not be supporting the UPDF. But for you to succeed as government you have to look at it in a broad spectrum. You improve the UPDF’s accommodation, offices and at the same time you help the Prisons. The Prisons are not very well highlighted, but they are in a sorry state and the Police are also in a sorry state. I would wish to sit comfortably knowing that all these sectors are moving on well.  

I also take a look on page 19 about the retirement of officers and men are due for retirement. Officers, especially in this last period they have been retired, but at the same time recalled. I thought the UPDF should have followed a career path. You have your human resource, you need this, because of your expertise and training; you do not just promote them and retire them. You promote them and retire them for what? It defeats logic. How do you promote me and at the same time consider me useless? So, I would have thought that a career growth should be found.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I want to correct the impression represented by hon. Sekikuubo that those who are retired are useless. That is not true. People are retired because they want to join public life and to contribute to the country in a different way. There are others who retire because their contracts have expired and that is why they are promoted in recognition of their exemplary performance.  

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thank you, honourable colleague, for giving that information. Well, that is another matter but essentially under the normal armies across the world you make use of the officers and men. You expose them to further training, you promote them and you use them as a country. I did not mean that they are retired because they are expired, but I was saying that it is a mismatch.  This mismatch is what I was pointing out; you do not promote and all that kind of thing. Well, as long as they are our fellow Ugandans, I really appreciate that for them they have to go away happy.

The committee noted that the Ministry of Defence was continuing to deduct housing allowances from all officers and men of the UPDF. We had resolved here last financial year that this is the duty of government to provide accommodation to officers and men. I must appreciate what I saw, the construction activities taking place, but this should not be at the expense of the soldiers. 

I would have suggested a stronger recommendation that this money deducted in good time should be refunded because we insisted and it was agreed here, but the ministry turned around and continued doing the same thing. I think we can look elsewhere, where we can really find money, but not to add pain to the officers and men who have already sacrificed enough for this country. 

As a general comment I must appreciate the UPDF and the Ministry of Internal Affairs for the schemes that are in place to make sure that we have a proud army. But I take the exceptional case of our own Col. Fred Bogere. It was reported that he went missing and later we leant that he was sick and that he was in Mulago. We reached there, he was not there. What facilities could be in place to assist those who are sick? Should we wait to go for requiem services? 

I thought, Madam Speaker, that should go in tandem and I think the minister would be kind enough. I do not know whether you are already aware, but for us as a House we may not be aware when we praise the benefits, the welfare of the UPDF, when we do not see our very own in Mulago, we cannot trace him; we hear rumours in the press. I want the minister to confirm it himself as he is here. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, our procedure here is that if a member falls sick the Speaker is notified as quickly as possible, but I must confess I do not think I have received information from his family telling me what is wrong with him. I have not, but maybe the minister will tell us.

6.29
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank the committee for their efforts to address most of the issues that have been raised on the floor a number of times and in most cases recommending for solutions.  

Let me start with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. There is an area that the committee has not given adequate attention, and this is the Department of Immigration. One of the biggest problems we are facing now is the ever-increasing number of aliens. They do not only pose a security threat but they are also taking most of the jobs that our people would be taking. We have some of them involved in boda boda business, selling mandazi, sweets, casual labourers, shopkeepers, you name it. 

I think the committee needs to interact with the minister and his technical team and find out why they have failed to control the increasing number of aliens. Are you waiting for a problem to occur like we had bombs sky rocketing the whole of Kampala?  

Another area that has not been adequately cited is traffic control. If we are talking of efficiency in the economy and we cannot address the problem of traffic, there is a serious problem. You can spend three hours from Mbarara to Kyengera, and you can equally spend another three hours from Kyengera to Nakawa. We need to find a solution to traffic congestion. I do not know why we have to stick to the roads that were put here by Sir Andrew Cohen. 

I will take an example of Jinja Road.  There is a roundabout near this Garden City, just near Shimoni Teachers’ College. Why the hell can they not make another road connecting to the other roundabout so that cars, which enter the city and are destined for these offices can connect on this roundabout? Because Sir Andrew Cohen and those colonial masters put a roundabout on Jinja Road, it must be –(Capt. Basaliza rose)- Madam Speaker, I have four minutes, let me exhaust my four minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I thought you had said you had a procedural problem.

CAPT. BASALIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of procedure I was raising is about traffic vis-à-vis roads and congestion. I would think that is the role of Ministry of Transport and Works and not Ministry of Internal Affairs. So, I do not think the honourable member is procedurally correct to talk about Ministry of Internal Affairs failing to control the congestion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But that is not a procedural matter.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: This is the problem of people who do not listen. I said traffic control. I am not talking of road construction. I am telling you there is no road here that has been opened. Even when we turned this road, we had to consult Ministry of Internal Affairs for the traffic officers to come and study the flow of traffic around Parliament.  

The other area of my concern is development. The development budget of Ministry of Internal Affairs is still inadequate. We have created 20 more districts. I have not seen money in the report appropriated to take on the new mandate. In the district of Isingiro the Police Post that is in Isingiro, we the citizens or the locals of Isingiro are the ones paying rent for the police post. So, as you create more districts, appropriate money to cover these new areas.

I am also not comfortable, Madam Speaker, with the continued use of LDUs in a professional department. The continued use of LDUs means there is inadequate manpower in the Police. It is the considered view that those LDUs who qualify to join the Police be trained and become policemen so that we can eventually phase out LDUs from this professional department. (Applause)

Let me go to Defence. I have reasons to smile because in this film we have seen here, the documentary, the minister was trying to account. I want to thank you honourable minister for trying to account to Parliament, which appropriates money. I have, however, a few areas of concern. 

One is on recurrent expenditure. I would have liked the committee and the minister in his presentation to have cited, or measured the achievement in recurrent expenditure, much of it was development. 

I not comfortable with the deduction of housing allowance for officers and men without mentioning when they going to be compensated. (Applause) The wage bill is a statutory expenditure and it is constitutional. I have seen those barracks and those roads and units of infrastructure you have put in place using officers and men’s allowance, which means they should have starved for a very long time. 

I want the chairman to tell this House and the minister when they are going to be refunded and at what interest rate. You must really give them some interest on their money because when you lend out money you borrow from the public. We know how much you sell treasury bills, so you borrowed from soldiers and officers. When you are paying them you must put some interest.

There was a mention of domestic arrears for both ex-service men and suppliers. Government introduced a system of commitment control, which we reported in our Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development that it was proving defective simply because the culprits are not punished. We have not seen heads roll because people have committed money outside their budget. 

It is my humble prayer, Madam Speaker, through you that the ex-servicemen who are impoverished, because either their cheques went to the district and they were not informed, or they become stale and they have not been paid and there are those ex-servicemen who have not received their pension. 

You should speed up the pension process and pay these people if you have to be in line with the PEP programme. We must pay people who serviced this country, risked their lives and abandoned their homes. You should not reward them by reducing their life expectancy, because that is what is happening. For somebody who is used to a free house, free medical attention, free food, free education, when all those are cut off that is stress and the person is likely to die very quickly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to conclude.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: I am concluding, Madam Speaker. I am a retired senior Army officer. I have had education like my colleagues in civil service have had. It is very painful that in the Army both officers and men are considered inferior caliber. Yes, there is evidence, the chairman has told you why doctors are running away from the Army. There must be reasonable effort to equate people in the army and in the Public Service. 

Those who are saying, “Ah!” Let me tell you. When I was still a staff officer, a drivers’ allowance was Shs 50,000 and a senior army officer’s was Shs 60,000. At one time I confronted the permanent secretary then, Mr Ben Mbonye - I think hon. Mbabazi knows it - I said, “This is not correct. You cannot have a driver getting Shs 50,000 in the same ministry and an Army Commander getting Shs 60,000”. So, Madam Speaker, the question of equity and rationalization of services must be taken seriously if actually we have to follow one single spine structure adopted by Public Service.

CAPT. MATOVU: When you look at even the risk, a doctor who is at Mulago is working in a nice environment; he is secure and his family is secure. But our doctor in Pabo, you can imagine the risk he is going through. So, I think the point we are discussing is very crucial that it needs urgent attention. Look at some units, because of the army most of the neighboring families and communities have began to access services from these very doctors.  

The second thing is that we have one health system in the whole country. A doctor at Mbuya does not attend to a civilian half way; no, he gives you full treatment. So, I think really we must do something. We should promote them to catch up maybe with the senior rank in order to equate the salary.

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, the issue remunerating employees in the state apparatus is very important. I am glad the MPs have the powers at least to do something about their salaries. If you are in Mulago you will cry tears. We are lucky some doctors are actually giving us services; many of them are packing their bags. Nurses are actually being attracted to other destinations because we are not taking our own as important. So, I think it is very important for the Prime Minister to see that the issue of remunerating our public officers is not a joke; it is something very serious. Otherwise, other countries are going to attract very bright people to go and serve.  

Madam Speaker, you have been in South Africa, you have seen our own Ugandans performing wonders because of the packages, which those foreign governments have given to our own people. It is a pity if the Army, which is one of the most important institutions in a country, is taken as though it is something to play around with. Yes, they are commissioned officers but on the issue remuneration, I want to enrich my friend that it is a very important issue, which the Minister of Defence should dwell on. The Prime Minister should not joke about the issue of enumerating our army officers, including nurses.  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you very much. As I advanced my last point, let me conclude on the issue of remuneration by citing critical examples. What the chairman was talking about, a doctor with a master’s degree in the army gets almost half as the much as the doctor who is serving in Public Service. I have a colleague here in the gallery who cannot speak for himself. He is an engineer and he was getting half of what the engineers in the Public Service get. So, what I am taking about, honourable members, is something that must be addressed.

Finally, I am raising on a point of security concern. I do not know whether the minister will have to mention it but the non-national fuel reserves in Jinja – you were not here honourable minister yesterday but I believe the NPC was here, he must have communicated to you. The fuel there is in the non-national reserve in Jinja. It is not a secret; it is public knowledge. Now we are told here that it can only last 20 days.  I do not know whether the arrangement I know of is working, but if it is not, we are in trouble.  

Finally, on the army hospital, I have seen what you have achieved. I think you did not do more on the army hospital to improve the welfare of officers and men. I want to thank you, Mr Minister for your moves today to try and be accountable to Parliament and the nation. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us try to be brief so that other members can contribute. Let us keep to four minutes.  

6.51
MR YIGA ANTHONY (Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to be very brief. I would like to thank the committee for the visual display where they have been able to make accountability as far as the Ministry of Defence is concerned for monies spent to construct those barracks, which you have seen. This is very good and I wish other sectors could also do the same especially where development funds are expended into physical infrastructure activities.

However, I would like to inquire from the chairperson why you did not give us any development work done by the Prisons and the Police. I know they are also engaged in construction activities, but why didn’t you give us a display of what they are really doing? So, you would give us – maybe there is nothing there.   

I had a very negative opinion about the revelation that the Government had deducted housing allowance to construction barracks but now I have somehow reconsidered my earlier position and I think we have done the right thing. The Government has done the right thing. 

So, I would like to congratulate the Minister of Local Government, basically because it is clear a soldier is supposed to be in a barracks. You cannot have soldiers, one is staying ten miles away and another twenty and you think you are really managing a force. It cannot happen like that. So really, what we have done now is what we should have done maybe some other years back, but what we have done now is a step in the right direction. Let us provide accommodation for the soldiers and house them in barracks. I think this is the right thing, Madam Speaker.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from my colleague hon. Yiga. You know there are two things. There are barracks that are being constructed and there is another one, which members actually have concern that is deducting salaries from the soldiers. Which one are you appreciating, is it a deduction or the construction or both?

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, the chairman really explained it clearly that in the absence of that accommodation soldiers were being given Shs 5,000 per month to go and look for accommodation but what has been done now, they stopped paying that money and they put it into constructing those houses, which is positive as far as I am concerned. Because what type of accommodation can you get in Pabo at Shs 5,000? It becomes very difficult. 

So we rather go in for barracks so that these people are housed in places, which are really secure and known. That is how you can even be able to command a force. But otherwise, if they are scattered here and there, how do you command them? So, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I do not know the establishment of UPDF or the Police, but I know it is quite big. For the Minister of Defence to show us that they have done one barracks and all the officers and men of the UPDF their salaries are being deducted, when will everybody in the force actually partake of a single development, in what time sequence? 

Is he in order to suggest that officers should surrender their hard earned emoluments so that they build? I would have preferred it the other way that they actually give real labour, but to ask officers to surrender their money so that the barracks are built is tantamount to you as a Member of Parliament to surrender your emoluments so that the Parliamentary building is built. I think is not in order to suggest this sort of scenario for officers of the army. Is he in order really?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gagawala, I do not know at what stage you entered the Chamber, but we were shown different barracks under construction and others completed in about six districts. There was also an indication for forthcoming plans. There is no problem with his argument, the chairman brought it out and said this is the position, the committee does not agree, but I want to hear your comments. So others have said yes, he is saying no, he is satisfied that the money is being used for the right purpose.  That is all he is saying.

MR YIGA: I thank you, Madam Speaker for your wise ruling. The other issue concerns local government prisons. I know the Government is supposed to enact a law so that these local government prisons are brought under the command of the central government prisons but up to now the law is being delayed. I would like to echo the concerns, which we have been raised over and over again that the conditions in our local government prisons are really appalling, inmates are really overworked, these people go for work around six in the morning and come back at six in the evening; they are under fed, if they are even lucky to get food, but many of them are starving; they are tortured.  

So, Madam Speaker, much as we are waiting for the law, could the minister in charge of prisons be able to do something so that the situation actually is elevated a bit as we are waiting for that law? Otherwise, the situation is out of hand and if we cannot feed these people why are we really imprisoning them? Couldn’t we find another way of not imprisoning them at all until when the Government is ready to have the infrastructure and be able to attend to them? Otherwise, we are really committing a lot of violation of human rights on these Ugandans who are really mistreated. Alternatively –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: I want a clarification from hon. Yiga. He asks why we are imprisoning them if we cannot feed them and that we are violating their rights. Madam Speaker, by the time somebody is imprisoned, the presupposition is that he or she also violated somebody’s right. I want hon. Anthony Yiga to help me understand which rights should be defended, the ones of the criminal to eat or the rights of a bigger community to continue in existence?

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, it is strange that we are getting comments from hon. Alice Alaso and moreover a mother because even if your child has committed some wrongs, you can punish but you cannot deny him or her food. Do you also have to mistreat him or her? I think it is right that these people should be given the right treatment. They should be rehabilitated. In fact they are supposed to be rehabilitated in those prisons.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Yiga, you are really talking as if all the crimes are uniform. Maybe somebody just stole one chicken - you are forgetting that there are some serious crimes and you are saying until we get prisons, we just look at them? No.

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, I was concerned about somebody who has been imprisoned and you do not give him food. I was just concerned but if you think that they should be denied food –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, we have not said that they should be denied food but when you suggest that “If you are not ready just let them loose”, I think it is irresponsible.

MRS ANGUPALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague, Yiga, because I heard him very well say that the local prisons have got a very big problem as we talk. The local prisons are not under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, it is under the Ministry of Local Government and its policies do not balance –(Interruption)- I am talking on a point of information; allow me to finish, you will also inform me.

The local prisons budget is normally not catered for and if you go through this budget, you do not get any pronunciations about local prisons. That is why there was a Bill, which was supposed to be brought in this House about the local prisons and the Police Bill so that they can be amalgamated and they will be catered for. 

What hon. Yiga is saying is that the prisons or the local police headquarters do not cater for criminals very well. We should understand the right of the individual; some of these people are kept in cells where there is no shelter or pit latrine. Madam Speaker, try to move and visit some of these cells. These people who are kept in cells urinate and can stay there with the urine for even three days. 

I believe what hon. Yiga is trying to state here is that if we are to have the local police or the local prisons then there should be shelter for keeping them for two to three days before they are taken to state prisons. I believe that is what hon. Yiga is saying and I have physically seen it. The situation is very appalling. It is calling for the Government’s attention and that is why some of us are wishing that the Bill would be brought before this House that the local police and prisons should be catered for.  

MR YIGA: I would like to thank my colleague for that information and I think she has brought out the message clearly. These fellows who are in those prisons really have committed petty crimes. These capital offenders always go to Luzira but someone who has stolen a chicken and other small things is subjected to these injustices, which I have mentioned.

Lastly, about the Police, in a number of districts, there are structures, which were started for office and residential accommodation, which have not been completed. 

I can give an example of Rakai District where I had the opportunity to work and participate in identifying land for the Police Force to put up the district police headquarters. It is now coming to over six years and the structure has never been completed. Could we know whether the minister has plans to ensure that these structures are completed before we begin on new ones? I thank you.

7.04
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report and I thank the Ministry of Defence. I think there is now reasonable improvement particularly in the management of public finances. I also thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for trying hard despite the limited funding that has been extended to that particular ministry for a long time. 

I am concerned about the national registration and citizen identification programme. I would love to hear from the Minister of Internal Affairs the details of this particular programme because when I look in the budget for the Ministry of Internal Affairs, there is no proper item that has been identified to handle this particular programme. I would like to know when this should be done. I can see that we are now moving in for road licences as a priority, instead of this programme. I would like the minister to throw light on this.

Madam Speaker, my next concern is about the recruitment of the police officers. You have identified an exercise of recruitment of 4,000 probation police constables. This is a good idea but again when I look at the budget and given that your ministry has always been under funded, I am finding a problem as to whether you are going to recruit these people. Where will you get the funds? I want to know whether really these funds have been properly put in the budget. 

We have continued to fail to inject more resources in this ministry and as a result the Ministry of Defence continues to take over the functions of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Therefore, it is very important, in order for this particular sector to do its work, that this Parliament looks at reallocating certain funds from certain sectors to make sure that the Ministry of Internal Affairs does its work.

The next issue I would like to address is the auxiliary forces. In my opinion, Madam Speaker, we seem to want to do things in an adhoc manner. We wait until the situation has become worse and we come like a fire brigade exercise. I think we should really plan properly. What is the right size of the UPDF, and the strength? What should it be and what should be the strength of the Police? It would be better to plan that way so that we recruit instead of resorting to these adhoc interventions. 

I would like to know the strength of the Police, the strength of the UPDF and what it is supposed to be. And what we are supposed to have, not what we have, in order to have better law and order and protection by UPDF?

Another point I would like to consider is about what my colleague hon. Rwamirama has talked about, the salaries and allowances for the staff of the Ministry of Defence. It is criminal for any ministry such as Ministry of Finance not to release salaries that have been identified as a policy if Parliament has voted for those funds to be released to a given ministry.  The 10 percent increase was supposed to go across board. I wonder why Ministry of Finance could not release this money and no explanation has ever come to this Floor of Parliament? 

I would suggest, Madam Speaker, that this 10 percent, which is about I think Shs 15 billion, be released to the Ministry of Defence and actually interest, as hon. Rwamirama said, should be pegged at least because this is their money. It was passed and I do not know why they were not paid this money.

Second on this particular issue, to take away somebody’s allowance to build a public institution, I think this is in my opinion illegal and criminal. It is criminal in the sense that the Shs 5,000 that that soldier should have got to pay for school fees and buy medicine for his child monthly - I have been calculating here. Every month it is about Shs 300 million. 

If we look generally at the Shs 60,000 member force of the UPDF of what we have been told before, if it is Shs 300 million every month, multiplied by 12 months, those are in billions of money and this is really denying the officers what they are supposed to get. I would suggest that the minister looks into this matter. I can see that this was not authorized by the recipients; it was a directive from the Defense Council. A Defense Council has no power whatsoever over the emoluments of an officer or man of the armed forces. You cannot just plan to use my money anyhow. 

It is like me saying we want to build a house for the Speaker of Parliament and, therefore, my salary should go to building the house for the Speaker. It is strange! Therefore, I am requesting the minister responsible, this has been raised by the Auditor-General who is an officer of Parliament and I appeal to the minister and the accounting officer to desist from deducting this Shs 5,000 from the soldiers and men of the UPDF –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please wind up.

MR SABIITI: Lastly and very importantly, on page 25, when I look at the amount of money being requested for, I know they need this money but when you look at other priorities, I have here the corrigenda actually of what we intend to spend. 

If you look at other ministries, start with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, go to the Ministry of Trade and Industry, go to the Ministry of Energy and Minerals where we need to invest more money in order to get more money to facilitate Defence, I find it strange to find one Ministry of Defence getting Shs 350 billion every year. It has been rotating between Shs 300 billion to Shs 350 billion nearly every year. We need security but if you do not provide drugs in hospitals, people still die. Really, we should prioritize and know how we should move in this country.  

In my opinion, Madam Speaker, this money should be reduced a bit and certain funds - and as per our Budget Act we should shift some of this money to areas such as health, education to pay fees for those in universities and teachers and then leave a reasonable amount to make sure that you also operate. But to take the biggest chunk of our total budget to one ministry, in my opinion, is really unrealistic. I thank you.

7.13
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Ministry of Internal Affairs for performing very well in spite of the limited funds. Our policemen are very smartly dressed nowadays and I think it is something that they are trying to do for these people. But their welfare is still in a very sorry state, especially when you look at the barracks. I think something should be done to improve the barracks so that they can stay healthy so their children and themselves may not get cholera and other diseases because of the terrible sanitation.

My other concern is about the Amnesty Commission. I can see that the Amnesty Commission has resettled about 1,500 former captives but they have a big backlog of 12,000 and there are new 6,000 reporters. This is a very big number of people. I do not know how the ministry is going to resettle these people.

Every time I visit my constituency, I get a number of these former captives coming to me. They have been sent home without any packages or with very limited packages and they get information that Amnesty Commission has resettled other people in other districts properly. I would like to know from the Minister what criteria the Amnesty Commission uses to resettle these people.  

For those who have been sent like far up in Adjumani, Amnesty Commission does not have an office there and these people have to come all the way to Gulu. But when they come to Gulu, they are tossed around. They do not have any means of coming back. Some of these are orphans whose parents were killed by the LRA at the time when they were abducted. They are homeless because the places where they were abducted from have no people. They have been displaced.  

It is very unfortunate that we do not have IDP camps, so these people do not have even where to go and settle. Some of them are just staying with well-wishers and good Samaritans. They really need to be assisted. I want the minister to give me an answer.

Madam Speaker, the implementation of peace agreement between Government and UNLF - We are happy that some of it has been accomplished now. But there is still a lot that has to be done and I think the former combatants or ex-combatants need to be resettled to ease tension between their leaders and lower rank people among the UNLF. This is because there is a lot of tension that is still building up.

On the Prisons Department, I would like to appeal that the renovation of Opengigi Prisons Barracks and cells should really be put on the agenda. I have not seen it here; I have also not seen it on the medium term plan. Last year, the Minister of Internal Affairs visited the prisons and he actually acknowledged the sorry state in which the prisons barracks and cells are in because they were really destroyed during the 1979 war but up to now nothing has been done to those structures. Also the sanitation in that place is really terrible.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I will request that the ministry also thinks about capitalization of the prisons farm. Opengigi Prisons farm covers a very big piece of land. They produce a lot of food and other cash crops but they cannot plough all the land that they have because they do not have enough capacity in terms of tractors or in terms of Ox ploughs and other facilities that would help them. 

I would like to appeal also in the same vein to the Ministry of Industry that they should think about putting some factories that could add value to some of the agricultural produce that this farm produces and also the Ministry of Energy so that electricity is extended there and we can have some factories around these prisons farm because they really produce a lot food and other cash crops like cotton and sorghum.

Madam Speaker, I have not seen anything to do with pensions for ex-service men. I would really appeal that this is a very big problem especially in West Nile and the rest of the country. We have a number of ex-service men especially those who served during Amin’s time and they have not been paid at all. They have not been compensated and it is a very big problem. It is even a very big problem politically and if we do not do this, we are going to get problems in the next elections. This must be looked into.

Madam Speaker, arrears for the auxiliary forces, I think this one is also a very serious issue, which should be dealt with immediately. The Ministry of Defence should ensure that the auxiliary forces receive their arrears. The other time the Minister of State for Defence said that they received one month’s salary. How about the five months? These arrears should be settled immediately.  

I am concerned, as others have raised here, about the disparities of salaries for the health workers in the Ministry of Defence compared to the Ministry of Health. I think that is really a very big issue and it is a shame that doctors in UPDF are not paid the same rate as the doctors in the Ministry of Health and yet they work under very difficult circumstances.

As I wind up, Madam Speaker, there is an impression that the activities of LRA have been curtailed in the North. While this is true, especially in Northeast, the impression is a bit wrong. When you go to Adjumani, since last year the situation is worse. People are being displaced further; more than a-half of Adjumani District is now not inhabited by the local people, but I really want to thank the UPDF officers for what they are doing. You find them living in bushes where you do not see a civilian. 

Recently, I was traveling from Adjumani to Kampala; the convoy had to stop on the way and some soldiers had to come down because they do not even have transport. They use the civilian transport to come up to a certain point, get off and enter the bushes where you do not see any human being. I really want to appreciate what they are doing there but I would like to appeal further to UPDF to put in more strength in that area so that we are rehabilitated from the war and people can go back to resettle in their homes.

Last but not least, I would like to appeal to the UPDF that in the next Parliament, we should have at least one-third of representation of UPDF as women. We talk about gender equality but we do not even have one woman UPDF Representative in Parliament, and our Constitution talks about at least one-third representation. We must have this one third representation in the next Parliament. Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much.

7.21
MR DANIEL KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for this report and also the Ministry of Defence for the innovative methods they are employing to give accountability in presenting the report.

I want to find out from the Ministry of Internal Affairs whether they are going to take over the local police administration as well as the prisons.  

MR WOPUWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my colleague for giving way. The local administration police and prisons have already been taken over by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. We have a Commissioner in charge of Local Administration Police and Prisons but they have feared because they do not have money to pay salaries and have not been innovative like Defence to build up barracks. But legally, they arm the Prisons, they arm the Police, they even command them in the field.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Madam Speaker, that is not the correct position. The member cannot talk about legal provision when this Parliament has not passed the laws amending the two.

MR KIWALABYE: So, honourable minister, I would like you to tell us whether your ministry is in position - because there is a state of confusion now - these forces wanted to be taken over because of demand of administration at the districts and lack of funds to pay them. We would like to know whether your ministry is willing to take them over.

I would like also to talk briefly about the ex-servicemen, those who served in the two great world wars. I have information that there was a summit which met in Nairobi in January 1945 to thank these combatants for the work they had done. 

When this summit met, led by Capt. Churchill from England, and attended by other big people including the late Kabaka Mutesa of Buganda, it was agreed that these people should be thanked by being given chunks of land in Uganda. Throughout Uganda, even some land was given to these people in Busia, some land was given in Iganga, some land was given in Bunyole, some land was given in Gulu, some land was given in Arua, and some land was given in my own constituency.

MR PAJOBO: Clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let him tell us, you know this matter is very important because the report says the British have disclaimed responsibility. So, we want to understand how we can help the ex-servicemen.

MR KIWALABYE: So, these people were given 30 hectares of land each in these areas all over the country. In my own constituency, in a place called Rwamondo, these ex-servicemen were given eight hectares, eight square miles of land as a group. They were settled there. Even in Bugerere, all these areas can be given. It is very unfortunate that big people, well placed people, grabbed this land. 

In Buganda, this land is part of the 9,000 square miles. Big people, well placed people, wealthy people, grabbed this land from these ex-servicemen. They were given titles by the Uganda Land Commission. Even by the time the new Land Act was put in place and land was put at the district, this land had already been grabbed and that is why we have so many evictions. In fact in my own constituency, all these ex-servicemen were evicted and the British Government, which had also donated in order to facilitate them with a maize mill - this maize mill is there abandoned up to now. 

These are the complaints we are having in my own constituency. Even if they are not qualifying for pension, but at least that small token they were given, as they call it, should have been upheld because they rendered service to this nation for international peace and stability. They did some good service but their land was grabbed. I do not know whether this government will come to the rescue of these people.

Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiwalabye, you know that document is very important. But I hope you will lay it on the Table because what you have revealed is very important, so that we can help the ex-servicemen.

MR KIWALABYE: Yes, I will lay it on the Table, Madam Speaker.

I am not in agreement with deductions from soldiers to build a barracks. It is the responsibility of all Ugandans to facilitate the army. If anything, fundraising should have been done publicly. You see if government policy is not to fundraise for these forces - because the Police was trying to fundraise and the Government did not like it so this should stop, definitely.  

The 10 percent salary increment, Madam Speaker, I do not know. I agree with the committee -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You know speaker after speaker makes a clear statement about the deductions based on a misunderstanding, so I thought - I have been waiting, holding back for the time of response but it is fair to this House that I tell them what actually happens and the legality or non-legality of the matter. 

My brother hon. Sabiiti said it was even criminal. He said it was not only illegal, it was criminal. I think he may mobilize the Police tomorrow to arrest me and charge me with - I do not know the offence. So, I better act quickly before this perception leads to that possibility.

First of all, Madam Speaker and honourable members, the deduction is not from salaries of soldiers. Under the law, for the benefit of hon. Sabiiti, the leadership of the army has power to grant or not to grant housing allowance. This is clearly written in the law. Under the UPDF Act No.307 of the Uganda laws, and under the Statutory Instrument No.6 of 1993, No.4, Accommodation for officers, I can read it for you, it says in 34(4): “An officer who has no quarters may receive a housing allowance in respect of accommodation suitable and according to his rank”.  In (5), “The High Command may amend the Eighth Schedule, which is the one that sets out the accommodation details of men and officers of the Army.” 

The High Command has the power. This Shs 5,000, which you are talking about, was never part of the remuneration of officers and men of the army. Initially our soldiers, even now, live in what they call mama ingia pole. Mama Ingia Pole are constructed by the soldier himself or herself. So, whenever the army arrived in a place where the leadership decided they would dwell or operate from, the soldier was expected to put up the mama ingia pole himself. In other words, you go and look for the poles, you go and cut the grass and you put up mama ingia pole.

Initially, it was smooth and there was no problem, but as time passed we developed problems; a civil-military relationship problem developed because land belonged to people and many of them demanded payment for the grass that the soldiers went and cut down. When we considered this matter, we decided that in order to help the soldier to be able to access some of these basic things to put up that structure, we should give them the Shs 5,000 for that purpose. It was not part of their remuneration, it was simply to help them and we called it some kind of housing allowance to help them put up mama ingia pole wherever they were.  

The policy of mama ingia pole, you all know I have talked about it before in this House, was in recognition of the reality of our situation in Uganda. And until we reached a stage when we were able to build barracks, we thought that was the most practical way of accommodating our soldiers. Now that we have reached a stage where we can construct barracks, we have decided to use the money, which is available for construction of barracks for housing these soldiers and that is why –[Hon. Members: “Can you quote?”] Let me finish the statement, I will clarify. 

That is why the Army Council at its sitting took a decision that the Shs 5,000, which was given to the soldier to help him or her build this mama ingia pole, should now be put in a kit for construction of barracks. When we calculated this thing, we realized that it was possible for the Government to build what you saw, what was presented here, by collecting that Shs 5,000. At the individual level it is not much money but when you collect it together it becomes quite a sizeable amount of money. As hon. Sabiiti was saying, it is able to do what you have seen has been done. 

Therefore, I really want to explain that this is not a deduction from the remuneration of the soldier, it is not part of the wage bill, and the Army Council acted within the legal powers that it has.  

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I understand his explanation could have some basis, but when you request for funding from Parliament, you may have initiated a policy of saying you need Shs 5,000 for every soldier as a form of allowance, having taken the decision in your Army Council. Government could then come up with a budget, it comes on the Floor of Parliament, we allocate funds and itemize it as an allowance for the soldiers, it goes now to your ministry as an allowance for that particular soldier and if you do not use it, actually it should have been remitted to the Consolidated Fund. 

If you want to use it, you as a council, given the law that you have under the Statutory Instrument, should seek permission so that this money is no longer an allowance. It should now be an item under development whereby you start constructing. But now the Shs 5,000 that is remitted to your ministry by Parliament and Ministry of Finance belongs to the officers and men of UPDF and you have no right whatsoever to use that money. The Council has no power over that money at all.  

MR KIWALABYE: It is my Floor, Madam Speaker, I only allowed the minister to give me information. Therefore, if this is not a deduction then the question of collection should not arise because if we say we go on collecting, it means you collect it from what is due to the soldier. But if you withdraw the allowance and you divert it for another purpose then that is a different issue. But if it is an entitlement to the soldier and you deduct it in order to build barracks, I do not support it.

The 10 percent increment, I do not know, because if there is a change in the factors then there must be an adjustment in the medium-term expenditure framework. It is automatic. You cannot continue maintaining the expenditure framework as it is when you have changed the factors, which affect it. 

If there is an increment of salary of 10 percent, definitely the medium-term framework has to be adjusted to accommodate the change. Therefore, the 10 percent increment of the salary, which amounts to Ss 15 billion, should be adjusted in the medium-term expenditure framework and these people should get their money.

Payment for professionals, everybody there is a professional –(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. When you say that the Shs 15 billion should be appropriated following the medium-term expenditure framework, it is wrong. We are saying that it must be within this budget of 2005/2006.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, this financial year is part of the medium-term, we just go on completing; it is part of the medium-term expenditure framework. When you adjust the one year, it means the medium-term expenditure framework is adjusted, as simple as that. So it has to be adjusted to accommodate this change.  

Since everybody is a professional, most of the people are professionals in this professionalized institution, then the salary structures should be reviewed broadly, not for particular professions like doctors, engineers and others. Even the combatants are professionals. Yes, if you compare the salary of a combatant with the salary of an equally educated person who has joined another sector like Education, you must equate and see whether the soldier compares with his counterpart who joined the teaching service. The review must cut across to see that these salaries are increased. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, just for record purposes, the report of the committee talks about professionals but the examples he brought came from Defence. However, his recommendation is on the professionals to be brought up to the same level with their colleagues.

MR KIWALABYE: When we were considering the UPDF Bill, I posed the question as to whether a combatant is not a professional and I think the clarification I got from the professionals in this field was that even the combatant is a professional.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, we are saying the committee recommended professionals but gave some examples from the medical service. Could we perhaps have that document? -(Mr Kasamba rose_)- Hon. Kasamba. Members, please be brief so that colleagues can also contribute.

7.45
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (Kakuuto County, Rakai): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I would like also to take this opportunity to thank the committee for having given a very detailed, well-explained report. I take this opportunity to thank the two ministries of Internal Affairs and Defence –(Mr Kiwalabye laid the document on the Table_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we are tabling an important document, a member should come down here, introduce the document and then lay it on the Table. 

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, I wish to lay this paper on the Table. The source is the Land and Water Resources Ministry in 1945, and it was from the Minister then of Lands and Water Resources - whoever he was. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just name the subject. I think there is a heading there.

MR KIWALABYE: The title is “Ex-Servicemen … –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, leave him.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, it was “Ex-servicemen …” I do not need to read the whole thing because everything is here. The areas and the square miles were allocated to these people as a prize. I beg to lay it on the Table.

MR KASAMBA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I have already appreciated the good work done by the ministries and I have a few considerations, which I seek clarification about. First, from the Ministry of Internal Affairs as far as the situation of the NGO board and the plans to it to effect the improvement of the NGO sector is concerned. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that some time back we debated the NGO Bill and I am wondering when it will be brought back for final consideration by this Parliament so that we streamline the NGO sector in this country. It is very appalling when you visit the NGO offices in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. They do not have a data bank; they do not have adequate staff to ensure that government monitors the NGO activities in this country. 

It is true NGOs are becoming big partners in implementing government programmes but we need to seriously monitor their activities and be able to know which NGO operates where, when and how. Can the minister come up with the time frame when we can have the NGO Bill tabled and finalized by this House?

The second point is on the National Focal Point of Small Arms and Light Weapons plan. As we subside on the convention warfare systems whereby there is direct aggression between the enemies and the state, it is becoming very important to know that small arms proliferation into the Great Lakes Region is becoming a major concern. 

Uganda being a major player, a stakeholder, can the minister come up with a strategy both by the Ministry of Defence and Internal Affairs on how we are going to curb the many small armies, which are spreading out there? You are aware that of late there are so many killings spread out in this country. Can the ministry come out and explain and give us a strategy, which is going to handle the many small arms proliferation in this country, especially with the surrounding porous borders with our neighbours?

On the side of the Police, I want to appreciate the work the Police has done. The Police has gained a lot of confidence with the public and we appreciate the situation they are working in much as they are still poorly facilitated. I also want to appreciate the infrastructural development, which is taking place in the countryside. 

When you go to most of the regional Police headquarters in Masaka, in Mbarara, in Kibaale, they have been constructed but it is very disappointing according to the recommendation on page 14, that it was observed that the ministry had secured donor funds to build headquarters but because of micro-economics stability, they could not access these funds. Can we request the Minister of Finance to give a full explanation as to why the Police headquarters cannot be put in place? It is very important. Police must have a home. 

The Kibuli Training School is a training school where police constables and men are supposed to access a training facility, but it is very unfortunate it has been occupied for the last four and a-half years by the Police headquarters. Most of the Police departments are still in dormitories of the Police. We need to consider putting up police headquarters and I think as a minister concerned you need to come up with a strategy to negotiate with Finance so that this macro-economic destabilization, which we are talking about, is taken into consideration. If we can bring materials, if the donors can bring materials instead of bringing foreign exchange in cash, we can be able to put up headquarters in a very fast and modest way.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, last year I was part of the team, which went to the North to assess the humanitarian security situation amid the fight against government forces by Kony rebels. Allow me to appreciate the work, which has been done by the UPDF to ensure that the war subsides. But as Parliament we need to continuously go see what the situation on the ground is. Much as we appreciate the problem has been handled very adequately by government, Parliament must be continuously updated. 

I think of late we have not been having regular reports as far as the security situation is concerned, but I very much appreciate the commanders who have done a commendable job to ensure the security situation in the North becomes better. You can access most of the districts, which have been under the Northern insurgency. I thank you very much. 

7.54
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, in debating the policy statements of the Ministries of Defence and Internal Affairs, it is very important for us to ask what the mandate of these two ministries is. What is the role of the Ministry of Defence and what is their mandate concerning security forces? This question should be answered. We all know that the mandate of the Ministries of Defence and Internal Affairs is to protect the lives and property of the citizens of this country. 

Consequently the next question must be, “To what extent can we assess whether this objective is being achieved?” The insurgency in the North has gone on for a long time and if measured in economic terms, almost a quarter of the country has been under insurgency for a very long time meaning that production and economic activities in these areas has been foregone. 

When you go further and consider the question of internally displaced persons, you will notice that almost a whole generation of children has been brought up under these conditions. In the future we are going to have human beings who are completely disoriented. This is a very serious matter. Consequently, we must accept, encourage and motivate those in charge of bringing peace and security in the country, including friends. 

We accept the fact that the quality of the army – yes, I am making a point that the quality of UPDF has substantively improved and many will testify to this fact. In fact the distinctive transformation in this sector can be viewed from the fact that these soldiers are no longer an army that is used to instill fear but a professional and civilised one that is doing a very good job and we commend them for that. 

However, while we commend them, we must encourage the Minister of Defence by saying, “You have a very unique opportunity because you are the first Minister of Defence who is not a Commander-In-Chief since the NRM administration.” That speaks mountains of trust for the appointing authority and for you. In fact recently the Prime Minister baptized you as a democrat with monarchic tendencies. 

What I am saying is that if peace and security can be restored during your time as Minister of Defence, you will have left a legacy that the people of Uganda will always appreciate. May I add that the insurgency in the North is causing tension, anxiety and almost pluralizing the society to unethical standards, which is very unfortunate since we already feel that we are not doing enough? Maybe it is because the minister comes from the West because had he come from the North, I think the war would have ended by now. 

This kind of thing must really change and it can only change if this insurgency is eliminated. If this insurgency is eliminated we would have – in fact I feel that the Government should give you all the resources that you need to bring about peace and order. This is because without security, which is the very essence of government, we cannot feel proud as Ugandans and as Members of Parliament most especially when some of our friends cannot stay in their houses, bring up children in their homes, produce or enjoy the peace and prosperity that is required. I hope the Minister of Defence will address this situation.

In conclusion, the Minister of Finance should address the issue of macro-economic stability. The indices of macro-economic stability include exchange rates, inflation, interest rates and Government deficit. These variables should be stable and this is very important. Inflation should be controlled because it has an impact on savings and if you cannot protect the savings of the people, you cannot produce well. 

On the other hand when you bring in equipment, machinery and materials such as cement and iron sheets and these funds are spent outside the economy, you can build barracks without destabilizing the macro-economic framework that they are arguing about. This is true. 

In conclusion, Mr Minister, you have our full support and we encourage you and we look forward to the day when insurgency will be completely eliminated and when peace, order, harmony and prosperity are restored in this country. We look forward to the day when this question of Kony will become a matter of history. I thank you very much. 

8.01
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you Madam Speaker. I am a bit disappointed because the Ministers of Finance are not present here. All four of them are not here yet we are discussing very important issues that affect security, law and order in this country. Personally I am disappointed with that ministry.

Madam Speaker, when I look at the Budget of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and in particular prisons, I realize that the capital development budget is so small and that a lot needs to be done. Of course we cannot do all things at once but there are priorities that should be handled. I was looking at the condition of the prisoners for example and realized that the number that was supposed to be accommodated in Luzira prison has more than tripled yet the services have remained constant. 

This leads to a number of problems ranging from diseases, congestion and limited supply of food. Imagine a situation of more than 1,500 inmates yet on the medical perspective the entire prison does not have an ambulance to cater for the inmates and staff. It is good that the Minister of Health is here. I think he should look into that and send one of the ambulances that he keeps on procuring, to this prison.

Madam Speaker, if you compare the capital budget of the Ministry of Internal Affairs with the one that the Minister of Defence has presented here and made a documentary, I do not know what it would look like but I believe it would be embarrassing. It would also make you think that this ministry is being marginalized. 

At one time I visited the State Minister for Internal Affairs and found that his office reception left a lot to be desired. If you went there you would not find a comfortable place to sit apart from these hard chairs of the sixties. As we looked at this documentary, we realised that Defence has done something. However, I think we still need to do a lot for the Ministry of Internal Affairs. When we talk about building for them a home, it should be taken seriously. The headquarters of the Ministry of Internal Affairs should befit them such that when you go there, you know you are going to Internal Affairs a place that maintains law and order.

About the Ministry of Defence, the documentary was good looking and we were all happy. However where did the money come from? All our colleagues have raised the concern that this money might have come from what was meant to be part of officers’ salaries. We are wondering whether the minister got retrospective authority to divert the housing allowance of soldiers to construct these barracks. 

Furthermore, I think we should not look at this case in isolation. If you looked at the Auditor-General’s report up to June 2004, it leaves a lot to be desired in this ministry. There have been a lot of financial leakages, according to the Auditor-General’s report, and in fact honourable minister, I am sorry that I have not presented a copy to you but I recall that I showed it to you in this House about two months ago. 

One outstanding issue was that of the money for auxiliary forces and specifically for the Third Division where Shs 4.5 billion has not been accounted for. When the Auditor-General’s staff went there, the man in charge of finance had disappeared. This goes to show us that a lot needs to be done in your ministry. You may have impressed some of us with your documentary but when we look at the Auditor-General’s report, it is clear that a lot still needs to be done. We would like to know when the arrears for the auxiliary forces will be cleared. Will it be this financial year? I recall that we did pass a supplementary budget here. What happened to this money and why have these people not been paid?  

Hon. Rwamirama raised the issue of disparity in the salary structure between the army officers, professionals and other public servants. Some of us have relatives serving in the Army and in the PGB and we have noticed that privates in PGB earning about Shs 245,000 while privates fighting in the North are earning Shs 140,000 per month. 

We raised this issue under the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee last year because there was an extra budget for the PGB in there. I think we need to iron this out because the information we are getting from your officers implies that you need to pay them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

8.08
MS JANE ALISEMERA (Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also add my voice to that of my colleagues in thanking the committee for the work well done. I also want to thank the ministry because from the documentary we could see that the army barracks has got a new face. The buildings looked very nice on the screen and I hope that the work is not shoddy. I am encouraged and happy that when these soldiers go to war, their wives will be left in better places than the previous maama ingia pole kind of houses.  

I also want to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs because these days we see many patrol cars and for the first time we are seeing some in Bundibugyo district as well. Also there are more policemen and police officers on the road, which means that we are recruiting more. We hope we shall get more police to fill the areas in this country.  

However, I want to say that I have visited many areas including Pabo camp in the North. When I looked at the office it was in a sorry state. It was as if they had hired a sort of toilet and turned it into an office. I thought that was very bad and that it needed some renovation before people could start using it.

On the Immigration Department, I want to bring to the attention of the minister that they created a border post in Busunga, Bundibugyo district and sent there an officer. However, that officer does not have anywhere to do his work from nor does he have anywhere to sleep. This man is stranded, though he is earning a salary.

On the issue of retired officers on the Army, I have been wondering why the filling of forms for pensions cannot be decentralized. Recently my office here at Parliament was invaded by veterans from Bundibugyo who had come to Bombo to fill in forms but had nowhere to stay. They had no transport back and some of them had borrowed money that I was supposed to refund. Why can’t some of these things be decentralized in the districts so that the work is done there and only one person is sent to deliver those forms to Bombo? 

Some of these retired veterans applying for leave allowance are told to fill leave forms of nine years in order to get that allowance. So you can imagine the fleet of veterans coming to Bombo and having nowhere to stay?

The veterans are also facing a problem concerning their cheques. Some of them are given cheques with their names misspelt. It is common knowledge that in the entire Western region it is only in the greater Ankole and greater Kigezi that you find the name Mugisha. In the rest of the mid west and the other side the name is spelt Mugisa. When these people are joining the Army they give their real names but somehow along the way they get misspelt. 

You find cases of Mugisha being called Mugisa or Kule being called Okule. I have been to Bombo to try and rectify the situation because these cases are causing problems at the banks where these veterans are denied their money. When I visited the office in Bombo I was told that they imagine that all names like Mugisha are spelt that way as if they do not have real records of their staff. Is it a deliberate move to confuse these people? If the money is not there, they should be informed other than being given cheques only to go to the bank to be told that the cheque is not theirs. Over 50 people from my district have been following cheques since 2001 and when I went to check it was the same countrywide. I do not know why they confuse those names?

I would like to request the minister to improve on communication gadgets especially those of the Police. There are areas that are hard to reach for example Lake Albert and Bundibugyo which are separated by a range of mountains. When there is a problem a person from Lake Albert cannot communicate to the Police Commander in Bundibugyo because of lack of communication gadgets. 

I request the Minister of Internal Affairs that when time comes for supplying these communication gadgets some of the areas that are hard to reach should be considered first so that such problems are not encountered. We have for example only one police officer on Lake Albert commanding the whole border region. When he gets a problem he cannot talk to the Police on the other side and this has become a very big problem for those officers.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I want to talk about prisons in the various districts. These prisons are in a sorry state and some of them even have potholes. When you are imprisoned there it is a real punishment and you would rather be beaten instead of sleeping in those police cells. You find that there are potholes in the cells and one cannot even lie down. Imagine potholes in buildings! I request the honourable minister to purchase some cement and fill some of these holes in the police and prison cells in the districts. Thank you very much.

8.20
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all I think we should not get tired of reminding the Minister of Internal Affairs to take action on illegal immigrants. We cannot have a country where everybody can come and get employment or do petty business as if we do not have public interests. Our people are without jobs and yet there are so many foreigners coming here. We must continue reminding the minister and government until action is taken.

Madam Speaker, when I sat on the committee investigating election violence we were told that the Police was grossly undermanned. Then we had a Police Force of 15,000 and I heard of late that even this number has gone down. Why can’t government reinforce the manpower of the Police significantly? We need an effective Police Force and one of the reasons for investigations taking so long is because we just do not have enough manpower. I would like to appeal to government to take action on this matter. I know that in the report of the committee it has been said that 4,000 new police officers have been recruited. That brings the number to 19,000, but that is not good enough.  

Police welfare has always been a problem that we have talked about in this House. I was very impressed when I saw in the video that the minister is constructing brand new barracks for the UPDF. That is great. Why can’t we have something done for the Police as well so that there is some reasonable improvement in their welfare? Once again I appeal to you, please, let us have an effective Police Force.

With regard to Defence, I would also like to share the same sentiments with other colleagues that this money that the minister used to construct barracks should in due course be reimbursed and I hope with interest because this is a typical case of borrowing. By the way, this was diversion of funds from money voted for allowances that was spent on construction. This is diversion and indiscipline concerning budgetary matters. 

However, one thing that really pleased me when I saw the video is the work that has been done with this money. I think the minister must be commended. This is because the money could have been diverted and misused but this money was put to good use and for this I commend him. Of course he did it in good faith in an attempt to try and improve the welfare of the officers but at the end of the day this money still belongs to these people and I think it is important for it to be subsequently reimbursed.

Madam Speaker, we have seen people going for training in Jinja and among them former Army Commanders. In my view these men have reached the end of the hierarchy in the Army. If you are going to train them, what are you training them for? Is there anything else that they are going to do, considering the fact that they have reached a time when they should actually be relieved and other people given the opportunity to take over? I do not know the rationale behind training so many of these former commanders of the Army. Maybe the minister could explain this to us?  

I quite agree with colleagues that in the old days professionals in the Army used to enjoy good benefits. In fact people were dying to go and work as doctors, lawyers and engineers in the Army. Unfortunately today the situation has changed. We are seeing a lot of professionals complaining, not only doctors but even lawyers. They are saying that their colleagues who are working in the mainstream civil service have a much better deal than they have in the Army. Therefore, I think that there is need to look into the terms and conditions of service of professionals who are hired in the armed forces.

Madam Speaker, concerning officers who retire, I think the Ministry of Defence should not emulate what is happening to other people who retire and die before they get their pensions. I think when people retire they should be given their packages. I have friends who have retired and they are really desperate. Something should be done about this. 

I also want to ask, “Do soldiers ever take leave?” I have a relative we have not heard from for a long time. One moment we hear he is in this part of the country and the next time he is elsewhere. Do they ever get the opportunity to take leave and go and see their families or are they supposed to be transferred all the time without considering their own welfare?

Finally, we have about 3,000 disabled combatants in Mubende. You see we disabled people do not want to be institutionalised because if you put disabled people together, you increase their misery. When they look around someone is limping and another has a broken leg! The Ministry of Defence should rehabilitate these people and resettle them in their respective communities instead of crowding them in Mubende. I appeal to the Ministry of Defence to do just that because it is not a pleasant sight to see these disabled people crowded in one institution. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

8.28
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): I thank you, Madam Speaker. As a trained soldier I will be very brief. My first contribution is on this issue of ceilings. This issue has appeared in most of the presentations of the various sectors. I request that you direct Finance to come to Parliament and make a statement on this issue so that we can agree on the way forward. You may have noticed that hon. Kamuntu and hon. Elioda Tumwesigye had different versions yesterday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes honourable members, throughout this Budget session a number of ministries have reported that they had procured funds to carry on their projects but the Ministry of Finance stopped them from using these funds because they claimed that the economy would be destabilized. The Ministries in charge of Water, Health and the Police raised this issue. We really need to address this issue and you are right, Capt. Matovu.

CAPT. MATOVU: My second issue concerns soldiers’ salaries and arrears. I would like the minister to address this in specific and simple terms so that after here if I met Pte Okello or Pte Ogwang I would not know what to tell them. This is because I do not seem to see any hope or a clear way forward in resolving this matter. 

Thirdly, concerning the Karamoja disarmament, the report talks about a joint disarmament programme; I would recommend that government get interested together with our neighbours in addressing the question of the source of these arMs We need to ask ourselves where these guns are coming from. 

In the papers I have noticed a number of people who have been murdered like Mrs Kiyingi, Samuel of Send-a-Cow, a young boda boda man I do not know where from, Isingoma in Mbarara, Capt. Musisi name it. Whose guns are these and where do they come from? Under the National Focal Point Person (NFPP) and UNDP there is a good programme concerning small arms and weapons. This programme is aimed at helping affected countries in the Great Lakes Region and the rest of Africa come up with laws to force manufacturers of these guns in developed countries to mark these guns and ammunition.  

I recall that in Kyaliwajala where this man Samuel was murdered, in an area of about one square kilometre we recovered 35 guns. Whose guns were these and can they be traced back? If we made laws that enforce that manufacturers brand these arms it would be easy to trace the owners. But as it is these guns are open cheques and until we enforce this law to ease tracking of arms, we are in danger.  

Concerning Police welfare in the report, we are concerned about arrears for the UPDF. When health workers strike they are looked into immediately and for the teachers they were given some promises. What about our Police who are improving on their attempts to keep us safe? 

About uniforms for the Police, I request the honourable minister to answer this on Oath. Is it true that policemen get two pairs of uniform a year? Have you known of cases where policemen buy themselves uniforms? Do you have it on record anywhere? Depending on the answers you give I will lay some papers here tomorrow.

About the issue of ex-service men, I request that a circular be sent to RDCs and chairmen, LC V explaining all this to ease and settle this matter once for all.

Lastly, concerning housing allowances, I want to change my original stand on this issue and say that Shs 5,000 especially for the men is too little and one cannot get a room for this amount of money. I feel for these officers who are defending this country and are made to move around the country when they have families. 

There are three types of welfare for a soldier: welfare at the front lines, that is the bullets, the food and the treatment; welfare at peacetime entails creation, production; and welfare of the family. One needs this in order to have a settled mind and protect this country.  The officers are few. If the Army does not house them why can’t they be given this token money so that they can enjoy their work and protect this country? Thank you.

8.30
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am happy that the challenges facing our security organs such as hostile environment, lack of stationery in offices, lack of enough accommodation, communication and transport are being addressed. We are happy about the progress. 

I want to inform the honourable minister that during the time when I was an RDC I interacted with officers of the Army and if it wasn’t that the Army does not allow its officers to riot, these officers would have rioted against these reductions. They are not happy. I did not find a single officer who told me that they were happy about these reductions. Therefore, my plea is that these are also Ugandans who are working. Let us look for resources elsewhere, refund their money and pay them their little housing allowance. (Applause)

Secondly, security personnel like the Police, Prisons and UPDF put in more time than any other person. They are on duty day and night yet when you look at their minimum pay it is only Shs 140,325. I think we should look into this and either pay them overtime or any other allowance that will improve their take home. If you stop and consider, who of us works 24 hours a day? These people are on duty all the time and sometimes in hard to reach areas yet they are not considered. Why don’t we consider them? Are they not as human as we are?

My colleague raised another issue of whether these officers are still getting their rations. There used to be Army shops where officers could buy commodities at reduced prices. Is the situation still the same? Maybe the minister will explain this.

Concerning Local Administration Police, as we speak they have no law to guide them. They are not provided for under the Local Government Act, the Police Act and they are not directly under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I think a law concerning Local Administration Police and other auxiliary forces should come as quickly as possible because right now we have a problem.

Honourable minister, I would like to know whether you have made provision for the Shs 160 million that you owe to the people of Kyamugashi after buying their land to construct a barracks. This land has already been taken over yet you still owe these people money.

I also have a feeling that promotion at lower ranks takes a very long time. As we streamline the forces, promotions at lower ranks should also be given some special privileges.  

We have also been talking about payment of LDUs and home guards who have been assisting us during the war. I have been working in the Rwenzori Region and the LDUs who fought against the ADF in Kasese, Kamwenge, Kabarole and Bundibugyo still have their payments pending. I do not know whether there is provision for them in this Budget. If not the honourable minister should come up with something to handle this issue.

I would also like to know why retrenched soldiers are not entitled to pension. If this is the case then soldiers who are casualties should not be retrenched.  My view is that they should be given skills that are valuable to the Army for example they can be trained in accountancy so that they keep working in the Forces.

Furthermore, death gratuity for our forces is a nightmare. I do not know why in each district or at least at regional level an office is not established to assist the widows and orphans in accessing the death gratuity that is due to them. Coming to Bombo is expensive, as one of our colleagues was saying.

Lastly, I would like to find out from the Minister of Internal Affairs who is responsible for juvenile remand homes. Most districts are operating in very queer conditions because there are no juvenile remand homes and they do not know where to put these juveniles. Is it the Ministry of Internal Affairs that is responsible or is it the responsibility of the districts?  Thank you very much, honourable Speaker.

8.35
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank the committee for the report. I will confine my comments on the report and start with page four. It is good news that we are getting a machine. I hope it will assist in analysing and detecting crimes like those that have been committed recently.  

On page 7 of this report the committee says that the Department of Immigration is installing four border monitoring systems in Malaba, Busia, Entebbe and at its headquarters. However, as you are aware our borders are porous. I wish to ask the ministry to come up with a method of monitoring aliens who are already inside the country. 

There should be a method of community policing to find out safe neighborhoods because there are so many people who are already inside the country and there is no way of detecting who is here illegally or legally as my colleagues have already pointed out.

On page 10 of the report the committee mentioned that the ministry would purchase 22 motorcycles to aid programmes and activities in the districts. This shows how low the budget for this sector is. In my constituency there is a big Police Station called Nagalama Police Station. It covers an area radius of about 20 kilometres but they have only one motorcycle. There is an O.C. Administration and an OC in charge of CID. These officers are forced to use only one motorcycle for that entire radius. 

This police station used to have what they used to call a tender, which was a vehicle that they used to move to other areas but it is no more. This is an example of a sub-district police station with only one motorcycle. I do not know of what effect 22 motorcycles are going to be. I think the ministry and we have to look at this programme more seriously especially that of upcountry Police Stations. If you invite them for any criminal investigation exercise, they will ask for transport and rightly so because they do not have it. 

We are made to understand that there is a proposal to have a central police post in every sub-county. I have not seen it covered or hinted anywhere in the policy statement that I have read. I do not know what plan there is for this or whether it is going to remain on paper.

Madam Speaker, on page 19 of this report there are planned and proposed activities and programmes for financial year 2005/2006 and specifically (d) talks about standardisation of vehicles. I have not understood this. Can the Ministry of Defence explain how it proposes to standardise vehicles and what this will involve so that we know how much money will be required?

Concerning page 24, I thank hon. Kiwalabye for the issues he pointed out. However, most of these people have a belief that the Queen is sending money for their association. I remember sometime back I went to the minister and he explained this to me. However, this explanation should be given to these people countrywide so that they know whether or not the Queen is sending them any money.   

I also seek clarification from either the Speaker or anyone else who might know. Where do these documents that are laid on Table end up? Several documents have been laid on the Table but when you go to the library they are not there. I wonder whether we should note the clerks-at-table so that we run to them for these documents. This is because there are documents that have been laid here that we are interested in.  

I have no problem with the budget of the Ministry of Defence, provided efforts are made to modernise the Army. We want our Army to be – as long as the Army is productive, I think the Army needs most of the money.  In many countries you find the best engineers, doctors, and scientists in the Army. So as long as you can move towards that direction, whether they start manufacturing cars, bicycles and getting the best vaccines here, I think we should exploit the discipline that exists in the Army to utilise them fully.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The documents, which are laid here, are kept in the library, and if you have a problem finding something, you should let me know because this is the first time you have said it. You let us know which ones you cannot find and I get them for you.

8.40
MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I have been directed by hon. Yiga, a back bencher, that I should be brief but, Madam Speaker, you are in charge.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is right.

MR GAGAWALA: The most important thing I wanted to get clarification on from the chairperson of this committee is, in the process of looking through the budget proposals, whether he saw that there are standards in both the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Defence? Are we coming up, because we found the Ministries of Local Government and Public Service lacking standards, and I expected that one of the most important things, which we should be doing, is to measure the standards, which we expect each ministry to be aiming at? It is not in this paper so I am waiting to hear from the chairperson whether there are any standards.  

By standards we mean not only for the ministry but also for the UPDF, because without standards we are aiming at nothing. Are our standards in the Police Force comparable to the standards in the British Police or in the Kenyan Police or in the Tanzanian Police?  

We are now becoming uniform as a region, are our standards moving towards something to be proud of? I think this is very important; and it is very important because it is those standards, which can force us to vote more money or to deduct money from the budget being allocated depending on the performance parameters, which we expected to achieve, say, accidents and security.

These are the statistics because the Ministry of Works told us they expected to repair 10,000 kilometers of gravel roads, 3,000 kilometers of bitumen roads, and they did this. In this report it is difficult to judge the performance based on statistics; and without statistics we are just voting for money with no –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Wambuzi, have you read the policy statement?

MR GAGAWALA: I have, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And there are no percentages there?

MR GAGAWALA: There are no facilities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then do not ask the chairperson because the policy statement comes from the minister.

MR GAGAWALA: But it is the chairperson to ask those questions on behalf of you –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, ask the minister directly, but do not ask the chairman to report on things, which are not really in his documents.  

MR GAGAWALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for correcting me. I am now redirecting this question to the minister. 

The other thing, which I expect in this budget is, when we vote money per capita, is the amount of money we are voting to the Ministry of Defence comparable to other countries? If it is really very low, then it is our duty to find something to improve. This evening it is clear our economists are not doing well. 

If the economists of this country can block money to come to build police headquarters, what does that mean? It means we are importing too much and we are exporting nothing. If it is true that if we import too much it will destabilise the economy because we have no counter exports to balance it. It is their duty to force us to do that.  

Otherwise, they would tell us not to act, just sit down. Somebody has got to take the blame; it has to be the Ministry of Finance to take this blame because we cannot fail to build police headquarters when actually somebody is trying to give us the money to do it and our young boys will be employed. So we are actually suffering double when the Ministry of Finance is on one side saying Ministry of Defence should do the work and then is blocking; Police should do the work, then you are actually saying you should not get facilities.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of infrastructure, the infrastructure of the Army is a job of the Government; it has never been a job of the men. You cannot expect a man to contribute money so that bullets are bought and the gun is repaired because his gun is not working or is a ramshackle. If the officer is sleeping in a ramshackle house it is not really his job to start looking for money to do this. I have been compelled to accept the explanation of the Minister of Defence that actually if it were reallocating rather than deducting, that would be okay. But if it is a reduction, it is very important for this money to be refunded to both the officers and men –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, as a general principle, what do you then say about taxpayers who actually pay taxes, they have been paying graduated tax to build public institutions, those who give Pay As You Earn (PAYE)?

MR GAGAWALA: Madam Speaker, the standard way of handling Police, Prisons and the Army is uniform in the whole world. The British Police has never actually started contributing its salary to build the British barracks, not even the Americans, not even the Japanese, not in Kenya, not in Tanzania. I think it is like expecting a doctor to say that they should deduct his salary so that medicine is provided. These are tools, which should be given, to do a good job. This is the position I am trying to articulate to the minister.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, really hon. Wambuzi Gagawala, you cannot possibly be suggesting that someone should be accommodated and be paid housing allowance on top of being accommodated because there must be a clear distinction. What I said was that because we were not providing accommodation and we wanted to help them establish that mama ingia pole thing, we said this Shs 5,000 is for that purpose. 

Now that we have decided to accommodate you by construction of barracks, you cannot have both. Well, I do not know whether that technicality is reallocation or whatever. I am simply saying that the premise of the argument, which was hon. Sabiiti’s and hon. James Mwandha’s argument and others, that in fact it is unconstitutional because we are deducting their wage or salary, is not true because we are not doing that.  

MR GAGAWALA: Madam Speaker, I sort of conceded from the presentation he put. The only contradiction with the argument of the minister is that there are some people who are nowhere near enjoying those facilities yet and now by the action of the ministry those people are also not receiving because they are hoping they would be enjoying what they would have seen. Whether they have seen, we should congratulate the Ministry of Defence, it is beautiful, it is a revolution; you have now done the paradigm shift not only in the infrastructure, which you did already in the men. 

Our men are okay, but we are saying the issue of infrastructure is that of the Executive, the Government and Parliament, it should not be left to the men. And those who are already enjoying those facilities certainly should not get. But those who have not yet got must continue getting their allowances, and if it was deducted wrongly it should be refunded, if they are still not enjoying. That is our argument, not more than that.  

Madam Speaker, the issue of ghost workers or ghost anything anywhere should have been highlighted whether it is still on board. 

Finally, it is very important for us to change. You see, the original prison buildings in the whole country are of 1945. If you go to Luzira you see the name and the year when they were constructed. Nothing has been done. Those prisons all over the country were built on colonial standards and they were meant to really torture the natives. It is very important at this stage because of our independence to start rethinking of what a standard prison and police station should be like. 

I thank the Government for having built the Nalufenya Police Station. If Nalufenya Police Station could be the standard then it would be okay, but there are some police stations even in Kampala here as you go to Entebbe you enter a police cell with forty people in a room of three by three meters. We think this is criminal, it is inhuman; that is what was done to our grandfathers when they were being shipped to America. 

So I think it is now time for the Government to rethink of what the proper standards for an acceptable prison are. Even if somebody is going to be killed tomorrow and he has been condemned to death, he has got to be treated humanely; otherwise we give a bad example to the person who it is being done to. He will eventually do it to other people when he comes out of there. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the space.

8.50
MR PAJOBO BRUNO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, I will be brief. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for making a very good report. I also thank the Minister of Defence for the good work. We are very happy for particularly being enabled to travel from here to Arua without being ambushed along Pakwach Road.

I would like also to comment very little about the welfare of the Police. I think this we have been talking time and again about the welfare of Police. First of all accommodation, the Police houses are roofed with asbestos and asbestos was banned worldwide. I think the Ministry of Internal Affairs should try to re-roof these houses in order to save our people from getting diseases out of these outdated houses.

Secondly, I also appreciate that the Police built very nice offices for their people.  I went to Kibaale and saw the police headquarters looking very nice. My dear when I went to see the people who came out - who work in that nice office - their housing, I really said, my God! If they take some of us here to sleep in those houses, you would be hospitalised the following day because you cannot allow policemen who really protect our lives to sleep in such places! The issue of housing for police should be considered seriously. We say our Police are corrupt but surely if you see the way they are tortured, why can’t we improve the welfare of our people?  

The other issue is the way in which the Government salaries are paid. The policy in Uganda is generally very poor. You either become more corrupt then they will reward you by increasing your salary or you do not perform at all then they raise your salary. We do not have a uniform salary, why can’t we have a salary structure for the whole country? 

Why do we select people, tomorrow let teachers go on strike they will be called and be given an increment. Others will go on strike tomorrow, they will demonstrate, hospitals will strike and they will be considered for a salary increment. But the Police and Army who have no right to strike, nobody talks for them they have to remain where they are; they do not give them an increment because they cannot resign. Are you now giving me permission to go and mobilise the Army and Police so that we go on strike and then they can be given a salary increment? 

I think that is not a good thing and I think that we want our people surely to be remunerated well, treat everybody well. Even during Idi Amin’s regime there was a salary structure even civil servants and everybody would follow that but today we are lacking that. It is a high time the Government streamlined the payment system and salary structure for everybody and then we see what we do. 

Then what about the civilians who are working in the Army? They should be seconded and then at the same time get allowances of working in those areas. Let us say doctors, give them the same treatment. I do not see the reason why you underpay the doctor in the Army and then pay the one in Mulago more. I do not see the reasons. So, we appeal to government to look into this issue seriously. 

Thank you very much, but I would like to touch prisons. I do not know whether this House is aware that Uganda has been accused of using prisoners as forced labour and thereby going against the Convention 29 bylaw prohibiting forced labour. Our prisoners are used as forced labourers and the case has been a bylaw for two terms, since June last year. Why can’t we really treat our prisoners well and have some time – their being in prison does not mean that they are condemned to die. So, these people should be treated according to the laws of international norms not just to torture them like that. I think we have a duty to do as a nation.  

Then the prison warden, whether some of them have got uniforms or not, you can see them moving with torn clothes, I think it is time for us to look into these issues very seriously if you want our people to work. Why are we treating our people like that? It is high time the ministers concerned looked into these matters seriously.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much. There is a promise for those combatants. Although we call them Amin’s soldiers, some of them I do not know whose soldiers, these soldiers had been promised payment while some of them were still in exile. They came back and they said they would be paid Shs 240,300 but about 3,000 of these people have not yet been paid. Some of us are moving for votes, we need their votes. We need also to keep them happy so that when we talk to them they receive us as human beings. Thank you very much, for giving me chance to contribute.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members. Hon. Awongo, I will give you the first opportunity on Monday morning; you will speak first. Let me ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to respond, and please be brief, I think you have got a lot of support, so you can abridge your answer.

9.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. Excuse my voice, I have flu. I have tried to group a number of issues as raised by honourable members so I may not refer to each individual member by name, but by issues.

The issue that involves illegal immigrants, I think has been raised by a number of people and I would like to say that the Ministry of Internal Affairs under the immigration department has been faced with lack of adequate staff and recently, we have put out an advertisement and recruited some more officers in order to detect these illegal immigrants and be able to move against them.  

Secondly Madam Speaker, we also did issue a statement in the press warning all immigrants whose status is irregular to report to the Ministry of Internal Affairs so that those who can be able to regularise their status can do so and those who know very well that they are here illegally can also inform us voluntarily. We intend to move against these people at a time that we cannot be able to announce now. Honourable members, you will be aware that we have done this, one swoop around the city of Kampala and we did net quite a number of illegal immigrants and many of them were deported.

We have a problem that some of the people who come here even illegally, for example the people who came to work on Nakivubo channel, some of the expatriates, after their work expired, disappeared into the country and eventually we have been tracing some of these people carrying out different kinds of trade whereas they came for certain purposes and they disappeared. 

We are calling upon the general public to let us know if you are aware of any illegal immigrants that are within your area. You will accept that even in the US and the UK, there are illegal immigrants and we must – let me not say Ugandans - but they are there. I want to inform you that the Ministry of Internal Affairs is gaining capacity. We have had Cabinet accept that we need to increase our structure and while we have had only one commissioner in immigration, we are now turning into a directorate with a number of commissioners responsible for different sectors and there is going to be focus on these sectors. 

We are also looking for money and I have asked government that we can have adequate transport to be able to move around the country and also be able to man different centers and borders as all of you honourable members know them.

Police welfare, yes, this is wanting and we are aware in the Ministry of Internal Affairs that this is wanting. But it is the resource envelope that is limiting us and our case is presented year in, year out and the little we get fortunately we put it to good use. Many members here will give evidence or testimony that we have had some interventions done in some of the places. 

Now we are also moving on to constructions, which are being done by our own construction unit, and this is helping us putting up barracks and some houses for our staff and we will move as resources improve and are provided to us.

This issue of numbers of the police, this year the Cabinet has approved the recruitment of 4,000 extra police personnel and some money has already been provided by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in order to begin that recruitment and training. This is towards equipping ourselves to be able to man the elections that many people have talked about in their contributions. We will keep improving the numbers. 

Somebody wanted to know what would be our ideal number that we would require. I think we would require a number of about 50,000 and right now we stand at something like 14,000. So with the 4,000 maybe we will reach 19,000. 

We intend to use the Local Administration Police and the Prisons officers during the elections. We will use the entire sister organisations that are within the Ministry of Internal Affairs in making sure that we police the elections and we have fair and free elections.

Government is also addressing the issue of transport. Last year we got 27 pick-ups trucks plus some 10 vehicles, which were for VCCU, and this year we have put in our budget for more vehicles. Definitely as you have seen, these are inadequate especially in view of the more districts that have been provided. It is a big problem that we have to reckon with, but government is aware of this constraint and I think the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will listen to our pleas as we go on.

The issue of identification of guns, hon. Matovu did refer to the 35 guns that were arrested or impounded within the area of the murder of the manager of Send-a-Cow.  I want to say that every gun is identified and I am sure Capt. Matovu is aware of this.  In my office as I approve licenses for guns, each license that I give is to a specific gun, with a specific number that is well identified. 

The impounding of those 35 guns was for the sake of ballistic examination in order to find out the bullet - where did the bullet come from? Because part of the bullet was recovered from the body of the late Nanswali and identification of the gun is being carried out by ballistic experts in order to be able to pin down that particular gun. 

It was 35 guns that were seized within the area because when the cordoning was done, everybody that was coming from his guard area was netted and it was not because all of them were in that area but everybody that came into the circle was netted. So they may have come from a distance, but all of them within that area of cordoning were rounded up. That is why the number was that big. 

The small arms programme within the Ministry of Internal Affairs is going to do a good job in mopping up illicit guns around the country. The only problem is that it is a new project; the funding is new, we are appealing to international organisations, which are sympathetic to the problem of illegal arms, to come to our aid and I am sure within a year or so we shall probably have a project running, which can help us with this. We are not working alone; we are working together with our neighbours. We have meetings, in fact sometime next week there is going to be a regional meeting here and we have attended many regional meetings within our neighbouring countries to develop the strategy of handling these guns.

On the issue of local government police and local government prisons, I want to say that the central government would like to take the local government police and prisons and our Bills are in the process. The Prisons Bill has been for the first time in this House and it is with the committee and the Police Bill has been gazatted and will soon be coming to Parliament and government is committed to taking over these prisons.  

I would like to say, for the people who have complained about the working of prisoners in different locations of the country, that because of resources in the local government, it is very difficult to maintain these people. Either you say that these prisoners should sit at the prisons headquarters and starve to death or do some work and earn some little amount of money and food in order to be able to live. 

I can even tell you that even in our societies, there are homes which cannot afford two meals a day and these are free homes with a wife and husband but they cannot afford meals but what about prison? Really, you should have pity on these people. The people who manage them do their best to make sure that these people live and at the same time you should know that these are people who are being rehabilitated. 

We do not have ambulances within the Prisons Department but we use whatever means of transport we have for transporting prisoners to hospitals and clinics for treatment. I think we put in our request to the Minister of Health so that we can be allocated some ambulances for some of our hospitals. 

The building of the Police headquarters at the moment is at a halt because the problem is that what we had anticipated or we were planning for did not take off as we had anticipated and we are still shopping around to see if we can find an agreeable project or programme that can help us. We have got some little money, which we have and actually what we have decided is we are going to start with the little money we have and whoever wants to help us will find us going at whatever stage.

The NGO board and most staff we have, yes this is a problem but of late my permanent secretary I think has posted some people to the NGO board. The number is not adequate; we need computerisation, we are moving on that. We would like the committee to move first on the NGO Bill. The problem with NGOs these days is that they have become complicated; they do not want to be supervised. 

The Ministry of Internal Affairs has got the mechanism of looking into these NGOs and they do not want their homes to be under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. They want to be somewhere where they cannot be looked into and they are fighting very hard that they do not remain under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which has got the mechanism we are looking after.

Prisons farms’ capitalisation: the issue is funds really is bad, otherwise our farms are doing the best. I can assure you the feeding of prisoners, even within the central government, is being subsidised by what is being done at our central farMs If it were not for that the situation would be worse within the prisons, even central government prisons. The country and government is grateful to the Prisons Department for the entrepreneurship that they do to make sure that the farms can be able to feed the prisoners to a great extent. 

The UNRF II funds, I want to tell this Parliament that out of the Shs 4 billion that was agreed on in the negotiations with this force, we have already paid Shs 3.3 billion and it is only Shs 7 million that is left to be paid and that is even in the budget of this year. It is going to be totally settled and the issues that are being raised that they are settled and so on, is really not government’s problem because we have given them the money to settle themselves.

Amnesty Commission operations and settling of reporters should be uniform for all reporters and right now we have a bank project, which is settling reporters and I want honourable members who have complaints about settling of their reporters to bring information to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and will I tackle it with the Amnesty Commission.  

Identity cards: we are in the process of procuring the production of identity cards. Bids have been opened and firms have competed and soon I think the company that will win will begin on the issue of first of all compiling the data base because before we talk about identity cards we need to collect the data base, a national identify card is not a simple matter. You have to do it in a thorough manner and once this is done then the cards will be produced by a firm and government will undertake to provide these cards to the people in order to identify them and I think this will help also in immigration to be able to identify our own people and others and it will be easy then to pick up those who are not supposed to be here. 

Madam Speaker, the last one that I have to talk about is remand homes. Remand homes are not the mandate of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. It is the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which takes care of that. I want to thank honorable members for the contributions that they have made.

Uniforms for the Police, we provide uniforms for the Police, two pairs of uniforms normally, but sometimes when we have budgetary problems you could find that we have been able to provide one set of uniforMs But then purchase of uniforms by individuals is not known to management but there is – Capt. Matovu you can also buy yourself gumboots and use them while you are serving in the Army, these would be your preference as an individual, but we provide uniform.

I thank honourable members for the contributions they have made. I think they have been constructive. Continue supporting our ministry. I want to thank you for the appreciation that you have given to us that even with the hard situation or conditions that we are in, the Police has done it best and the Prisons is also doing its best, and other Departments of Immigration and NGOs are also going to pull up their socks so that they can be able to live up to the standards that you require of them.

Permit me finally to thank the chairperson and the entire committee for the good relationship that we have together. We work very amicably and we are very happy with the committee. We are not confrontational at all but we help each other to build this country. Thank you very much.

9.20
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have identified 25 issues, which I need to respond to and they are very serious matters, which I think I should respond to quite comprehensively. I just wondered, since you said that hon. Awongo would be No. 1 on the speaking list of Monday, can I request that I be No. 2?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there is already No. 1 and No. 2 for Monday. I have disappointed the Minister of Internal Affairs on his statement, so he is No. 1 on Monday, Presidential and Foreign Affairs is No. 2, No. 3 is the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. 

MR MBABAZI: Okay. First is the question of salary increment, the 10 percent. Madam Speaker, I thank the committee for a good report, except on the salary increment, which I will explain in a moment. I must express my appreciation for the manner in which the committee handled its business, it was businesslike and it was very interactive and I think the report is a clear reflection of the outcome of that level of co-operation. So, I would like to register my and my ministry’s appreciation of the committee, I thank them.

On the salary increment issue, Madam Speaker, I think every year I make a statement on it because it arises every year. The point is, as the committee reported, that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did announce an increment of 10 percent for the remuneration of public workers, including the military obviously. But unfortunately the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not disburse the 10 percent under the wage bill of the Ministry of Defence therefore we were not able to pay it.  

We have been negotiating with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development over the years on this issue; we have really hit a dead end because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development argues that this 10 percent should be accommodated in the allocation to the Ministry of Defence. If that was to be done then it would mean that some of the planned activities, which the Cabinet and Parliament would have passed then by doing so, by reallocating funds that Parliament had passed, would suffer and our argument had always been that maybe this is not what was intended. So, it is a matter, which we continue to discuss with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and we hope one day we will find a solution. 

Secondly, let me link this with the question of deductions. Deductions of housing allowance for construction of barracks, I have responded to it and I really do not have much more to add.

I just wanted to say, Madam Speaker, that the Army personnel as someone said are human beings like you and me. It is true that obviously they do not have a right to strike because their striking is lethal, if they strike you know what it means. To strike against their own government would be to do the contrary of what they are duty bound to do, to protect the Constitution, so they will not strike. But this business of MPs in Parliament everyday saying, “You, Government why can’t you consider them, these soldiers are human beings, why do you deduct their salary, why do you keep their 10 percent?” 

I really think we have to reconsider this matter so that when we are speaking here we know we are speaking to the public, including the soldiers. I have had occasion one time to address this issue in an area where the local leadership took it upon itself to speak on behalf of these soldiers. These soldiers are not voiceless; it is not true to say that these soldiers are voiceless. Even in this Parliament, I am here, I have a voice, I am their voice, the direct voice of the Army in Parliament is me, but in addition they have MPs representing the UPDF, they can speak. 

So when like in the case I have in mind public leaders go and speak and incite the soldiers, you could even experience mutiny because of this –(interjection)– I am ready to give way if honourable –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, members expressed themselves vigorously in what they said. Let the minister also respond as vigorously as he can.

MR MBABAZI: Yes. I really think that when leaders speak especially in public we must weigh the full implications of what we say and know that this is what you want to achieve. Fortunately, the UPDF is a well-disciplined Army and it is not likely to be incited whatever effort some people make.

The next question is about the decongestion. The point is well taken and as you know, Madam Speaker, this is a point, which we support and in practice decongestion has started. The Minister in charge of pacification of the North can give testimony to this. Our biggest IDP camp was Pabo, which at one time had a population of 60,000. This has now been decongested – if that is the correct word - into seven camps, and so the process is on. The process is on, I know the one who raised it is not here but I felt I should inform this House that what he is saying is very well appreciated and in fact is in practice at the moment. 

The question of retirement of officers, there were a number of questions. One was “Why promote people and retire them?” Well, those who have been promoted and retired and the number one on this list is none other Gen. Kaguta Yoweri Museveni. When we picked him to give him the rank of full General is the day he retired and there have been a few similar cases. 

Why? Because you see retirement is either in appreciation of the work you have done or it is to give you a position to perform a particular function in command. Those that have been promoted and retired, the promotion has been an expression of the appreciation and recognition of the services they have rendered to the UPDF and to the country, and I think they appreciate it and we should all appreciate it. There is nothing wrong with it. Actually that is what it ought to be.  

Recalling is also a normal process because sometimes officers retire voluntarily because they would like to go and do other business but when there is need in the establishment of the military leadership to have them back, we can recall them if they are willing to rejoin. Again there is nothing strange and nothing wrong with it. And that is what we do. This is done not only in Uganda but universally. We are not the only ones who do this; all armies practice this.

Col. Bogere, where is he?  Madam Speaker, Col. Bogere is sick and is on sick leave. He has a condition, which he has had as a medical condition for some time and we are aware of it. He has been undergoing treatment and he is still undergoing treatment. In some countries it is a legal requirement that when you fall sick you inform the employer. In Uganda it is still a voluntary act on the part of the employee – is that so? I am not aware of this. But in the case of Bogere we are aware that he is sick. We were informed, as his employers, and he is on sick leave.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are also partially his employers. So I think it would have been good to let us know because I have been reading in the press and there is no report from his family, nothing. We would appreciate Parliament being informed when your members from the UPDF fall sick.

MR MBABAZI: Okay, Madam Speaker, I have taken note of that. We will have to work out how that can be done. I do not know whether I write to the Speaker or come here and make a ministerial statement; that is all I am saying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, these are simple communications either by their families or you. It is just a simple communication; it is nothing elaborate like coming here to make a statement. Just notify the Speaker that so and so is not able to come for this reason. Whoever is responsible for him should inform the Speaker.

MR MBABAZI: The next question is about disparity of rates of remuneration for professionals in the Army and in the general Public Service.  

Madam Speaker, we have faced a bit of a problem in the Army. First of all I must say I appreciate the point being made. Why should a professional of the same training and rank in the Public Service be paid more than the professional in the Army? Generally, what we have attempted to achieve is parity of treatment. In fact, in the case of the lowest paid soldier the low - what do we call it? The lowest payment to a soldier should not be less, this is the policy we have, and it should not be less than the remuneration of an executive officer in the Public Service. So we have tried to achieve some kind of parity but in practical terms, we really hit a snag. 

For example, one member, I think it was hon. Rwamirama was talking about the problem of allowances; travel allowances and things like that. We had a situation where the driver of the Minister of Defence would be paid Shs 50,000 as night out allowance when the Army Commander, who was on the same trip was paid Shs 12,000. That was the maximum we have been paying and I do not think we have changed. 

The reason was that in the Army people move. There is a lot of movement around. If we are to pay the rates of the Public Service the entire Ministry of Defence budget would not be enough to pay allowances for the soldiers, it would not be! You see in other armies and in the past even in Uganda that is why they have officers’ messes. So when soldiers’ travel they actually live in a mess, they do not go to a hotel, and they pay nothing. They find food, accommodation and whatever they require, without payment. 

But in our case where the presumption is that when an army commander moves from here to Rukungiri he will sleep in a hotel because he has no where else to sleep and pay for food and things like that, if we were to pay them the going rate of the Public Service, the entire Defence budget would not be adequate to cover them. Therefore, again through the Army Council took a decision on that. 

I heard hon. Sabiiti make a statement, he essentially based on the ignorance of the workings of the military that the Army Council took a decision and the soldiers themselves were not involved. Well, I want to inform the House that the Army Council is the supreme, policy-making organ of the UPDF as you passed in the law here. 

Actually in practice what happens before a matter comes to the Army Council, it goes to the units for all the soldiers to participate in the debate. There is no single soldier who does not debate any serious matter, like this UPDF Bill. You remember it took a long time, why? We needed to have the opinions of all the soldiers of the UPDF in all units. So, by the time it comes to the Army Council, where all those units are obviously represented, we will also have picked opinions of the people in the Army. That is how it works.

When you hear that the Army Council has taken a decision, normally it is a decision reflecting the democratic outcome of a process of consultation of members of the Army. Therefore, when the Army Council took this decision that we pay so much less, it was because we took into consideration the fact that we did not have enough money to pay a higher rate, but it is not our desire to create a disparity of rates of remuneration between the soldiers and the Public Service and we are very determined. In fact we have a directive from the Commander-in-Chief to correct this. As soon as funds permit we will do so. 
 
The next issue was about the Army Hospital, and I want to say that, yes, the Army Hospital is really not at the level or talking of standards - the standard of the military hospitals worldwide. This is because of very serious resource constraint. So what we have decided to do now is to exchange our land in lower Mbuya with property developers and we were dealing with NSSF, before they got into trouble, to exchange that land with property developers in exchange for construction elsewhere of a first class military hospital for the UPDF and I hope we shall realize this in the near future.  

Hon. Sabiiti suggested that the existence of auxiliary forces means that security arrangements in Uganda are ad hoc. Well, obviously this is not true. The idea of an auxiliary force is to have a reserve force. We passed this in the Act, in the NRA Statute in 1992. It was in our previous military laws, it is universal that you need a standing army. This standing army needs to be small because it is expensive to maintain an army, but you need a fall back position. 

So the concept of auxiliary forces refers to a reserve force. Should the need arise, the country can respond promptly. You know when they attack you they do not give you a notice and you do not have much time to prepare. That is why you must always be prepared such that in case you are attacked you are able to mobilize yourselves in a short time to defend yourself. Actually, to have an auxiliary force is evidence that you are a well-organized society, contrary to what hon. Sabiiti was saying.

There was point made by the committee that the law does not cover the auxiliary forces. Again this is not true. Auxiliary forces are a reserve force and the UPDF Act, Chapter 307, covers it very well and as soon as the President assents to the UPDF Act, which we passed here, again it will be well covered. We may have subsidiary pieces of legislation. If you want to put flesh to the skeleton those will be necessary, but to say that auxiliary forces under our current legal regime are unlawful, is not accurate. Our law covers them.

“Why give Defence so much money when other ministries have little?” it was again asked by hon. Sabiiti. The answer is rather obvious: because peace and security is the prerequisite for development. Without that nothing else can happen. Therefore, in our planning, budgeting and whatever we do, our first priority is to establish peace and security in order to create conditions conducive for all those things you are talking about, because without this they cannot happen. I know this is only for hon. Sabiiti, all the others understand it.

Pension for ex-service men is the responsibility of the Ministry in charge of Pensions. Therefore, I will not say much about it. The role of the Ministry of Defence is simply to prepare data for individual officers who served in the Army and who are entitled to pension. Once we do that, we forward it to the Ministry of Public Service, which deals with pension. Therefore, I leave the question of pension and payment and so on to the relevant department to handle pension.

The strategy for curbing the proliferation of small arms and light weapons again is well known. I think it was asked by hon. Kasamba. “Why do you not work out a strategy?” We have one and I think the Ministry of Internal Affairs talked about it. As a matter of fact we are part of the UN effort to curb the illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons and we have had several conferences. We have got a police officer called Nabudere, who is in charge of National Proc Point, and they have held conferences. We even had an international conference organized here by them. So, there is a strategy, but it is just evolving because this is a problem, which is ever present.

The next point is why Defence is given a lot of money.  When I went to Defence in 1992, the share of the Defence budget of the national expenditure at that time had improved from 52 percent of the total budget to 44 percent. Before I went to Defence, the expenditure on Defence was 52 percent of the entire budget of the Republic of Uganda. When I went there in 1992 that improved. The share had come down to 44 percent but of course you know, as we speak now it is like No. 4 or No. 5 when you compare it with others because the Ministry of Education takes twice as much as Defence; Health also takes much more than Defence; public administration costs more than Defence. I think we are No. 4.

And if I may answer hon. Wambuzi Gagawala’s point, that how does Uganda’s expenditure on defence compare with other defence expenditures elsewhere, Madam Speaker, our Defence expenditure now is about 1.7 percent of GDP, the average in the region is 2.5 percent of GDP. We are actually one of the lowest in the region and in the world. When you take a country like Zimbabwe, at the time when this war in Congo broke out, in 1998, Zimbabwe was spending about US $400 million on its Army. 

At that time our budget was about US $160 million. Kenya was spending at the same level as Zimbabwe. Even now they spend much more on defence than we do. So, when you look at what we are able to do to defend the country, the things we have done to bring about qualitative change and quantitative change, not only in Uganda but also in the region, we have really done it at the lowest possible conceivable rate in terms of expenditure. 

The United Nations (UN) Committee, the UN panel of experts could not believe it. In fact they thought that we were telling them lies, that we are concealing some information when we gave them our budgetary provisions; and we said, “This is what the Ministry of Defence uses”. They could not believe it. Up to now they are still trying to look for other sources, and of course they are not there as we speak.

The Auditor-General’s report, which my good friend hon. Okupa referred to that there was a loss of Shs 4.5 billion, is not quite accurate. Hon. Okupa, what the Auditor-General reported here was that there was no account to him by the Ministry of Defence at the time when he presented the report of Shs 4.5 billion. Well, I am happy to inform you, Madam Speaker and honourable members, that this was simply delayed action. Accountability was duly given and there is no problem of Shs 4.5 billion.  

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable minister. This money was meant to be for the auxiliary forces’ payment. If it were true that the accountability has been given then definitely these forces would have been paid.

MR MBABAZI: Well, it is true that the accountability has been given and it is also true that auxiliary forces have been paid. Of course everybody knows that, including hon. Okupa.  

It is also true that they have not been fully paid. Someone asked the question and I want to repeat that our intention is to pay them all the arrears with the money, which is now budgeted for. The Minister of Finance gave a statement here to the effect that –(Interruption)

MRS MEHANGYE: Madam Speaker, may I put this little information on record that the 448 LDUs and other auxiliary forces in Kamwenge District, none of them have been paid? So I hope that with the next payment, at least a few of them could be paid. None in Kamwenge, of the 448, has been paid. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, sometimes you invite those reactions by giving answers, which are a bit vague and not quite satisfactory. So tell them what the question is so that they may leave you alone to finish your statement.

MR MBABAZI: I will repeat my point and then of course leave it to you to judge whether it is satisfactory or not. The point I made is that the point made by hon. Okupa about the Shs 4.5 billion in the report of the Auditor-General is not as I reported it. It is not true that the money was lost. The report of the Auditor-General was saying that there was no accountability to him by the Ministry of Defence of Shs 4.5 billion. That is point No. 1, and this is a question of fact because the report is there and there cannot be vagueness about a report because it is written.

Point two, I made a statement that since then accountability was given for the Shs 4.5 billion. Therefore, there is no question of this Shs 4.5 billion being a loss at the hands of the Ministry of Defence. That is my statement.  

But secondly, in response to hon. Okupa, just now when he said that if that were the case auxiliary forces would have been paid, I said of course that they have been paid. Again, everyone knows that. Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa came here and made a statement, they have been paid up to this time. When you are paid it means that you are given money.  We know that there is still money owing but that is a different point and we have stated it. This is what I was saying, the Shs 18.7 billion, which is in the Budget, is going to meet all the arrears for the auxiliary forces, and I made a statement on it.  

To answer hon. Mehangye, these auxiliary forces we are talking about are not the LDUs of Kamwenge, which she is talking about, and she knows it. She also knows, because I have discussed the question with her many times, that we are trying to find a solution for the problem of those who fought the ADF in the Rwenzori region. We do appreciate their effort and we intend to do everything possible to show our appreciation, and I hope we shall show it soon.

There was a point, which was made again raised by hon. Okupa, that there is a disparity of payment within the UPDF. You know that we had been talking about disparity of rates between professionals in the UPDF and professionals outside UPDF. Hon. Okupa came up with a point that within the UPDF there is disparity of payment, that a private in the UPDF is paid Shs 140,000. 

A private who is at the same rank in the PGB is paid Shs 240,000. Madam Speaker, this is not true. I do not know where hon. Okupa gets his information from. I was telling someone who was near me that maybe hon. Okupa is talking of the PGB of Congo, not Uganda, because there is nothing like that here.  

Hon. Mwandha asked the question, why train former Army Commanders, what do you do with them after the training? The answer is that we deploy them because they are still serving officers even if you have been – you see there is a problem in Uganda that once you have been for instance a minister like me you cannot in future do a less important job. But why not, what is the problem with that? 

A good example is Lt Gen. Elly Tumwine. As you know, he was our first Army Commander; he served his term and left but he is still a serving officer. Now he is the Chairman of the General Court Martial and he is serving well in my assessment –(Interjections)- yes, he has also been a minister once and he is doing well. What is wrong with someone like me who has been a minister to be appointed –(Interjections)- not RDC –(Applause)- but something lower. I do not think there is a problem as long as they are still serving officers and we find value in them, they will be deployed. 

Hon. Mwandha raised an important question about the 3,000 causalities; actually we call them causalities, in Mubende. These are causalities of the Army who sustained injury for instance in the course of duty either in battle or something like that. The reason we take them to Mubende is of course to give them treatment. They may have had treatment elsewhere but we send them there to recuperate. 

In addition to that, we were faced with a very fundamental dilemma; what could we do? Should we discharge you because you got injured? Because as you know in the military you can provide other services even if you do not go in the battlefield, because not everybody goes into the battlefield. Secondly, this is someone who got injured on national duty. Should we really say that once you are injured then that is it, we sever links with you? So, the position we have taken therefore is that when you are injured, we treat you and take you to Mubende essentially for recuperation, but also to try and impart in you other skills.  

That place is supposed to help the causalities develop other skills other than just military skills. They get skills like carpentry and things like that. Eventually when they have acquired those skills then you are able to resettle them into society. They re-integrate into society much more easily that way. We have taken a position that unless they voluntarily choose to retire, we will keep them and give them as much support as possible. This is an issue, which we have been discussing in the Army Council and in the High Command and I am sure that our policy will keep evolving. 

Then there was a question about food ration for soldiers. I think it was hon. Kigyagi who asked that. Do soldiers still get good rations? The answer is no. The food ration was monetised because there was abuse in handling food rations and because there was abuse, we changed the policy so they are instead given money to buy their own food. There is no problem of mishandling the money by officers who handle it on behalf of the other because you get it directly.

This question of motor vehicle standardization, hon. Mugambe, simply means - we are trying to overcome the problem we faced today. In the UPDF and Ministry of Defence we have all types of vehicles. We have Japanese, British, American, Chinese, Russian, South African, Israeli, Indian, Germany, French and other makes of vehicles. The problem is that these are different type of vehicles so you must develop the capacity to maintain them. 

Mind you, for military vehicles, especially those in the field, you must have the capacity out there in the field. We have Swedish, I forgot Swedish vehicles - you must have the capacity to maintain your vehicles out there in the field. So it becomes very difficult to have mechanics, which are familiar with Swedish and then Chinese, then Japanese, French, like that. It would be better if we had either one type of vehicles or not so many and then we develop capacity to look after them. That is what we mean by standardization. 

Is the Queen sending money for ex-KAR? No, she is not. And I agree with you, we should make these people aware that we have tried but if we have not reached any - we will continue to inform them that the Queen is not sending any money. I wish she were.

Finally, ghost workers; as you have seen in our statement, hon. Kiwalabye did us a favour by introducing a copy of a letter written in 1945. I am really happy with hon. Kiwalabye. I do not know where he got it from –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is possible that he is a son of a former serviceman?

MR MBABAZI: Yes, obviously I had a look at it. It is not easy to – but we are going to study that and see if it can help us in this.

Finally, ghost workers have been a problem in Ministry of Defence as you know and we have been fighting it. I am happy that we have been making some headway but what we are doing now is to wage what I could call the mother of all battles in the fight against ghost workers. This is through computerization and I am happy to inform this House that we have gone a long way in the process. It was not easy to do so because the ghosts are a very powerful force, extremely powerful. So, we have been waging battles and I think we are gaining ground, I am quite confident that eventually we will defeat them. We have reached a level –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I do not understand the honourable minister very well when he states categorically that he has been fighting ghosts and that ghosts are a formidable force, when they are not known to be based anywhere in the world, or to have any such capacity. Is it part of the ministerial statement? In response, can the minister tell us in straight terms what he is implying?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I think it is common knowledge that people create soldier’s lists to take their money. There must be a person who organizes those lists and takes the money. That is what he is talking about. Somebody organizes the ghosts.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, I absolutely agree with you. We are fighting hard and I am very happy to inform this House that we are making very good progress against this menace by trying to computerize the budget, which is before you. There is money for that purpose, to computerize it comprehensively.  

In future, I am going to write a paper to brief Parliament about what exactly we are doing because it is not a simple matter of taking pictures like those for IDs. You know, when you go to international conferences you find a camera and a machine there. They take your picture and produce an ID at the other end of the machine, but still ghosts can beat that. We are really waging war and I will be happy to write a paper to inform Parliament about the progress that we are making. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Minister. Let us hear from the chairperson. We want to conclude on Defence and Internal Affairs.

10.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Amon-Reeves Kabareebe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, be as brief as you were in the beginning. Your report was very well summarized. Please, summarize this as well.

MR KABAREEBE: I want to thank all the honourable members who contributed towards our report. They seemed to say that it is one of the best. I believe that we shall improve. I want to make a few comments on what members said and what the honourable ministers have said, especially the Minister of Defence. 

On the fallen comrades, when we visited Magamaga we discovered that some soldiers were simply buried nearby and not even in the cemetery. I saw some heaps, I escaped from the team and went ahead of them, I asked the civilians who were within the barracks, “What is that?”  They said, “These are graves of soldiers’ wives. Unfortunately, we could not transport them and so we buried them there.” It is unfortunate but I think the honourable minister will have to improve on that. 

Somebody who joined the NRA during the bush war, I am aware of some of the people because I was responsible for some recruitment - some people joined the NRA between 1983 to 1986 when we were in Kampala - from that time to date they are in the North and they have never gone home. What type of life is that? So I think the Minister must design something that can assist the UPDF to get some leave.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are some serious proposals being made here by the chairman of your committee.

MR KABAREEBE: I hope you have noted that. He has not. I can repeat that I know some people, who were in the bush since 1983 and 1986. They were here in Kampala and from here of course the fighting went on to the North. On this side I stopped at Corner Kilak, on the other side I stopped at Keri. 

There are soldiers, now of the UPDF, who have been there since 1986. Imagine if you had never gone for leave since you joined government, and they are there in the North, so the minister should work out a programme as quickly as possible to make sure that these people begin going for leave. It is not a new issue. It was raised especially when we came to the fallen comrades, how they were simply buried temporarily and some members of their families too.

The Police must be strengthened, Madam Speaker. We have only seven months to go for elections. These are multiparty elections and you may expect a lot of violence. You cannot take it for granted so you must have enough police personnel if you do not want to involve the Army again. There must be a lot of effort put into the recruitment of the Police. 

Madam Speaker, I will explain this point with an adage: a certain saved person mobilized funds. He was a big person, so I cannot say he stole funds. He used it to buy iron sheets and roofed the Church. After some time he was removed from that office. Auditing took place and they found out that he had stolen money; he mobilized it from a certain vote and used it to buy iron sheets for the Church. He was taken to court; you are aware of that case. He was a chief administrative officer. He lost the case and he was put to Luzira yet he had put the iron sheets towards a good cause, roofing the Church. So, this is a similar problem that we are facing.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you talking about the houses again?

MR KABAREEBE: Have I said anything about the houses? (Laughter) I said that a chief administrative officer who is saved mobilized funds and then he went and built a Church, a very good cause, but when he was moved from that office and it was audited, he was arrested, taken to court, and he lost the case. He was then taken to Luzira. He was pardoned by His Excellency the President. When I reached that the Minister of Defence stood up. 

Was it hon. Sekikuubo? It was hon. Sekikuubo who said that paying housing allowance is the duty of government. Housing allowance is payable to the soldiers who are not accommodated. The Shs 5,000 we are talking about is payment that is affected. Is it for the privates? An officer like a captain does not get Shs 5,000, he gets about Shs 70,000, and it was removed. 

Honourable, you know what I am talking about and this money, which is being collected as housing allowance, we appropriate it here, as a housing allowance, but not for development. Why do we not appropriate it directly here that it is for development so that we may know it is for building barracks? (Applause)

Soliciting funds in that way can be very good but if we quietly went and sampled those soldiers to find out if they supported it since it came through the Army Council - supposing it was put to the vote by secret ballot, out of the 30,000 voters, how many would say, “It is okay, take the money?” It is a very big question.  

So I think that was a win-win case. My problem, Madam Speaker, is that in the committee it was a win-win situation where you leave money from the soldiers, you mobilize it and then go and begin building the barracks. This is why I encouraged the minister and his team to bring it here so that members could see it. But that was my own understanding that at least the 10 percent, which was increased in 2002/2001, should be considered.  That is not considered, and housing allowance is not considered. What is the purpose of this Parliament? 

The minister is saying that with these things of the Army you need not talk much about them, but the mouthpiece is here. Have you given them the money? Do they have representatives here and are they allowed to talk about it? This is the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. It is an elected Parliament, charged with the duty to defend its people wherever they are. I do not see any reason why the minister must say, “Do not talk about those things of the Army. It seems you are going to instigate them.”  By the way, if this Parliament were not to talk about the welfare of the soldiers to show that there is a way we are trying to fight for them, it would be too difficult for you to manage the Army. 

I want you to know that they are patient with you because they know that Parliament is doing everything possible to help them because they cannot strike, they cannot go to court, and they cannot demonstrate or create a mutiny. These are disciplined soldiers. So when they hear that their Parliament is fighting for them, discipline is enhanced in the Army. But to tell us that we should never talk anything about the Army and we keep quiet, you will find it difficult. So, I want to assure you that you should not threaten Parliament. It is our work. (Applause)

The allowances we are deducting from these soldiers generates Shs 640 million per month, which comes to Shs 7.2 billion, and it is doing a very good job. However, the project of building houses for soldiers, the barracks will take between 15 and 19 years to be completed. The lifespan of a Pte in the Army is nine years, and that of a Captain is 12 years. If an officer is promoted to the rank of officer or above that, then he is able to serve for 16 years. This is a project, which now has a lifespan of 17 years to accommodate every soldier. That means that all the soldiers we have shall have gone home. So, what is the purpose of removing this money from them?

So be prepared, because you have not explained the lifespan of a soldier, the soldiers we have now, who have been privates since 1986 are supposed to be retiring. If you are to prevent retirement of a private, you keep on promoting him so that this fellow can come from nine years to 12, from 12 to 15 assuming that by that time he would have been promoted to the rank of a brigadier; but if you have kept him as a private then he has to go after nine years yet you have been taking his money for nine years and there is no house for him. 

When we visited one of the barracks, we found that these soldiers are using their money to buy grass; they cannot simply go into somebody’s bush and cut it. They buy grass at Shs 5,000, buy the poles at Shs 10,000, a small door also at Shs 10,000, which is Shs 25,000 to build a mama ingia pole. How then can you again take his Shs 5,000? It is a disciplined arrangement of withdrawing money from a person. 

He must have told you - he told us that the committee agreed and we were talking nicely because it was a win-win situation but when we reached here, imagine there is no housing allowance, no salary increase! As you see, we are not increasing today, it was increased a long time ago and yet you know that once the minister announces an increase in salaries, then it is a law, and we pass it here. Who should go to court for these soldiers? Maybe at one time, Madam Speaker, you would assist to see whether the committee could help these people to go to court and get their money.

I want to end by saying that the Army has been polishing the North for a long time. We have proposed that the moment the rebel activities stop, the Police should take over, but we do not agree with what the Committee of Budget was saying that the Police should take over immediately. It is not possible this financial year because you cannot be sure of the situation. 

The moment you remove the Army from the North people will run away from there. They still need that protection for some time; the Army should polish the area and this will take some time and of course you know that the Police do not have the capacity to control the whole North, East, Karamoja and then the whole of Uganda. 

You should note also that we have the forthcoming elections under a Multi-party system and of course there is a higher degree of risk of violence because we are going for a new arrangement, which we do not understand. So the committee is really pushing hard that government puts in money to make sure that the Police is well facilitated lest we revert to hon. Amama for his defence.

Another issue is on the Police and internal affairs. Actually the UPDF would look at this as a new arrangement of terrorism. Terrorism has taken a new trend that we may not be able to know, where you have people shooting at you. You have now heard about 20 cases in the last four months. So, terrorism can be in many forMs 

There was another one, which was trying to come up, that of poisoning. They get a couple with their four, five or ten children, and kill them at a go. Eventually you now hear that it was rivalry, it was domestic. But when we follow it up closely, we get those gangs who know how to do those things, the hit men are there and they are hired to do that. So, the Police must be empowered to overcome this phenomenon.  

Then there is something new in the community: the prisons service. Most people do not understand how it is going to operate but these are people with small cases whose sentences can be about two, three or five years, and then they can be given some work to do at home. So, our prisons as we talk now have got a population of 22,000, having increased from 1995 to 1996 when we had 12,000, and it has increased by 10,000, so they are over congested. In fact some of the prisons have four times what they were supposed to accommodate. Instead of 200, some are accommodating like 1,000 so the number is abnormally big and this is as a community service, going to do a good job. They have already started it.  

We are also talking about the disarmament exercise in Karamoja whereby co-operation is required and this co-operation cannot go by air. The Minister of Defence and that of Internal Affairs, together with the Permanent Secretaries were in Mombasa about the disarmament exercise in Karamoja, Kenya and whatever. Definitely, they cannot end with seminars. They have to come up with treaties and laws, which must be rectified by this Parliament. We must know how they are going to do it, how they are cooperating; the way Uganda did it with Sudan. That is how it should be done otherwise we shall remain at capacity building and meetings. 

We shall now go to Moroto, from Moroto proceed down to Mombasa and Nairobi to Mombasa, just in meetings. We must see how to remove these small guns. When you see a meeting going on for 20 times and there is no treaty or agreement, then know that that is a dead exercise –(Interruption) 

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, in the report we agreed on a plan in Kenya for the disarmament of armed people in Karamoja and Turkana in Kenya. It is a common plan. They are working out the details about operational procedures and things like that and the most important thing is that Kenya will be operating on its side and Uganda will be operating on its side but this will be a simultaneous operation. It will be co-ordinated so that those who are armed in Kenya do not run to Uganda and those who are in Uganda do not run to Kenya because operations will be going on at the same time. 

We did not think we needed to change the laws of our country because Ugandans will not cross into Kenya, Ugandan military or Police will not cross into Kenya and Kenya will not cross into Uganda, unless we have invited them. Where it is necessary to employ the skills of the other side, which we may not have here by mutual agreement, we can do it within the laws that we have. I just wanted to give you that information. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, please conclude.

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much for that important information. Another challenge I can see is that we are heading for the East African Federation and if we are to put up a force, an army and police, the standards of Uganda must improve generally. I can see the UPDF is marching very fast but government has not done much to help the Police. So you find that the Police and the Prisons of Uganda may not be able to match up to the standards of Kenya and Tanzania, let alone Rwanda and Burundi.

Mr Minister, on the professionals in the Army, you have promised that you are going to look into it. If you do not do it very fast you are going to lose all the professionals in the Army because there is nobody willing to earn Shs 500,000 in the Army when another one is earning Shs 1.5 million in the civil service and yet he goes to office at 8.00 a.m., goes for lunch then has evening tea, then passes via a small club on the way home, takes some beer, picks a child from school, goes home and sleeps. Tomorrow he goes back to work and yet the other one is on the job 24 hours Monday to Monday. 

If you remember well, during the last recruitment exercise there is no doctor who turned up. None turned up. Why? Because they already known this. So the three medical assistants came by accident, and they are planning to run away. This is a matter you should address with immediate effect.

Finally, I moved a Private Members Bill in this Parliament but it seems the Ministry of Finance is still lost because there is no way they can say that it will cause implications because the money for auxiliary forces or LDUs is being paid. So there are no implications but up to now they have failed to release the certificate so that we can put these people in order. If for example the LDUs went to fight and you have 200 of them dead, who would be responsible for the coffins? Sorry to say that but who would buy the coffins and under what Vote?  

I want to conclude by thanking the ministers and honourable members, but I want the hon. Minister of Defence to revisit the way we homogenously agreed in our meeting that it is a win-win situation. Now that you are still taking away their allowances, how about this salary, which was increased the other time? Can’t you give them that small money so that they can have some peace instead of fighting on two fronts? 

You have taken away their allowances, you have refused to give them their money and now if you quietly went for a vote and asked for those who want to contribute to this barracks, even those who are sleeping within the same barracks, who have been lucky to be accommodated, would you get their vote saying that they support this project? Definitely you will not, so I want you to revisit your position.

In fact if you look at that budget the way we made it is such that you must pay it, so we shall keep on monitoring and pestering the Minister of Finance. We shall start on Monday when you try to appropriate the money. I will educate you on how we arrived at the Shs 15 billion, which we deducted from Shs 26 billion, which was supposed to be for hard materials, which you bought one time but the money appeared twice. Now that we are lucky it appeared, could you remove that money and pay? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, we have been here for a long time. I want to thank all the Members of Parliament for staying and helping us to do this important job. I want to thank the clerks-at-table, the Sergeant-at-Arms and the Chamber stewards for accommodating us all this time. The House is adjourned to Monday, at 10.00 a.m. –(Interjection)- your statement will come on Monday –(Dr Kezimbira rose_)- Okay, he has something burning.

10.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought I could inform the House that I have just received sad news that one of the suspects in the murder of Robinah Kiyingi has died in prison. I would have given you this information on Monday in my statement but because it could have appeared in the press then. It is better that I inform the House now. I do not know any details yet; this is the information that I have just received. More details will come to you on Monday. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to confirm that the minister has been walking around with his statement since morning but because of the work we had today, I did not give him the opportunity, but he will be the first one on Monday morning. The House is adjourned to Monday, at 10.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 10.38 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7 September 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)
