PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - FIRST MEETINGTHURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA5923Thursday, 22 September 2022Colleagues, the 12th edition of the East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Games will be held in Juba from 20th November to 1st December. Official training and preparations are on-going. Only team members will go for these games; we shall not be sending cheerleaders. (Laughter) I want to repeat that only team members will go. Others are waking up at 5.00 a.m. to train, then you wake up at 10.00 a.m. to train on how to sing and cheer; and you think we shall give you an opportunity. (Laughter) Please, we shall let you do your skill by Bluetooth or WhatsApp. You can do WhatsApp videos and we project; you will cheer from here. Honourable members, this is an indirect way of encouraging you to participate so that you can be selected in the teams. That is the only way we can make the work of our captains and colleagues very easy.I have seen campaigns for East Africa Legislative Assembly (EALA) going on. What is disheartening is that I have seen some candidates littering Parliament. I have even seen some of them gluing their pictures on the walls of Parliament. Unfortunately, I have not been to the toilets, in the lifts and other places.  EALA candidates, if you are listening, I urge you, Members, not to vote anyone who glues his or her picture around. Maybe they can learn. Otherwise, it is looking dirty. How do you get into a lift, glue and paint the whole of it with your pictures, which are extremely difficult to remove?  Please, I want you to exercise restraint. You can get a better way of campaigning. In Parliament, there is a better way we do it; by interacting with colleagues.IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 33RD SITTING - FIRST MEETINGParliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, KampalaPRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, welcome to today’s sitting. We continue to receive increasing cases of the Ebola disease. I know some of you, colleagues, come from the infected areas; and some Members will be going to the constituencies. Therefore, I would like to urge you to find a better way of communicating to your constituents. However, leave the professionals to do their job.There are situations you cannot help much, like going to your area and people running around you in big numbers. So, you might end up getting Ebola and bringing it here. I urge those who come from the areas, which have reported or suspected cases, to exercise a high level of caution so that we do not have a catastrophe in this House. In the areas the Minister of Health has identified, I urge the committees not to go and do any work there. On Tuesday, the minister will be coming here to give us an update on what we asked last time. I urge each one of us to be cautious so that the situation does not get worse.5924PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [The Deputy Speaker]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRI do not have much to communicate today beyond that. I will handle all matters of national importance together with the Prime Minister’s Time. I want us to go to the Order Paper. We are about to go for recess, colleagues.  I want us to go when we have cleared all Members’ issues that are pending on the Order Paper. My focus is on that –(Mr Isamat rose_)I do not know which kind of reaction you want to give to the issues I have communicated. I will allow only two Members.2.40DR ABRAHAM ISAMAT (NRM, Kapir County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of Ebola is serious. We are aware that Ebola does not attack only human beings; it also attacks animals. During COVID-19 pandemic, not a lot of emphasis was put on the animals; it was basically on humans. In this outbreak of the Ebola disease, I am very much aware that animals are equally susceptible to it. The health ministry has a monopoly as far as overseeing the spread of disease is concerned. It’s sister ministry, that is, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, especially the Minister of State for Animal Industry and Fisheries is present. Can we get some information from Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries? We could be harbouring the Ebola disease in animals as well. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Government does not work in isolation; it works together. We can take your advice. Minister of Health, contact the agriculture ministry.  If there is any useful information they can add, on Tuesday, when you are bringing your statement, consider that. Thank you.2.42MS HELEN NAKIMULI (NUP, Woman Representative, Kalangala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. In regard to your communication about the training for the East African games, we, who train use a lot of energy, and we need the energy. We have been told we are not going to get breakfast after training. When you train for two or three hours, you need to eat well. I think this should be looked at.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is an administrative issue. I am going to look into it.MS NAKIMULI: Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, on matters of national importance, I am going to allow you during the Prime Minister’s Time. Chairperson of the Committee on Health, would you like to say something?DR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to give guidance and information that on the 20th September, the Member of Parliament for Butambala raised an issue, in which he stated: “Was it in order for the Ministry of Health to pronounce an outbreak after only one case?”I would like to inform Members that there are certain diseases where one case is declared an outbreak because we do not have time. We have seven cases right now. If we had not acted and blown the whistle when we had one case, it would have been disastrous. For diseases like Measles, Polio and Haemorrhagic fevers such as Ebola, one case is an outbreak. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson, for that good guidance to the House. Chairperson of the verification committee.REPORT OF THE VERIFICATION COMMITTEE ON VETTING OF NOMINEES TO THE FIFTH ASSEMBLY OF THE EAST AFRICAN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY2.44THE CHAIRPERSON, VERIFICATION COMMITTEE ON VETTING OF NOMINEES TO THE FIFTH ASSEMBLY OF THE EAST AFRICAN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY (Mr Mwine Mpaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay a report of the verification committee of the nominees and 5925THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022applicants for election to the East African Legislative Assembly, and the minutes.In a special way, I would like to thank the offices of the Speaker and the Clerk, and the 20 honourable members of the committee, who worked tirelessly to ensure this task was executed. This is the report of the verification committee of the nominees and applicants for election to the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA).IntroductionMr Speaker, Parliament of Uganda is scheduled to elect nine persons to represent Uganda in the EALA for the period 2022 to 2027, on 29 September 2022.Pursuant to the provisions of Rule 9 of Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, on Tuesday, 20 September 2022, Parliament appointed a 20-member verification committee to consider the nominees and applicants whose nomination papers had been received by the Clerk to Parliament during the period 19 to 20 September 2022.Mandate of the committeeThe general mandate of the committee, as stipulated in Appendix B paragraph 11(1) of the Rules of Procedure, states that the verification shall consider the nominees and all applicants independent of a political party organisation, and ascertain whether they fulfil the requirements of Article 50 of the EAC Treaty and Article 80 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The laws governing the election of Uganda’s representatives to the EALAThe election of Members to the EALA is guided by Article 50 of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community, Rule 12 and Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Article 50(2) of the EAC Treaty is to the effect that for a person to be qualified to be elected a Member of the Assembly, that person must:1. Be a citizen of that partner state;2. Be qualified to be elected a Member of the National Assembly of that partner state, under its constitution;3. Not to be holding office as a minister in that partner state;4. Not be an officer in the service of the Community; and5. Must have proven experience or interest in consolidating and furthering the aims and objectives of the Community.The qualifications under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, as specified in Article 80, are that the nominee;“a. Is a citizen of Uganda;b. Is a registered voter;c. Has completed a minimum formal education of advanced level and/or its equivalent;d. Is of sound mind;e.  Is not holding or acting in an office the functions, which involve the responsibility for or in connection with the conduct of the election; f. Is not a traditional or cultural leader under Article 246(6); g. Has not been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under the law in force in Uganda and has not been discharged; h. Is not under a sentence of death or imprisonment exceeding nine months imposed by any competent court without the option of a fine; 5926PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Mr Mpaka]i. If the nominee is a public officer or a person employed in a Government department or agency, he or she must have resigned his or her office at least 90 days before nomination.”Observations and findings of the committeeThe Clerk to Parliament, in compliance with Rule 10 of Appendix B, forwarded 28 nomination forms to the verification committee for consideration. In exercise of its mandate, the committee scrutinised all the nomination forms of the aspirants and physically interacted with 27 aspirants, who answered to the invitation. One applicant did not appear.ObservationsIn the course of verification, the committee observed that a number of aspirants had issues with arrangement of their names on their national identity cards, academic documents or nomination papers tendered. Some had additional names or additional letters on their names.Initially, the committee was concerned about compliance with Section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act, which provides that “any person, being over the age of 18 years… who wishes to change his or her name, shall cause to be published in the gazette a notice in the prescribed form of his or her intention to do so”.These were 16 candidates of the 28, leaving only 12. However, it is the preserve of the courts of law to interpret these laws.The committee was guided by the decision of Court in:i) Mukundane Vincent and Ahimbisibwe Gordians v. Electoral Commission; ii) Election Petition No.004 of 2010; Mutembuli Yusuf v. Nagwomu Moses Musamba & Electoral Commission; iii) Election Petition Appeal No.043 of 2016; Tinka Noreen v. Bigirwenkya M. Beatrice & Electoral Commission;iv) Election Civil Appeal No.007 of 2077; Okello Charles P. Engola Mac-Odwogo and Electoral Commission v. Ayena Odongo Crispus; andv) Election Appeal No.026 and 094 of 2016 and Hashim Sulaiman v. Onega Robert, Civil Appeal No.001 of 2021.In all these decisions, the common holding is that: “Writing of the same name in a different order cannot affect one’s qualifications. More evidence must be adduced to the satisfaction of Court that, that person who sat and obtained certain qualification was not the same person who was nominated for election.”The Court decisions are clear that a change of name does not result in a person forfeiting the rights attached to their former name as long as there is no evidence of existence of a different person known by the same name.In the instant verification exercise, the committee received no such evidence. In fact, the Court of Appeal in the Okello Charles case, already cited, went ahead to find at page 36 that failure to include the initial “P.” in the statutory declaration could not invalidate his academic qualifications.On page 46 of the same decision, it was found that in Section 4(14) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, which is specific to matters of elections, the Electoral Commission is only barred from accepting a statutory declaration where the purpose is to serve as evidence of possession of an academic qualification acquired.In this particular case, all persons that appeared before the committee had academic qualifications and none sought to use an affidavit or statutory declaration to validate academic documents.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5927THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022On the basis of the above legal authority, the committee found no misdeeds on the part of the aspirants, who had issues with the appearances of their names on their credentials, more so because no evidence was adduced to the effect that the names belonged to other persons.Even then, following the judicial interpretation rendered in Okello Charles P. Engola Mac-Odwogo and the Electoral Commission v. Ayena Odongo Crispus, Election Appeal No.026 and 094 of 2016, the committee found all explanations rendered to be satisfactory. Findings1. The committee, in consideration of all the nomination forms of the aspirants, established that all the aspirants had complied with the procedural submission of documents and requirements contained in rules 4 and 5 of Appendix B, which comprise the Rules of Procedure for the election of Members of the EALA. 2. The committee, further, duly verified the nomination forms of the aspirants to ascertain whether the aspirants had the qualifications to be elected Members of Parliament, as per the requirement of Article 50 of the East African Community Treaty and Article 80 of the Constitution.3. The committee established that the aspirants came from different political parties and interest groups and from both genders as indicated below:Gender categorisation of the verified aspirants1. Nine (9) female aspirants2. Nineteen (19) male aspirants, out of which one was a person with disability (PwD).Political party membership or independent positions of the aspirants1. Six NRM aspirants2. One JEEMA aspirant3. One FDC aspirant4. One DP aspirant5. One UPC aspirant6. Eighteen (18) Independent aspirantsIn conclusion, the committee found that the following aspirants satisfied all the requirements of Article 50 of the EAC Treaty and Article 80 of the Constitution; as well as rules 4 and 5 of Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure. I beg to submit.Should I read the names?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, read the names because Members have to approve.MR MPAKA:1. Ms Amongin Jacqueline – Independent2. Dr Kapyata Denis – Independent3. Mr Muwonge Daniel – Independent4. Ms Kiryowa Stella – Independent5. Ms Phiona Rwandalugali – Independent6. Ms Patience Naamara Tumwesigye – Independent7. Mr Kateregga Mohammed – JEEMA8. Mr Bwengye Lauben – Independent9. Mr Kisembo Ronex Tendo – Independent10. Mr Bukyana Julius – Independent 11. Mr Muyinda Allan – Independent 12. Mr Murangira Ambrose – Independent13. Ms Kadogo Babirye Veronica – Independent14. Mr Agaba Gilbert – Independent15. Ms Nakitende Salaama Adeline – Independent16. Mr Luyinda Fred – Independent17. Ms Rose Akol Okullu - NRM18. Mr Paul Mwasa Musamali - NRM19. Mr George Stephen Odongo - NRM20. Mr Dennis Namara - NRM21. 2l. Ms Mary R. Mugyenyi - NRM22. Mr James Kakooza - NRM23. Mr Gerald Blacks Siranda - DP24. Ms Josephine Lolem - Independent25. Mr Moses B. Ategeka - Independent26. Mr Joseph Tindyebwa - Independent27. Mr Harold Scandrone Kaija - FDC28. Mr Fred Ebil – UPC.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. Colleagues, this is in 5928PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [The Deputy Speaker]–(Hon. Ssemujju rose_)– Hon. Ssemujju, do you have an issue? Colleagues, this is in line with Article 50 of the Treaty and Article 80 of our Constitution.The decision we make here cannot remove any candidate. We do not have that power; we cannot change anything. Now, why should I allow a debate on something where we are not going to change anything? (Applause)So, I want to put the question. Procedure?MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My understanding is that every report to Parliament is subject to debate. However, since you have ruled, I will abandon that.However, the procedural issue I am raising is that one of the candidates submitted by the NRM was not approved by this Parliament to be a minister on grounds of lack of academic qualifications. Now that the committee has verified him, yet there is an outstanding decision of Parliament that this person does not qualify even to be a minister - and the qualifications are the same -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have the name, honourable member?MR SSEMUJJU: I do not want to mention the name.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How will I guide?MR SSEMUJJU: The reason I am making reference to decisions of Parliament, Mr Speaker - these decisions are of Parliament. You can order that - and outside, because I do not want to de-campaign a candidate, but I can give you the name in private of a person that Parliament said does not qualify to be a minister, yet he is on the list and verified.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The good thing is that even if you have not given us a name, you have told us the party and we know the party he comes from. All the candidates of the NRM party, which you have referred to, are current Members of EALA, voted by this Parliament. (Applause)The same Parliament voted that Member. I was in the 10th Parliament. I never saw the 10th Parliament receiving that Member’s name for verification as a minister. I think it is the previous Parliament, meaning, the decision that the 10th Parliament took supersedes the one of the previous Parliament. (Applause)He passed through the verification committee in the 10th Parliament, headed by one of the senior lawyers and the president of the JEEMA party, Hon. Asuman Basalirwa. (Laughter) So, trying to question is like we are questioning Hon. Basalirwa’s capacity to do a thorough job and present to this House.Colleagues, with that, I, therefore put the question that the nominees, as presented by the committee, be approved by this House as candidates for election to the Fifth Assembly of The East African Legislative Assembly (EALA).(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The “ayes” have it, but we got a very loud “no” from Hon. Ssemujju -(Laughter)- which can be captured. Colleagues, with this – Let me finish, honourable member. I have just announced the results of the vote.In line with Rule 11B of the election of EALA Members, I direct the Clerk to publish the names of these candidates in the mass media and our noticeboard of Parliament. They will campaign and be voted, on 29 September 2022 - that is Thursday next week - in line with Rule 13 of the Rules of electing Members of EALA.I urge all of you - there will be no field activity; no other activity because this is an activity we have once in five years. So, there is no Member - whether you are travelling abroad or elsewhere; I have directed the Clerk that all COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR5929THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022should be stopped because this is an activity that happens once in five years; we cannot have an excuse for missing it. We want you to come and vote for your favourite candidates. MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a matter of procedure, I would like to seek guidance from you. Names of people have been read here and we know for a fact that NRM has six out of the nine. We also know that there are several Independents that are NRM-leaning. So, NRM also has a right to choose so that the whole team can be NRM.Can we, therefore, be guided, Mr Speaker, as to how the Opposition will be able to select their own candidates?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable – No, the Member is seeking guidance, colleagues. When someone is seeking guidance and you add “order”, you are making life difficult for them.The successful candidates and all candidates will be voted by this House. I think that is enough  - Yes, they will be voted by this House. Parties, which preferred to field candidates and those, which decided not to; that is not our issue as presiding officers. (Mr Oboth rose_)Hon. Oboth, do you want to add something? MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, you have guided well. I am seated next to Hon. Ecweru and I caught your eye when I was just stretching. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can supplement as a senior colleague.MR OBOTH: I think the procedure is that we shall get the best nine and the six from NRM, unless Members want to make a decision right now, to say that the NRM candidates go unopposed, which is also not known in our Rules of Procedure. (Interjections) You ignore what you are hearing elsewhere. In fact, when Hon. Ssemujju voted “No”, I do not know what impact his vote has against the FDC candidate; whether he did not want that candidate.As you have guided, let us follow the rules to the dot. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, conclude so that we move on. Honourable members, you are eating into my time.MR OBOTH: Let political parties and all candidates mobilise so that we get the best nine - six from the NRM and others -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.Colleagues, I promised you yesterday that the Minister of Internal Affairs would  answer questions, which we had put to him. So, before any other, I would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and address the concerns of Hon. Mayanja. Later on - Clerk, you need to capture this; when we are working on responses to Members’ questions, the agriculture minister should be considered.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ARREST AND REPORTED ABDUCTION OF MOTIF KASSAGA, KENNETH KA VULU AND JAKANA NADULI3.03THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker, I stand here to respond to the issue in respect of the arrest and reported abduction of Motif Kassaga, Kenneth Kavulu and Jakana Naduli.In that respect, I report as follows: Jakana and Bashir Kassaga were held in relation to communication and circulation of offensive content on social media. But I would beg to -(Interruption)MR MAYANJA: Mr Speaker, we do not have the statement that the minister is reading on the intranet.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, is the statement uploaded? No, I have not yet ruled on this one. Okay, Hon. Ssemujju.5930PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEMR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I raised this matter yesterday, but some of my colleagues shot it down. Regarding matters of national importance, the responses are not ministerial statements that are covered under the Rules of Procedure, and are supposed to be circulated. In fact, the ministers are supposed to come here and instantly answer.It is a wrong procedure that we have adopted here because of the magnanimity over the presiding officers that these responses will be presented as ministerial statements.Mr Speaker, therefore, the procedural issue I am raising, is: Does the response to a matter of national public importance become a ministerial statement?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. But honourable, you are asking me when you have already concluded that we adopted the wrong procedure. (Laughter) I am the one who told the minister because of the sensitivity of the matter, to make it a brief statement. I am the one who guided the minister that way because - you see, issues of human rights and all that, need to be well captured on record.  I felt a statement would be better shared and he can have a copy and maybe, pass it on to the family that is aggrieved; and the minister humbly agreed. So, minister, continue; I am told the statement is uploaded.GEN. MUHOOZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and by extension, Hon. Ssemujju for coming to my rescue. That said, two of the statements, the one in respect of Jakana and that of Kassaga were uploaded. But also, that has been overtaken by events.Like I   said, the first two, Jakana and Kassaga, were held in relation to circulation of offensive content on social media. Jakana was released on bail yesterday and Kassaga is still held in Luzira. I would beg - because I am constrained to go into the details; these matters are subjudice.However, the last one, Kavulu, was also released on police bond yesterday. He had been held at Kansanga Police Station, but his case is related to that of Sipapa, otherwise also known as Charles Olimu, where he is an accomplice.Therefore, I beg to stop here because these matters are before Court.  Those are the three I wanted to inform you about. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But now, I am confused. Honourable colleague, the minister was saying you have even rescued him and Hon. Basalirwa said he will call you to order after. You are proving Hon. Basalirwa right. (Laughter) No, let the minister complete, colleagues. We are wasting a lot of time. Please, honourable minister, are you done?GEN. MUHOOZI: On those three, yes, I am done.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  Honourable minister, I also had one regarding passports. You see, colleagues, let us focus on the content. The minister has told you the cases are before Court.When Hon. Mayanja came to me, he said these people are picked by drones; we do not even know where they are. The minister has confirmed that they were arrested by police, and they were arraigned before Court. One is in Luzira, another one was released on bond, and so was another. What else do we want?If anyone was mishandled, let it be torture or anything else. That may be one of the grounds they could raise in Court to be released.  I do not want to go into details of what Court is doing. The minister has confirmed that they arrested them.  So, the rest of the details, please - honourable minister, go to the issue of passports.GEN. MUHOOZI: Mr Speaker, on the issue - yes, Hon. Ssemujju -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable minister, go to the issue on passports. I am the one who allows points of procedure, honourable ministers; it is not you.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5931THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022GEN. MUHOOZI: The second question is in respect to the one raised by Hon. Sseggona on why Government has asked Ugandans to pay for new e-passports when replacing the old ones. My answer is as follows: The old ones are being phased out. We had set 4 April 2022 as the deadline to transition to the new e-passport.Passport acquisition is not free. We actually get NTR from the passports and the charges are known and on our portal. For ordinary passports, you pay Shs 250,000 and for express, it is Shs 400,000. Diplomatic passports are Shs 500,000 while official ones are Shs 400,000. That information is on our portal.On delays while acquiring passports, it is true there are delays sometimes. (Member rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, here, we do not deal with smaller issues; we deal with only serious issues. Honourable minister, go on. For small clarifications, please, meet in the corridors. (Laughter)GEN. MUHOOZI: Mr Speaker, on issuance delays, that is unfortunate, but explainable.  I would want to give information regarding the -(Interruption)MR SILWANY: Thank you, General.  It is unusual for me to seek clarification from Generals because they are always very clear. Honourable minister, I would like to seek clarification. When we were in Parliament last week, Hon. Medard Sseggona raised a very pertinent issue about the payment of Ugandans whose passports are running - for example, your passport is running until 2020 and they are issuing you a new e-passport, of a new type. For example, there are passports that are still valid up to 2026 or 2030. Why are you required to pay afresh when you already have a valid passport? Why doesn’t Government issue a new passport on the same fees, since you have a valid passport?  Government is just changing the type of passport to digital. That is the clarification that I wanted to seek.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister -MR SILWANY: About the fees price -GEN. MUHOOZI: As I explained, Mr Speaker and honourable members, we are transitioning to a new passport; the e-passport. For that matter, you have to pay for the new one.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Next item.Chairperson, Committee on Internal Affairs, please, look into these issues of passports in detail and report to this House in one week. MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, you ruled that you had authorised the Minister of Internal Affairs to make a statement. Statements, in our rules, attract an hour’s debate. The procedural issue I am raising is whether you have also removed that requirement - because you said you have allowed him to make a statement on a matter that you have described as a very serious matter on human rights.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ssemujju, Rule 52(2) of the Rules of Procedure says, “It may…” So, it is at my discretion. I do not need a debate on this. MS AISHA KABANDA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it procedurally right for the ministers to respond to their own issues? The issue that was brought to Parliament by Hon. Allan Mayanja was about the manner of the arrest. The person was arrested by people not in known uniforms, travelling in a car without Government number plates, taken to an unknown place, and held incommunicado for days. What he has communicated about is extremely different.The arrested people being produced to the public after a couple of days, is another matter. The fact that they were held incommunicado from their families, for a couple of days, is the 5932PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEissue that is in question. Are we proceeding well for the minister to set his own questions?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I want to assure you that we are procedurally moving well because those are the issues before Court. Yes, they were arrested and the manner of arrest is one of the issues before Court. How did you arrest me? How did you treat me?If you are not satisfied with my ruling on that, sit here and rule otherwise. (Laughter) I see that is what you are trying to do. Colleagues, no more procedural points on this issue. I) MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGIES ON MEASURES TO MITIGATE CLOSURE OF BUSINESS VENTURES3.18THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Mr Francis Mwebesa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, as you may recall, during the Budget Speech of 2022/2023, Government outlined several businesses – (Interjections)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, this level of indiscipline cannot be tolerated in this House. A colleague cannot be on the Floor and you start torturing him. Let us not try to be cleverer than others. We are all equal here. Honourable minister, you are protected. If you do not want to listen to him, just go out.MR MWEBESA: On behalf of the Executive, I want to commend the House for this support. Let me now highlight the measures Government has put in place to help businesses withstand the turbulent and economic times experienced globally, with a view of helping our enterprises to remain afloat.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order, Hon. Flavia Nabagabe.MS NABAGABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not want to disrupt the minister, but we just want to know who he is. He has come up to talk, but we do not know who he is or which questions he is answering. We do not know which department he is representing. Is it in order for someone to address us when we do not know them? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you say that you do not know which question he is answering, it means you are confused because we have an Order Paper and the Clerk called the question.Secondly, if you are interested in the Member, the canteen is up.  You can meet him there and finish your business.  (Interjections)   I do not know why - Mzee has already retired. Please, do not get interested in him. (Laughter)MR MWEBESA: Mr Speaker, and honourable colleagues, as you may recall, during the Budget Speech for the Financial Year 2022/2023, Government outlined several business support measures to be put in place with the approval of Parliament. On behalf of the Executive, I commend the House for this support.Let me now highlight the measures that Government has put in place to help the businesses withstand the turbulent economic times experienced globally, with a view to helping our enterprises to remain afloat.1. Credit relief and funding to SMEsTo support the recovery of the economy, Government has provided credit relief to borrowers, as well as funding to micro small and medium enterprises, and large corporate businesses. The following progress has been registered:a. Bank of Uganda extended credit relief to enable borrowers who were unable to service their loans during the pandemic to restructure them. Loans totalling to Shs 7.2 trillion, representing 40 per cent of the total loans, were restructured over the period.b. The Microfinance Support Centre was funded to support micro businesses through the Emyooga Fund –(Interruption)[Ms Kabanda]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5933THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order?MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, you earlier made an exception and said you are the one who allowed the Minister of Internal Affairs to make a brief statement. Now, there is another minister - who I have only seen today, by the way; I have never seen him – also, reading a statement and we will be pleading with you to allow us to debate, yet, he is making a response.Is the minister, whom I have seen today, in order to confuse our rules and begin presenting a ministerial statement, with his eyes fixed on the document he is reading?   Is he in order to present a ministerial statement instead of making a response? (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, I think honourable colleagues have missed Hon. Mwebesa for some time. If you look at our Order Paper - Item No. 4(i), you will realise that this is supposed to be a statement. He has 10 minutes to make his statement and so, the minister is in order. Minister, please, ensure the eyes are fixed on the statement. (Laughter)MR MWEBESA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Microfinance Support Centre was funded to support the micro businesses through the Emyooga Fund with Shs 100 billion and support to the SACCOs of Shs 27 billion. Consequently, 6,600 SACCOs and 255,000 saving groups have been established across the country. These are operating a total of Shs 4.1 billion accounts and as a result, savings worth Shs 63 billion, as at the end of April 2022 - among the lowest earners of this country - has been realised.For small businesses that do not fall under the Emyooga Fund, and at the same time do not qualify for the UDB funding, Government in partnership with Bank of Uganda supervised financial institutions to establish Shs 200 billion for a small businesses recovery fund. The fund offers credit at a subsidised interest rate of 10 per cent per year.Domestic arrearsDomestic arrears to private sector suppliers of goods and services to Government totaling to Shs 526 billion were cleared. In addition, court awards amounting to Shs 57 billion were settled. This measure helped to free up funds that were held by Government, and thus, improved the liquidity position of the private enterprises, and enabled them stay operational.Support to the Teachers’ SACCOGovernment has also disbursed Shs 20 billion to the Teachers’ SACCO to support them to recover from the pandemic, and stimulate demand in the economy.Agricultural Credit Facility (ACF)In the Financial Year 2021/2022, the Agricultural Credit Facility disbursed a total of Shs 67.42 billion to 1,057 borrowers as at June 2022. Cumulatively, the facility has financed a total of 3,120 farmers across the country to a tune of Shs 737.3 billion.Agricultural insuranceGovernment in partnership with the private sector has established the agricultural insurance scheme. Farmers can take advantage of the subsidised insurance premiums under the Scheme.My ministry, in conjunction with a consortium of insurance companies successfully piloted this product across the country, with an initial injection of Shs 5 billion by Government. This scheme will continue to be rolled out across the country for the next four years, based on the success of the pilot phase.This kind of insurance serves as an incentive to farmers to borrow funds for investment in agriculture, assured that in case of exposure to bad weather or any other calamity, insurance provides the compensation in monetary terms. Subject to availability of funds, the scheme will be scaled up.5934PRIME MINISTER’S TIMENSSF Mid-term AccessFollowing the amendment of the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) Act to allow midterm access for qualifying members, a total of Shs 420 billion had been paid out to about 21,500 beneficiaries as at mid-June 2022, with an ultimate impact of stimulation of investment and demand in the economy.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you conclude?MR MWEBESA: Support to women Entrepreneurs: For women entrepreneurs, Government received a $217 million grant from the World Bank to provide funding in the current financial year to mid-level businesses managed by women to support their growth.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Hon. Kanyike, do you have - colleagues, on these questions, you are limited by rule 44(2). We can only have a supplementary question by the person who raised the question.3.28MR EV ANS KANYIKE (NUP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister although he has struggled to make a statement before this august House. However, I appreciate him for the job well done, although he has struggled - it has to go on the record.I raised this question basing my argument on the report by Twaweza, a Non-Governmental Organisation; and Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), a Government entity. The report showed that 55 per cent of businesses, which have been operational for five years, have collapsed. And, I have read the report, which was given by the NGO -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can I guide you? Colleagues, please, respect each other; whether one is struggling or not, all of us struggle. Therefore, there is nothing special about struggling. No one is smarter to say you will never struggle.Honourable colleague, I just want to guide you. The rules only allow you an opportunity for a supplementary question, not a commentary. Therefore, what is your supplementary question, if any?MR KANYIKE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. My supplementary question, with your guidance, Mr Speaker, is that this august House needs a comprehensive report. This matter should be handled by the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, which will come up with a comprehensive report. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the colleague has no supplementary question; he only had a comment. Hon. Mwijukye, the shadow minister, do you have a procedural matter?MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the minister, who is a senior citizen, very carefully; I thank him. However, I have realised that 90 per cent of the strategies given by the minister are mere handouts, and I have a challenge with handouts.In that regard, Mr Speaker, I request that you offer me an opportunity in the near future, probably next week, so that I come up with an alternative to these strategies. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, it is your right under the rules. Once you have it ready, you can bring the statement and I think he would be grateful. MR OSHABE: Mr Speaker, when I look at the Order Paper, Item No. 4 is, “Statement by Ministers” and that is what the previous minister has presented.A while ago, Hon. Ssemujju thought the minister was responding to a Member’s question. You ruled that - and he insisted that statements by ministers are given an hour for discussion.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT[Mr Mwebesa]5935THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022Mr Speaker, according to the Order Paper, we had a right, as Members, to have a debate on the issue presented by the minister because it is presented as a statement by the minister. With your guidance, we really have a lot to talk about on the matter before this House, especially on the closure of businesses. Will you allow a little bit of discussion on that matter? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, one day, you will be a minister. The response the minister brought was a response, which I did not want to give just two minutes of reading. So, I allowed the Clerk to structure it as a statement, but not in the real meaning of a statement originated by the minister; but in the meaning of the detail that is in it.Now, even if it was a statement, it is my discretion, as the presiding officer, to look through the statement, and also look at what I have on the Order Paper – because when you insist on saying “it is our right” - rule 52(2) gives me powers to look at it and determine whether we should have debate on it or not.Since it was a response, I am still tied by rule 44(2) of the Rules of Procedure, where I can only get a response. However, this does not stop the committee responsible from taking up this statement and generating work.Do you get it, honourable? Basically, that is why I am constrained. Otherwise, if I give each response a debate of one hour, then, we will never do business in this House. Next item -MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON SUPPLY OF SEEDLINGSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First skip that one as I consult with Hon. Musasizi because I was talking to his senior. So, you can call Item No.6 for now.RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO URGENT QUESTIONSTHE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIESTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries?MR BWINO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The version of the Order Paper that I have shows that the statement is by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, are you reading from the same? On Item 6(I)(a) of the Order Paper, I have the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.(A) ON THE PLIGHT OF OVER 600 PEOPLE IN THE VILLAGES OF KASANJE, LWEMODDA, KYEBIGGA AND KALINGOMA IN KYESIIGA SUBCOUNTY , MASAKA DISTRICT WHO WERE EVICTED IN 2020 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development -House suspended for five minutes.(The House was suspended at 3.34 p.m.)(On resumption at 3.42 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO URGENT QUESTIONS(A) ON THE PLIGHT OF OVER 600 PEOPLE IN THE VILLAGES OF KASANJE, LWEMODDA, KYEBIGGA AND KALINGOMA IN KYESIIGA SUBCOUNTY , MASAKA DISTRICT WHO WERE EVICTED IN 2020THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development -  5936PRIME MINISTER’S TIME3.42THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to apologise to this House for having made you adjourn for some minutes –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, we suspended. We did not adjourn.MS NABAKOOBA: I am sorry, but I was around; I had moved out briefly. Mr Speaker, accept my apology.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Go on, honourable.MS NABAKOOBA: Mr Speaker, I am now responding to the question raised by Hon. Joan Namutaawe, Woman Representative, Masaka, who talked about a threatening eviction of about 600 people in her district.Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that last year, I made an effort to reach Kasanje in Masaka. I managed to interact with the communities and the leaders of the area. I found out that the matter had been raised in the previous Parliament, and efforts were made by my predecessors to solve it, but maybe it was not concluded. There were even court cases. The community that had taken the owner to Court was actually ordered by Court to vacate the area, since they had been considered squatters. The land being talked about belonged to the Departed Asian Properties Custodian Board. It belonged to Masaka Jaggery Mills Ltd. It has since changed hands, and now belongs to a one Kasujja.Through those interactions, I made sure that at least, I called the landlord on the ground. We extensively discussed with him and the RDC.  I instructed the RDC of the area to handle the matter. They entered into mediation and the owner ended up compensating some of the people who had crops on the land. Initially, they were about 170 people, and then they ended up presenting a list of 400 people, which was very difficult for us, as a ministry, to ascertain whether they were indeed 400 people, because they had no permanent houses or permanent gardens.Mr Speaker, by the time the MP brought the matter on the Floor of Parliament, compensation had started and it was still ongoing. However, the contention arose out of the additional numbers. I directed the RDC to intervene and see how they can be helped. For those who had permanent houses and a permanent school, they entered into an agreement with the owner to enable them legalise their tenancy. Currently, I can confirm that the matter was handled and we only await a report from the RDC of the area. The details are in a report that was submitted some time back. I beg to submit. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.(B) ON THE IMPENDING EXPIRY OF THE UGANDA SUPPORT TO MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT (USMID) PROJECT IN REFUGEE HOSTING DISTRICTSMS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a response to the question raised by Hon. Ababiku Jesca, Adjumani District Woman MP, on the impending expiry of the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) project in refugee hosting districts.We have a running programme in 11 refugee-hosting districts of Adjumani, Terego, Madi-Okollo, Moyo, Obongi, Yumbe, Lamwo. They have signed a civil works contract for a total of 36 sub-projects. Right now, they have reported full mobilisation of their contractors with varying stages of construction ongoing.Mr Speaker, about the expiry of the USMID; USMID is supposed to expire in December 2023. Nevertheless, as a ministry, we have started engaging all the stakeholders to enable us have a successor-project that will benefit our cities and some of the municipalities.That is the statement as of now. I beg to submit.RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER5937THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022I would like to assure you that the programmes we have began in the refugee host districts, will be ready by the expiry of this additional funding under the USMID programme, which is running in the lands ministry. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the honourable colleague who raised the matter around?(C) ON THE ALLOCATION OF A 150-ACRE PIECE OF PUBLIC LAND IN SANGO BAY TO A PRIV ATE INDIVIDUAL WHO WAS LEVYING A ROAD TOLL ON ROAD USERSMS NABAKOOBA: Mr Speaker, on the allocation of a 150-acre piece of public land in Sango Bay to a private individual who was levying a road toll on road users - This was raised by Hon. John Mpalanyi, MP Kyotera County.The ministry investigated the matter and found out that the land titles that had been issued were issued in error. Since that time, 13 land titles have been canceled. The owners were asked to return those titles to complete the process. As we speak now, we have a team comprised of physical planners, surveyors and valuers in the field for boundary opening of the Sango Bay.They have also established that the road toll is not there as of now.  Mapping of the land parcels for the project-affected persons, forests and wetlands is ongoing to ensure the successful implementation of the palm oil project, which is going to take place in that area. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is Hon. John Mpalanyi here? (D) ON THE QUESTION OF MANAGEMENT OF LAND MATTERS AND ABUSE OF MINISTERIAL POWER BY THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENTMS NABAKOOBA: On the question of management of land matters and abuse of ministerial power by the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development in purporting to suspend activities of Uganda Land Commission and suspension of all the activities of Wakiso District Land Office by the lands minister of state. This was raised by Hon. Medard Sseggona Lubega, MP Busiro East.The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development sought the guidance of His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda on management of Uganda Land Commission activities. H.E. the President intervened by interdicting the chairperson and corporate secretary of the commission. There is now an acting chairperson and acting secretary of the commission, who are spearheading the implementation of the activities of the commission. Issues at Wakiso Ministerial Zonal Offices that led to the closure of the offices by the lands minister of state have since been resolved. The offices are open and functional and serving the public. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is Hon. Sseggona here? No.(E) ON THE EVICTION OF 200 HOUSEHOLDS FROM A PIECE OF LAND IN NTWETWE CONSTITUENCY IN KYANKWANZI DISTRICTMS NABAKOOBA: The ministry carried out investigations and found out that the land belongs to the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima’s wife, Linda Nyakairima; it covers about five square miles. At the time of acquiring the land by the family of late Nyakairima, the land had very few settlements in 2010. As of now, this land is highly encumbered. We wrote to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, who guided that the Land Fund should be used to compensate the land owner so that people can have titles on this land. The boundary opening exercise and land valuation was carried out to enable us kick-start the process of compensating the landlords. Thank you.5938PRIME MINISTER’S TIME(F) ON GRABBING OF BUSAABALA PLAYGROUND IN MAKINDYE SSABAGABOMS NABAKOOBA:  The ministry has been on the ground to ascertain the allegations of land grabbing, and reconnaissance has been done. Leaders of the area were consulted - we were there with the honourable MP and I directed that the status quo should be maintained until a report of surveyors is prepared and discussed.A team of surveyors will visit the locus next week to open the boundaries to ascertain the size of land, owners of the land, overlaps if any, and encroachment. That is all I have, thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.(G) ON THE EVICTION OF 450 FAMILIES FROM LAND IN AREAS OF BUDDA, BUWENDA, KYAMBAALE IN KIBINGE SUBCOUNTY BY A ONE DA VID SSENFUKA AND THE NEED FOR URGENT INTERVENTIONMS NABAKOOBA: The ministry investigated the land eviction claims and it was found out that Mr David Ssenfuka does not own land in the said areas. And, there are no threats of land eviction. I beg to submit. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kayemba, do you have any supplementary questions? Not a comment.3.55MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA (NUP, Bu-komansimbi South County, Bukomansim-bi): I thank the minister, but she sent a repre-sentative from the lands ministry, who came and met the residents. I thought we would have a good report because the residents gave all the information and I am somehow disappointed to see that nothing is there.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let me guide you. Before you come to speak on the microphone, please, know what the rules say. Whenever we are getting a response from the minister, rule 44(2) talks of a supplementary question. If you just have a comment, you can wait for a minister in the corridor and comment. If you do not have a supplementary question and I ask you - because I must ask, please, say, “I do not have any.” (Mr Kayemba rose_)No, now you have thought of a question. Okay, ask your question Hon. Kayemba.MR KAYEMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, why is it that all leaders, especially the local leaders were taken to Court and others blocked from going there to help the evictees, if there is no land issue there?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, these are issues we saw in the media.MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable member reported about one person, Ssenfuka and we went to check whether Ssenfuka was actually threatening to evict people. From the interactions, Ssenfuka had no land in the area. If there are other developments by other people, let us get the information. We shall investigate and report back.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you interact with Ssenfuka and he said he was not planning to evict anyone?MS NABAKOOBA: Mr Speaker, I would go there personally, but this particular one I sent technical officers to go on ground and ascertain the allegations.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, honourable colleague, you have been assured by the minister, that Mr Ssenfuka has no land in the area and he should, therefore, not threaten or try to evict anyone. If he tries, come back to the minister and report to the police because the minister has confirmed That Mr Senfuka has no land there. I think it is a good assurance on your side.RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER5939THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, this is action taken in regard to the recommendations of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the petition in the matter of Kasoli Tenants SACCO Limited. This is a little bit detailed because we are required to give you what -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, this is an action-taken report; it should be a substantive item. Minister, you will get space on the Order Paper to present the substantive item.MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the Floor of this Parliament, I raised concern about grabbing of the scouts’ land Kazi and the disappearance of the titles. The presiding officer directed that the minister goes on the ground and reports back to this House.So, procedurally, I am seeking your guidance since the minister is around and perhaps, she could use the same opportunity to inform this House about the theft of the scouts’ land in Kazi. I beg to submit.MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable member. Yes, a question was raised by the Member and I took it up immediately, I assigned one of my officers to get in touch with the honourable MP to get me the documents and details of the complaint.The officer told me that he communicated to you, but you were out of the country, and you were unavailable. And, it was very difficult for me to proceed without additional information.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you needed additional information so that you are able? I thought the questions were very clear.MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the minister in charge of lands, who has all the database, information, staff in the district - we opened regional offices to seek information from a Member who raised a matter on the Floor instead of using the Government system to verify and report?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, this is a direct issue. The Member is concerned with the safety of the title. If there are any issues - please, honourable colleague, we have our records; what you submitted is what she is supposed to respond to. So, honourable minister, on Tuesday, come back with a response to this issue.Colleagues, it is Prime Minister’s Time. Honourable minister, after Prime Minister’s time, I am going to give you a chance since you have the report on the action taken; we shall allow you to table it as a substantive item.STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK - 27TH TO 29TH SEPTEMBER 2022MR KANYIKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Looking at you does not mean I have allowed you. I must call you. What if I was trying to understand what you are up to? (Laughter) Okay, raise your procedural matter, honourable member.MR KANYIKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was scared. I rise on a procedural matter, under Rule 41(8) of the Rules of Procedure.When I look at the Order Paper, I realise that Prime Minister’s Time has been allocated 60 minutes yet, the rule is very clear that Prime Minister’s Time shall not exceed 45 minutes.I seek your guidance on whether it is not revoking this rule.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you read Rule 41(8a) of our Rules of Procedure? Do you have the rules; can you read it? Can you read subrules (a) and (b)? Okay, let me just help you.Subrule (a) talks about written questions which are a maximum of 40 minutes; and (b) talks about oral questions, which are 20 minutes. That is one hour. So, if you are still holding onto the old rules, honourable colleague, please, go to the amended rules. You passed these rules here. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please, proceed.5940PRIME MINISTER’S TIME4.04THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): My son is still new. Mr Speaker, I move under Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that requires me, as the Leader of Government Business, to make a statement in the House regarding the business for the succeeding week. I am, therefore, here to submit the following business for the week of 27 to 29 September 2022.1. The Microfinance Deposit Taking Institutions (Amendment) Bill; and2. The National Disaster Preparedness Risk Management Plan.Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Procedure; Chief Opposition Whip.MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, thank you. This is not going to be the first time I raise this procedural issue regarding this particular item on the Order Paper, which is featuring religiously. It is, indeed, within her mandate, as the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, to always submit the Government Business of the succeeding week. However, it has to be reflected on the subsequent Order Papers; this has not happened. It is not going to be a ritual or kind of ceremonial activity for the Leader of Government Business to always present the business of the succeeding week, but which is never implemented. Are we proceeding well, Mr Speaker?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us judge her starting next week. Prime Minister, next week, we shall see if you bring what you have promised today.PRIME MINISTER’S TIME4.06THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, Hon. Ronald Olema, Member of Parliament, Lower Madi Okollo County, Madi Okollo District raised an issue. He gave a long narrative.He wishes to put forward the issue of poor status of Pawor Seed Secondary School, which was constructed by the Ministry of Education and Sports at a cost of Shs 1.4 billion in 2018, and that this construction was supervised by engineers from the Ministry of Education and Sports, and Arua District Local Government, from 2018 to 2019.He further said that two different contractors, Gibo Company Ltd and Dolphins Consulting Engineers & Contractors Ltd were awarded the seed secondary school contract worth Shs 700 million each. The school, which is on the verge of collapsing due to poor and careless interior and shoddy works, is located nine kilometres away from the nearest trading centre.He indicated that on 8 September 2021, he wrote to the Ministry of Education and Sports about the poor status of the school, but to-date, the school matter has not been handed over to Madi-Okollo District Local Government by either Arua District or the Ministry of Education and Sports.He further said that during his monitoring visit to the site, together with the RDC, the district chairperson, the district councillors and the LC3 chairpersons of Madi-Okollo District, they noted that a headteacher, with a few teachers, were posted to this school and they had admitted some students who are being exposed to a death trap due to shoddy or appalling structures.Noticeable was the fact that all toilet structures had collapsed beyond repair, including four classroom blocks, the administration block and the computer room, which stand condemned for exposing students and teachers. According to him, there was no value-for-money. No assessment was done at the site, and the school could be closed by all standards.His prayer is: Can the Ministry of Education and Sports undertake an immediate assessment and major repairs done in the school before term three?5941THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022Mr Speaker, my response is that the Ministry of Education and Sports has noted this anomaly and has organised a meeting between the project implementation team from Arua District and the technical team from Madi-Okollo District. The Ministry of Works and Transport has constituted a technical team too, to undertake an immediate assessment. The outcome of the above two engagements will inform the next course of action.He had an additional question: Can the Ministry of Education and Sports, together with Arua District Local Government, either consider the school condemned or handover, once major repairs are done?Mr Speaker, my response to the honourable member is that the handover will be informed by the joint structural and technical assessment report, and the outcomes of the engagement of the two district local governments; that is Arua and Madi-Okollo.He had a third additional question: Can the Ministry of Education and Sports consider additional funding for the establishment of a boarding section, since the students commute from eight kilometres away; and also provide a clean water source, that is a borehole with solar power? My response, Mr Speaker, is that all seed secondary schools are purely day and no boarding facilities are provided.Regarding the provision of a clean water source - that is a borehole - the local governments and Ministry of Water and Environment have been required to prioritise seed secondary schools in their plans for water provision. For solar power, once the operational issues are addressed, the school will be prioritised under the Electricity for Rural Transmission Project, which is within the Ministry of Education and Sports and the energy ministry.He had a fourth question: Can Government ensure that the persons involved in shoddy works, putting Government’s name to shame, be investigated and apprehended? Mr Speaker, my response is that Government of Uganda does not condone shoddy works and believes in value-for-money. Therefore, we are currently undertaking a technical assessment and the recommendations therein shall be implemented to the letter; and the culprits, if any, will be brought to book.The second Member is Hon. Christine Apolot, Kumi District Woman MP. Her prayer is that the Prime Minister informs the House on the Government undertaking to establish regional cancer centres. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, a minute. Government Chief Chip, can you tell your colleagues on the NRM side that we have serious business going on here?Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it has become a serious habit. Yesterday, Members discussed it here - we have serious business going on here, but other Members are merrymaking in the corridor. So, we would like to bring it to your attention.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, we shall handle.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.MS NABBANJA: The second question came from Hon. Christine Apolot, the Woman Member of Parliament for Kumi District. She asked that I inform the House on Government’s undertaking to establish regional cancer centres.My response is that the need for the regional cancer centres is well articulated in the current Manifesto of the NRM. The overall aim is to move cancer services, that is, prevention, diagnosis and treatment, closer to the population, and to decentralise cancer care and management to regional levels while decongesting the main Uganda Cancer Institute.5942PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEWith the increasing burden of cancer in the country, the Government of Uganda has embarked on the development of regional cancer centres. This is in line with the National Development Plan III and the National Health Policy, Health Sector Development Plan and the Uganda Cancer Institute Strategic Plan 2022/2026.According to the Uganda Cancer Institute Strategic Plan, four regional cancer centres in the western, eastern, northern, and north-western regions are to be set up, equipped and operationalised by the end of the Financial Year 2025/2026.This is the update on the progress of the regional cancer centres across the country.Northern Uganda Regional Cancer Institute GuluThe project for the regional cancer centre in Gulu was approved by Parliament in 2020, as a Turkey project. The construction work is nearing completion. Equipment has been shipped and is on site awaiting installation. The site handover is expected by the end of the year 2022, and the official commissioning will be in the year 2023.The Eastern Uganda Regional Cancer Centre MbaleThe feasibility studies for the realisation of this project have been completed and the concept was submitted to the development committee of the finance ministry. In the meantime, the Uganda Cancer Institute commenced work on start-up structures in order to have a skeleton service, while awaiting a comprehensive project that will accommodate all the cancer services.Western Uganda Regional Cancer Centre MbararaThe final report of the feasibility studies for Western Uganda Regional Cancer Centre in Mbarara has been completed and submitted together with a concept to the development committee of the finance ministry, for approval and financing.In the meantime, Mr Speaker, there is a very active cancer care service, which is second only to the services in Kampala, with over 3,000 patients attended to, in the last financial year. This has been achieved using the available infrastructure, equipment and human resource.North-Western Uganda Regional Cancer Centre AruaMr Speaker, the feasibility studies for North-Western Uganda Cancer Centre in Arua, have been developed and submitted to the development committee of the finance ministry, awaiting approval and financing. In the meantime, breast cancer prevention and early detection services commenced in Arua using the available infrastructure equipment and human resources.Hon. Acayo asked a question: Whereas the general civilian population continues to obey and respect the traffic laws while walking or driving on the road, there are a number of vehicles and motorists of security personnel vehicles with civilian number plates, but with military jackets put on the driver’s car seats to disguise as vehicles of military officers.There are also civilians and some security elements that have sirens and flashlights similar to those of VIP vehicles. They always abuse traffic rules, force to have the right of way and even disobey the police traffic officers on the roads.Her prayer is: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what mechanism does Government have in place to stop this abuse of the road and disruption of traffic flow that inconveniences the movement of people, especially at peak hours?”My response is that Section 123 of the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998, (Amendment) Act, 2020, the Traffic and Road safety (Rules of the Road) Regulations, 2004, specifically, regulation 5 specifies who has a right of way.[Ms Nabbanja]5943THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022Regulation 5(2) states that, “The driver of a car of the President, Vice-President, Chief Justice, Speaker to Parliament or the Prime Minister or a police vehicle or other emergency vehicle or a vehicle in a State Motorcade is allowed, in case of emergency or in other cases as prescribed, to deviate from the regulations.”Section 123(5)(a) of the principal Act states: “Authorised emergency motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, trailer or engineering plant for the purposes of the police, fire brigade, ambulances, the military motor vehicles of the armed forces and such other motor vehicles, trailers or engineering plant as may be designated by the minister in consultation with the chief licencing officer by statutory order.”Mr Speaker, Government through the Directorate of Traffic Police has put in place a joint security taskforce composed of both military and traffic police officers, to crack down on motorists, especially those from security agencies and Government institutions, who have been abusing traffic laws with impunity. The operation focuses on the peak hours of the day when the crime is much prevalent. The security vehicles impounded are handed over to the military police for further management. Civilian drivers with military security jackets found on their car seats will face the law that speaks to the illegal possession of the military wear.Drivers in the vehicles belonging to Government institutions with Government number plates that abuse traffic laws and regulations shall be held responsible for the fines and tickets issued against the vehicles, in person.Mr Speaker, vehicles and motorists with unauthorised siren and flashlights are also impounded and fines issued.Government urges the general public, especially public officers, to obey traffic rules and those found culpable shall face the law. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister - straight from the airport to the House and addressing serious issues. That shows that you have stamina.Honourable colleagues, I now open up questions for oral answer. The questions will be for one minute. Avoid introduction. Just say: “Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why are you not doing A, B, C and D?” MS AISHA KABANDA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister made a commitment that she would investigate the matter where an NRM chairperson became a public nuisance, and report back to Parliament. The Prime Minister has not said anything to that effect. Can I request that she responds to the matter of Mr Yiga, the NRM Chairperson for Gomba, who displayed his nudity in public? The law on public nuisance has not been enacted on him.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, you are out of order. This is Prime Minister’s Time. Rule 41 is very clear. Let us just refer to our rules. If it is one of the questions you have written to the Prime Minister or a question you are going to raise, now is the answer.MS KABANDA:  It is the Prime Minister who made a commitment, Sir.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a response, not a question. Colleagues, just go and look at rules 50 to 54. Look at Prime Minister’s Time, which is under rule 41. It is gazetted properly - no other interruption. Prime Minister’s Time is Prime Minister’s Time and these are your rules. They are not mine.MS KABANDA: Sir, it was a procedural matter. You could guide.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is Prime Minister’s Time. (Laughter) (Members rose_) I am going to pick you, colleagues. What I am doing today – Rt Hon. Prime Minister, after your questions have ended, we are going to have matters of national importance so that 5944PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEMembers can raise their issues. Today, we did not do matters of national importance at the beginning.4.25MR MWESIGWA RUKAARI  (NRM, Mbarara North Division, Mbarara City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My issue is about land in Mbarara. The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Hon. Nabakooba, has been there. It has been a running conflict. If you read today’s newspaper, there is a whole page about Rwenjeru conflict. Government part-paid and the landlord has been selling the same land. It is a crisis.There are also security personnel involved. I got involved and failed. State House tried and it did not resolve –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Question, honourable member?MR MWESIGWA: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, help us and sort out the Rwenjeru land conflict, which the honourable minister knows about.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when are you sorting out the Rwenjeru conflict? Colleagues, ensure that you end with a question?MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, now that the lands minister is here, I request you to respond.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we use one minute in this session.2.26THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT  (Ms Judith Nabakooba):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been to that area. We agreed that we should open the boundaries, first, to ascertain issues of ownership - to know, which land was given to the public and which one is being claimed by the other person. I promise that next week, we will be sending technical teams to do that. We will be in position to report back to the House and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Keep Members involved. 4.27MR FREDRICK ANGURA  (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the rains are currently ongoing. The last time we raised concern about planting seeds here, the Government promised that a report was going to be made, together with the one on seedlings. However, this is specifically about seeds. Our people are waiting. The Parish Development Model, where we were told the seeds were taken, is delaying. When are we going to have a supplementary budget brought here or assurance for seeds for planting?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you will not respond to that question. Colleagues, we cannot tell the Prime Minister or a minister to bring a supplementary. Whatever the Prime Minister or Government brings should be assessed by Parliament. If they bring it, how will you assess when you are the one who requested for it? That is solicitation.Hon. Angura, the finance minister has a statement on the Order Paper. We are waiting for him. I will allow you when we are discussing it.4.28MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when the floods hit Mbale, they ended up in Budaka. You are aware that a lot was destroyed. I did what it could take and even the district disaster committee wrote to the ministry. However, up to now, whereas Mbale was given some relief, Budaka has never got anything. What do you intend to do for the people of Budaka, who also faced the wrath of the floods?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, people of Budaka are waiting for you.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I stayed in Budaka for almost 10 years. I am part of Budaka. Now that I have got a report, let me [The Deputy Speaker]5945THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022go, together with the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness. We shall come back here and report.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go and take action, as usual. There is no need to report back.4.29MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on tourism roads in Bukimbiri, Kisoro District. We have been waiting for Government to compensate the people affected by the construction of these roads. I would like the Prime Minister to tell us when compensation will begin and when the roads will be constructed.In Bukimbiri, we do not even have a kilometre of tarmac. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is the new MP for Bukimbiri. (Laughter)MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the “new baby” is aware that I was in his constituency and I know it road by road. We had a meeting with the President, UNRA and the Minister of Works and Transport. The issue is being handled.4.31MR FADIL TWALLA  (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When landslides happened in the Elgon subregion, Shs 5 million was given to the people who lost their dear ones. It was from the President’s office. People from Bugisu got theirs, but those from Sebei did not. I would like to ask the Prime Minister: What happened to the money for the people of Sebei?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when is the share for Sebei being delivered?MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I will go and investigate. Otherwise, I know that the President directed the Minister for the Presidency to deliver his support to the bereaved families, and I know Kapchorwa was one of them because they lost three people. I will find out what happened and act accordingly – [MEMBER: “Information.”]THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, please, read rule 41. In fact, only the Leader of the Opposition has the right of reply or comment; no one else.4.33MS SYLVIA NAYEBALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gomba hosts the biggest solar plant in East and Central Africa that was commissioned by the President in 2019. However, where the plant is seated, the owner of the land has not been compensated up to now.I would like to know from the Prime Minister if Government has any plans to compensate the owner of the land, who has since passed on; it is now the widow and the children that have moved to different offices of the contractors to seek compensation that has not been forthcoming. Thank you, Mr Speaker.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I have the Minister of State for Energy here.  Hon. Okaasai, come and throw some light on this.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okaasai. Colleagues, now that is a problem.  I was watching what Hon. Okaasai was doing when they were asking the question and I knew the Prime Minister would refer to you.Hon. Okaasai, where the solar plant in Gomba is located, the owner of the land has not been compensated. The man died and now, the family is moving around the offices of the contractors begging. When can they be compensated?4.35THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENER-GY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai): Sorry about the distraction, which I had behind me. Mr Speaker, I request that she gives me more information; I will follow it up and give -5946PRIME MINISTER’S TIMETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Here, the language is “honourable colleague”, not “he” or “she”. It is “honourable member” or “honourable colleague.”MR OKAASAI: Okay, I will get more information from the honourable colleague so that I can follow it up to get exactly where the challenge is in giving compensation for the land where we put that station.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nayebale, link up with Hon. Okaasai and ensure that, indeed, they are compensated.4.35MS MIDIUS NATUKUNDA  (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is: Last year in October, heavy rains destroyed three schools in Rukungiri, that is, Kakamba, Kyabureere in Bugangari and Nyarubare in Nyakishenyi.When the team from the Office of the Prime Minister came, they visited all the affected areas and promised to send relief in terms of iron sheets and other necessities. However, relief was sent only to Kakamba Primary School, leaving out the other two. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what happened to the other relief that was coming to Kyabureere and Nyarubare Primary School in Nyakishenyi Subcounty?MS NABBANJA : Mr Speaker, let the Member get in touch with me; those schools will also be considered.4.37MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 11 April 2022, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industrial and Fisheries, declared a quarantine due to Foot and Mouth Disease in Adjumani District.After vaccination and thorough observation, the district wrote back to the ministry, but up to now, the quarantine has not yet been lifted.Why is the ministry not responding to Adjumani’s letter when our people are suffering and out of the business economy? MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, once your area is put under quarantine because of Foot and Mouth Disease, it truly hurts. Therefore, if vaccination is done to a certain extent after a period of time and after assessment, the district is supposed to be out of quarantine.Now that the agriculture minister is here, please, come and throw more light, on why we have delayed to -4.39THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Fred Bwino): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The challenge of Foot and Mouth Disease is countrywide and it remains until we are able to carry out universal vaccination.Therefore, we cannot lift the quarantine for one area as of now. However, I request that you allow my ministry to come up with a comprehensive statement on this national problem.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Please, come with it on Wednesday because we are now getting mixed reactions. Last week, we were told that, indeed, it had been cleared and that what was remaining was implementation. The Ministry of Internal Affairs was ready to do their part, but waiting for the agriculture ministry. Now, we go back to the old days. So, on Wednesday, please, come up with a statement.4.40MR GEOFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In 2017 and 2018, farmers sold tobacco to Continental Tobacco to the tune of Shs 12 billion in West Nile, but the company did not pay up to a tune of Shs 9.7 billion.We have been making efforts; the banks are selling farmers’ property and those farmers cannot send their children to school.5947THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022May I, therefore, know from the Prime Minister, when Government is coming in with a commitment of paying these farmers? I thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, Government is aware of this problem. I am also aware that the people of Arua supplied tobacco to those companies, the way those of Bunyoro and Mubende did. We are done with Bunyoro, and next is Arua. The verification exercise is ongoing. Thank you very much.4.41MS FLORA NATUMANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kikuube): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister came to Kikuube and the people of Bukinda who were evicted were promised that they would get an answer to their plight - that was last year.These people have never been well resettled; they have no schools and hospitals. The good thing is that the lands minister is also here; she also visited us. These people have never received  an answer. They are camped at the district and they have never received an answer to their plight. They need schools and hospitals.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question, honourable member.MS NATUMANYA: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what are the plans for the people of Bukinda?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, she is aware that I have been to Bukinda. The President directed that we handle that matter with the utmost urgency it deserves. The disaster preparedness ministry has been on site and the assessment has been done. The schools will be constructed in those areas where those people were shifted, in the near future, using Development Response to Displacement Impact Project (DRDIP), which was approved by Parliament.4.43MR TONY AWANY (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime back, Nwoya District was earmarked to benefit from the Sericulture Project under Science, Technology and Innovation. I am told the project in Nwoya has been terminated. Can the Prime Minister give us the reason that project in Nwoya has been terminated? Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I request the Member to get in touch with me so that I get more details about the same and then, we shall act accordingly.4.44MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, at the beginning of this term, you promised on the Floor of Parliament that the victims of LRA from Madi Subregion will be compensated in this financial year; I did not see it in the budget.So, what is the alternative route? Thank you very much.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General together with the President were in Soroti this year, and we commissioned the compensation exercise for that region; northern, eastern and West Nile. A total of Shs 50 billion has already been spent and I believe the people of Adjumani will also get supported.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. - On Prime Minister’s time, there is no supplementary information.4.46MS CISSY NAMUJJU (NRM, Woman Representative, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you are aware, Lwengo is one of the cattle corridor districts, which need more attention.I would like to know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister: When will the water scarcity problem in Lwengo District be worked upon, because the people of Lwengo are also citizens of Uganda?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Lwengo - 5948PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEMS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, it is challenging to answer a question from a very popular Member. I am aware of the problem of Lwengo because Hon. Cissy Namujju has been to my office.Those people were promised excavators to work on their water sources. I request that the Member gets in touch with me so that together we can task the ministry concerned so that those people are served.4.47MS MARIAM NAIGAGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, during the Baraza conference in Namutumba District in April, your representative, the Minister, Office of Prime Minister (General Duties), promised to support Nawampandu Primary School with iron sheets to roof the four-classroom block that was built by the community since pupils are studying under trees, and now, it is a rainy season. When are we receiving the iron sheets? Thank you very much.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, let the Member come to the office and we act appropriately.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.4.48MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2018 and 2019, 13 new districts were created.  Government promised from time-to-time to provide them with road equipment. But up to now, nothing has been provided. Can we know when Government will give these new districts road equipment so that they can work on their roads? Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I have answered this question and I think this is the 10th time. I have told Members that the new districts will get their equipment because this Parliament appropriated money; these machines are being worked on in Japan. Very soon, the equipment will come and we will have them here.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.4.49MR MUSA NOAH (Independent, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Education and Sports in conjunction with NIRA are carrying out registration of primary and secondary school children. This registration is taking place countrywide. However, when I go to my district, the parents are supposed to transport their children to the NIRA district headquarters. Our parents are very poor and they do not have money to transport their children. In other districts, they are going to schools.Prime Minister, what is the proper procedure that your people are following to register our children? I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I will inquire and get in touch with the Member or come back here and inform you of the proper procedure.4.50MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is a tourism road that connects Kitgum to Karenga and to Kidepo. The state of that road is very worrying; our people can hardly travel to the next subcounty within the district, and this road was planned and budgeted for.When we consulted UNRA, we were told that they no longer have the budget and the mandate to work on the road because there is a contractor who was already contracted to work on the road. I would like to know when work will commence on that road so that our people can move comfortably. Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, the Kitgum-Karenga-Kidepo Road was prioritised by Cabinet last week. And, therefore, olimukintu.  (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that language cannot go on our record because we do not know what it means. (Laughter)5949THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022MS NABBANJA: I am sorry, Mr Speaker, you know, I wanted to inform her that, that is a priority road and, therefore, it will be worked on in this Financial Year, 2023/2024.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.4.51MR SIMON OPOLOT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister; there is a new road that she recently launched that passes Pallisa-Mukongoro-Kanyum up to Kumi. That road is finishing my voters. It does not take a week without somebody being killed by over-speeding vehicles.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when are you putting humps, especially along trading centres and corners? This is the fourth time I am talking about this issue.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The votes are reducing, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, and it might be his voters specifically.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, it is our responsibility, both the Member and myself, to sensitise our people once a new road is made because our people sometimes have a way they ride on new roads.Therefore, as the Ministry of Works and Transport comes in to put signposts, I request the Member to sensitise the community so that they do not die just like that.4.52MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka South County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is a death trap at the junction running from Iganga around Walugogo, on the road that goes to Luuka.In 2020, His Excellency the President, with the then Speaker of Parliament and ministers, commissioned the construction of this road from Walugogo-Luuka-Bulopa to Kamuli. Road equipment were assembled from the biggest to the smallest during that commissioning.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to-date, all these equipment were removed and nothing has taken place. I am inquiring why the road equipment –(Member timed out.)MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I will come with an answer after inquiring from the Minister of Works and Transport, and UNRA.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.4.53MR DENES SEKABIRA (NUP, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I raised a matter here of illegal land eviction of residents of Kakabala Parish, by land grabbers hiding under the National Forestry Authority. Over 100 families are being evicted from their land. I raised the matter and you promised to send a team to the ground. When are you sending the team - because these people are suffering too much?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.MS NABBANJA: I request to know where Kakabala is because I only know Kakabala of Kyegegwa.MR SEKABIRA: It is found in Butuntumula Subcounty in Luwero District.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I request that you allow me get in touch with the Member, so that together, we can discuss what is happening with the NFA and the people.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.4.54MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the NRM Government has always promised to put a fruit processing plant in our district because we are the major producers of pineapples and mangoes. When are you going to put in place a fruit processing plant in Luweero District?5950PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEMS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the President has been very categorical on this; value-addition is the way to go because a lot of wastage is taking place in Luweero and other areas. I request that for such big issues, it is better we get in touch with Members before coming to the Floor. There are plans to ensure that those people get investors so that we can process your –(Interjections) - yes, big investors.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.4.55MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. This financial year, Parliament allocated money to sports federations. However, as we speak, many federations are pulling out of our regional teams because this quarter, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released zero shillings to all of them. My question to the Prime Minister is: When will the federations that represent our national teams get money for sports?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, some of them are in camp and they are stuck.MS NABBANJA: I request, once again, the honourable member, to get in touch with me, so that I can speak to the Minister of Education and Sports. The finance minister is here, but I doubt he has the answer.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 4.56MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. About eight years ago, the road to Buhweju was surveyed for purposes of tarmacking it; through Buhweju, Ibanda, Kitagwenda, and some parts of Kamwenge, up to Rubirizi District. People’s buildings were marked. It is now over eight years and people cannot sell their buildings or develop them. They are stuck and do not know what to do. I ask the Prime Minister to update us on what the people whose buildings were marked following that process can do, because they are stuck.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I was in Buhweju this year. The bad experience I got there forced me to cause a meeting with UNRA and the Ministry of Works and Transport. That is a priority road. We are only trying to get financing so that the road can be worked on; it is a priority road for this Government. Thank you.4.57MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, yesterday night a one Kato Hussein was abducted from his home at Buddo, and a one Ssemakula Abbas was arbitrarily arrested from Ben Kiwanuka Street. They are nowhere to be seen. Where are these people?Secondly, have we gone back to the days of Amin and Obote? Why arbitrarily arrest rather than summon the suspects? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, we do not have much time.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The colleague has withdrawn the name Obote. So, you can handle - (Laughter)MS NABBANJA: I can see Mama Cecilia was about to hang the young man. Mr Speaker and colleagues, I would like to request the Member to give me more details after Parliament’s sitting today - because as I told you, I am just from the airport - such that we can, together, see how to start the investigation.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.4.59MS CHRISTINE NDIWALANA (NUP, Bu-komansimbi North County, Bukomansim-bi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I got different calls, so far from two 5951THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022villages in Kigangazi Town Council, where people have been evicted from their land and those evicting claim that they were sent from your office. Is it true that you sent some people to go and evict people from their land in Bu-komansimbi? Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, that is blackmail of the highest order. I have not sent anybody to Kigangazi. I even do not know where Kigangazi is. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, is it true?MS NABBANJA: It is not true. Secondly, the minister is here. She can always investigate that.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, take up that issue and address the Member’s concerns.5.00MR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on 21 October 2021, the Attorney-General of Uganda wrote to the Hon. Minister of Local Government, giving opinion on several issues on how to operationalise new cities, including sharing properties. We have come here several times telling you we have issues in these new districts, regarding properties. When are we getting the guidelines for the new cities on sharing properties?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Local Government, the Attorney-General, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Prime Minister’s office have had several meetings over this issue, so that the districts and cities that have been created can have autonomy over the others. I believe the guidelines are already made; let us get in touch, brother.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, as you can see, the time allocated for Prime Minister’s Time is done. However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as I informed you, we had not called matters of national importance. I request that since your ministers are here, these matters can now come in. I request that we continue addressing members’ matters for 30 minutes because they have been very many - and we will continue with the tradition of using one minute, so that we are quick. Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.5.01MS FLA VIA NABAGABE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question is about the Myanzi-Kassanda-Bukuya Road, which is a major road that connects two districts. In Kassanda, we have no single tarmacked road. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have been to Kassanda a number of times and that road has been promised to the people of Kassanda for a very long time. My question is: When will the Myanzi-Kassanda-Bukuya Road ever get tarmacked? Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Member is aware I have been to Kassanda and that, that is a priority road, by Government; it is in our manifesto and it will be worked upon. Those are the roads that Government is struggling to get financing for. 5.03MS SHAMIM MALENDE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is on the African Court on Human and People’s Rights -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, give me peace. I have picked over 20 people here. Now I have just gotten this side –(Applause)  MS MALENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is on the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights. On the 30th of August, I had an opportunity to visit the court in Arusha and interacted with the Registrar of the Court, the Deputy Registrar, the Deputy President and some judges. I was made to realise that Uganda signed the protocol, which put the court into existence. We contribute finances to the running of that court and we send judges there. Unfortunately and 5952PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEsurprisingly, the Government of Uganda has not signed a memorandum allowing  -(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not on record? Just ask the question.MS MALENDE: The question is: When does the Government of Uganda plan to sign the memorandum allowing its citizens to use the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights?MS NABBANJA:  I will just go and instruct the Attorney-General to put that in place so that a Memorandum of Understanding is signed. 5.04MR PATRICK NSANJA (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the three times you have visited Kayunga, you have seen the situation on Kayunga-Bbaale-Galiraya road and the bridge that connects us to Nakasongola. Recently, when you visited, you promised to rehabilitate the road and work on the Kanda Swamp that cut off the road. Up to now, the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) has never turned up. You actually promised to open up the bridge by October, but nothing is being done. What happened to the road? Otherwise, the waters are reducing and drying because of the accidents by sugarcane trucks. MS NABBANJA: The Member has raised two issues. The bridge between Nakasongola and Kayunga; that is, Ssezibwa. Mr Speaker, Ssezibwa Bridge is going to be commissioned by the end of December because it is almost motorable now. I expected you to say, “thank you”. Then the road from Kayunga to Galiraya is one of the country’s priority roads. There is even a contractor earmarked to work on that road. The money we were supposed to use - because of COVID-19, you know what happened. Once we get the money, that road will be worked on.5.05MR JULIUS EKUDO (FDC, Gweri County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what plans does Government have to make sure our children cope with computer literacy, and promote e-learning in Uganda? For some of us who come from the rural areas, our children do not even know how to open a computer. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I know you have been a Member of Cabinet and you are aware that Government has been providing computers to secondary schools. This project continues; so, it will reach his district.5.06MS JULIET NAKABUYE (NUP, Woman Representative, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in the 2021 NRM Manifesto, Ugandan farmers were promised a conducive environment in form of agricultural inputs, such that many can resort to commercial farming. However, since the term began, we have experienced persistent increase in prices. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what measures has Government put in place to see that this problem is curbed so that Ugandan farmers can profit from their investment in agriculture? Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, this Parliament approved funding for the Parish Development Model, aimed at increasing production, productivity and value-addition. I request that we mobilise our people to ensure that the SACCOs are functional so that Government can credit their accounts and they become productive.5.08MR MOSES KAMUNTU (Independent, Rubanda County West, Rubanda):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you visited Kisoro and Kabale the last time - when you were supporting Hon. Kwizera - and you witnessed loadshedding.[Ms Malende]5953THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022Kigezi region has been abandoned. We have not attracted investors because of weak power and constant loadshedding. I have been told that there was a project to extend a high voltage powerline from Mirama Hills to Kigezi for the last 10 years, but to date, there is nothing. Is there any way you can help us get that high voltage power for quick investors?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The honourable Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is there; he can cross over.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the project for what he is talking about was launched yesterday. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this brings us to the issue we talked about. When such projects are being launched, inform the MPs. You launched a project in his area without informing him and moreover, sometimes attended by our opponents. You need to tell your ministers to always inform the MPs.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I promise to inform my colleagues to always involve the area Members of Parliament while launching such very important projects.5.10MS LINDA AUMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a matter of national importance. On the 19th of this month, that was a Saturday, wind blew off the roof of a school in my district - Abolet Primary School in Itek Subcounty - and the pupils have nowhere to study at the moment.Also, the roof of Abongorwot Primary School, in Agali Subcounty, was blown off in 2019 and the President promised to give us iron sheets. I was emceeing, but up to now - I was ambushed on Sunday by the community, telling me that the President is a liar. I request that this pledge be fulfilled -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the question should be:  “Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when are you fulfilling this pledge?” Rt Hon. Prime Minister, she needs iron sheets for her school. MS NABBANJA: She knows, because she was a Resident District Commissioner (RDC) like me. We shall go to Lira and handle her issue. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 5.11MR JOSEPH KOLUO (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on Tuesday this week, strong rains accompanied by heavy hailstorms, blew off the roof of a four-classroom block at Omosingo Primary School in Kapujan Subcounty, where I come from.What can Government do to help the children to study? The neighbour is asking –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have asked the question.MR KOLUO: Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, Toroma is in Katakwi. The Vice-President had talked about this issue. We already have a report about the same and we shall handle it appropriately.5.13MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (Indepen-dent, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you elaborated well in the previous answers and quoted the law that gives entitlement for those who are supposed to be given lead cars and even sirens. May I know when you intend - but before that, we are now in merging time –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have one minute, honourable member.MS KABASHARIRA: We are at a time of merging agencies and authorities so that we can save money. When do you intend to stop these lead cars, which belong to those people 5954PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEwho are not entitled in that law, which you quoted? I know you are an action person.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, like I already told you in my earlier response, we are stopping all those people who have put sirens either in private or Government cars. Once caught - we have already told the traffic officers and security agencies to crack the whip. I promise that it is going to stop because even the President has rallied behind it. 5.15MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Mr Speaker, two months ago, I wrote two questions to the Prime Minister. The first was about an investor known as Agri Exim, who purchased produce worth more than Shs 9 billion from six produce dealers, who support 10,000 farmers in Lango subregion. One year down the road, they have not been paid. The second one was regarding the dual regulation of medical devices by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards and the National Drug Authority. These include cotton, mama kits and syringes. Because of this in-fighting, we see high prices of these commodities and double taxation. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when will I get an answer to these questions that are now two months old? Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, these questions go through the Clerk to Parliament. I am only given these questions by raffle. So, I will request –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are going to handle that. Please, ensure the questions are passed on.5.16MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) is withholding examination materials for both UCE and UACE for several secondary schools in Uganda. The argument they give is that these schools should first get clearance from the Secondary Science and Mathematics Teachers (SESEMAT) and the Uganda National Students’ Association (UNSA) bodies before the materials can be given to them.Aware of the fact that schools underwent challenges during the COVID-19 lockdown, where they could not collect money from the students and remit to those bodies, can’t your good office prevail over UNEB so that it releases the examination materials to the schools since the exams are –(Member timed out.)MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I request the Member to get in touch with me so that we can act accordingly.5.17MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti): Mr Speaker, on the 8th of this month, students of Soroti University went on strike, protesting the non-payment of the living-out allowance and faculty allowance. I have also learnt that it is not only in Soroti University, but all universities in the country. My question is: What has caused the delayed payment or non-payment? Secondly, the security cameras in Soroti City are dead. Recently, a boy called Geoffrey Eboi was murdered in Nakatunya. The police failed to trace the culprit because the cameras were dead. This is a security matter. What is the police doing about this?MS NABBANJA: Where has the minister gone? (Laughter) Mr Speaker, regarding the security cameras in Soroti, we shall investigate and come up with an answer. On the strikes by our university students, I request that you give me time to investigate and come back here to report. 5.19MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have our [Ms Kabasharira]5955THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022people who, whenever they are referred for scanning, have to come to Mulago or go to Aber Hospital. In Financial Year 2021/2022, we budgeted for CT scans. Where are the CT scans – or where is the CT scan for Gulu Regional Referral Hospital? When are we receiving it? They are saying “even Soroti”. When are we receiving these CT scans to reduce the burden on our people? Thank you. MS NABBANJA: I have an answer for that one. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have had good answers, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the procurement process is ongoing. You know I was a minister of health. All regional hospitals will get CT scans. The procurement process is ongoing and very soon, we shall deliver. 5.21MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The way to go, now, after the COVID-19 season, is to increase agricultural production. I recall - and I am sure you also recall - that in 2015, the President pledged to give ox ploughs and oxen to the people of northern Uganda in order for them to come out of poverty.May I know when the Presidential pledges will be honoured so that our people can increase production of cotton and other agricultural produce? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Especially when you are seated near the “money man”. MS NABBANJA: The agriculture minister is here and I believe he can give us a better answer. The finance minister is also here.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister for agriculture?5.22THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Fred Bwino): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On this specific matter of ox ploughs and oxen for Lango, I need to get the details so that I can come back with a report.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, report back on Wednesday.5.23MR CHARLES MATOVU (NUP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will use a minute for two questions. First, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when are you extending relief to the people of Bussi Island? An assessment was done and a report brought to your table. Another disaster has just hit them again. Another one pertains to the Presidential pledge to tarmac the Kisubi—Nakawuka—Nateete and Nakawuka-Kasanje-Mpigi roads. He pledged in 2019, but we have not seen any works taking place to date. And, that road is very important, not only for the people of Nakawuka, but to the whole country because it connects Entebbe, Masaka and Mpigi. When will that road be tarmacked? Thank you. MS NABBANJA:  Relief will come next week.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Then, regarding Nakawuka Road, the procurement process is ongoing. I remember that question was asked here and I gave that answer.5.25MR GEOFFEY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you aware that the major cause of cancer among children is a result of poor post-handling of food, especially storage, poor management of 5956PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEmilk, poor management of beef in abattoirs, and poor management and disposal of waste in the lake? If you are not aware, what action are you putting in place to address these challenges? –(Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But if she is not aware, how can she -(Laughter)- Rt Hon. Prime Minister - luckily enough, she is aware.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker and colleagues, It is our responsibility as citizens and leaders of this country - not only the Prime Minister, but all of us - to educate our people so that we really prevent these non-communicable diseases.Hon. Geofrey Ekanya, you are aware that it is our role as leaders, not only the Prime Minister, but even you. 5.27MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the centrality of sports in promoting good health, development and unity cannot be underestimated. And, as a matter of fact, you know that sports promotion necessitates that we also have sports infrastructure development. My question is: When are we commencing the construction of Akii-Bua Memorial Stadium in Lango Subregion and Buyinja in Fort Portal? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The screen should clear; this is Hon. Okot Boniface and the other one is Hon. Santa Alum. Therefore, he is not Okot Santa. Someone might take a picture thinking we have a new Hon. Okot Santa.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker and colleagues, I request that you give me some time. I will come with an answer through the Minister of Education and Sports.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you can answer it in your next Prime Minister’s Time, with a written response. 5.28MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the two works ministers went to Lango Subregion - and even the President - at the beginning of the year, and promised to work on the Lira-Kamdini Road. When will the work on this road start? MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, we have a contractor on that road. The World Bank provided money; there was a time when Government decided to use its own money, but the World Bank gave us the money. The conditions that were put on this road were removed. We expect the contractor - remember it was the materials that were the issue. Mr Speaker, I did not expect this question. Therefore, I will go and investigate why the contractor is not on site working.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would also advise that the MPs from Lango Subregion who raised this issue - to the extent of the President driving there right away - be met and given an update. It will help a lot. 5.30MS FLORENCE KABUGHO (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you were in Kasese two years ago to check on the victims of the floods who are in Muhokya IDP Camp. You made an assurance to them that Government was going to procure land for them. However, till now, they are getting scanty information about the procurement of the land. I would like to know what other assurance you are giving to these people in Muhokya IDP Camp. Thank you. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, land was bought. (Interjections)- Oh yes. Land was bought and paid for. I cannot remember the position or the area, but land was bought. And, what I know, there was an objection from a family member of that land through the IGG, which was also waived off two weeks ago. [Mr Ekanya]5957THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022The Prime Minister’s office, together with the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, is in the process of parcelling out that land to the beneficiaries. (Interjection)- Yes, land in Kayunga and land in Kasese.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.5.31MR ACROBERT KIIZA (Independent, Bughendera County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, like my friends from Mbale and Kasese, Bundibugyo was also hit and even up to now, it is being hit by floods. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that on the 3rd of September, Bundibugyo lost three people. However, to our dismay, when Kasese was being considered for the Presidential handshake of Shs 5 million, Bundibugyo was left out. What plans do you have for those people who lost their dear ones? Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Same as Sebei.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker and colleagues, I request that the district disaster committee writes to us so that we can forward the same request to the Head of State because we do not have your request. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rubabo and Kumi.5.32MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, thank you for the work that you have so far done for the country. The people of Kumi are crying because they have not been compensated for cattle, whereas their peers in other regions - Soroti and other districts - have gotten the money. What could be their problem? And, when are they getting their money? Thank you.MS NABBANJA: I can only assure the Member that the Attorney-General will compensate your people. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.5.32MR NABOTH NAMANYA (FDC, Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question goes to the Prime Minister regarding the Kebisoni Seed School. The school was supposed to commence and -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What school is that?MR NAMANYA: Kebisoni Seed School -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In Rubabo? MR NAMANYA: Yes, in Rubabo. A disagreement has erupted between the contractor and Government regarding the exclusivity and inclusivity of V AT. So, the contractor abandoned the school over those issues and variation regarding the contract. I would like to know from the Prime Minister when that mess will be sorted out so that next year, at the beginning of the term, our children can go to that school. Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Hon. Namanya, I request that you give me details about the same so that we can act accordingly. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. 5.33MR NULU BYAMUKAMA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a matter of national importance. We have a road from Ibanda-Kanjogera to Rwengyaja. However, there is a bridge called Mpanga Bridge; that bridge was temporarily constructed and it has developed cracks.Therefore, I request the government to work on that bridge. I thank you. 5958PRIME MINISTER’S TIMETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Prime Minister work on that? MS NABBANJA: I will just instruct the Minister of Works and Transport to go and assess and then work on those defects.5.34MS MARY BEGUMISA  (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question falls under the tourism sector, where I belong. Our people and tourists have continually been offended by the mentally disoriented people on the roadside. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when is Government planning to get those people into the rehabilitation centres? All over the world, you do not find such people on the roadside; their private parts are out - we call them mad people or mentally disoriented people. Our tourists, often times are concerned. We, too, are concerned. Thank you. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Member is raising a very important issue where our people who are mentally disoriented - those can be treated in Butabika. I think the Member should just get in touch with me. We will use the police, round them up and take them to Butabika Hospital. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next week we do not have Prime Minister’s Time. We shall be voting; so, most of the issues have been sorted out today.5.36MR PETER OKOT  (DP, Tochi County, Omoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker.I would like to thank the Prime Minister and her team for delivering on my request to get some relief food for  the nodding disease victims in Omoro, and generally. Wheras that was part of the short-term interventions, my prayer is that we find the cause of the disease. We lost three victims last week. It is important that you report to us what the cause is.Secondly, I would like to interest you in the infrastructure of Omoro. Right now, we have Moroto Road that is not motorable. Also, when it rains – (Member timed out.)MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, when you directed me here, we caused an inter-ministerial committee meeting involving the ministries of Education and Sports, Health, and of Gender, Labour and Social Development, and Members of Parliament who were on the ground. I believe that is why he is thanking us.About the cause of the disease, the Minister of Health will definitely be instructed to go to Northern Uganda and ascertain the actual cause.For the roads, I will get in touch with the works minister and UNRA to see that those bottlenecks are addressed.5.38MR PATRICK BINGI (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister. There is this very critical road right in the heart of my constituency – Butemba. It leads to the only National Leadership Institute, Kyankwanzi, from Bukwiri. That is the road that we, together with all leaders across the country, use.This particular road has been under plans of being tarmacked for the last seven consecutive years. Now that it is the rainy season, sections of the road are flooded. The facility is nearly not accessible. What plans does Government have for the national leaders using that facility?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, that is a priority road because we all use it – it is, by all standards. The NRM Government will work on it –(Interjections)- it is a question of getting the money.5.40MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, last year, I raised an issue of a one Omara, who was stabbed to death by the UPDF soldiers on Lake 5959THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022Kwania, and Naome of Abeja Subcounty who was raped by a man in uniform. You promised that you would carry out investigations and compensate these families. Up to now, nothing has happened and the families are waiting. When are you going to address that?Secondly, on the issue of floods; we thank you for coming to Amolatar when we had them. I am here to report that the same families you visited in the IDP Camps in Akwon Subcounty have, again, been flushed away by the floods in the same area. Is there any plan for you to support us? We live in a disaster-prone area.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Office of the Prime Minister is constructing a health centre in her constituency. We have been there and supported those people, and we shall continue as long as the floods continue to come. We shall support you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. About the rape case which you promised to investigate?MS NABBANJA: The rape cases will be investigated and the culprits will be brought to book.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Agnes Apea, keep in touch with the Prime Minister. I know you are best friends.5.42MR FRANCIS KAZINI (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Kikuube): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you remember two months ago, you visited Kikuube, specifically to monitor the road construction going on there.You gave a directive to UNRA and also to the road construction companies that are working on Buhimba-Kakumiro-Hoima-Kyenjojo Road, to give access roads to the people of Kikuube.  Since then, your people cannot access their homes. They have not been given access roads. I pray that maybe you talk to them again because your people are suffering. Those with vehicles cannot –MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, a team went back and assessed the amount of money that is required to work on providing access to people’s homes. This will be done in the near future - this is already being handled.5.44MS CHRISTINE SENDAWULA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that we have one road in Kyankwanzi, which is tarmacked, but it is becoming a disaster to us. Almost every day, a person is killed due to the accidents of speeding cars going to Hoima, Kikuube and sometimes going to Kakumiro.We request for humps in Kikamirambaazi and Katanabirwa. Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member from Kyankwanzi has raised a very important point where we continue to lose lives because of speeding cars. I request that she gets in touch with me so we can instruct UNRA to put humps on the stretches of those roads.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can see the Prime Minister is getting tired; so, colleagues, we are concluding.5.46MR BASHIR LUBEGA  (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my people in Mubende Municipality continue to fall prey to unscrupulous conmen who continue to use the President’s portrait and the one of Gen. Muhoozi as their number plates. They drive passed roadblocks, and when people see them in the villages, they think they are very strong people -(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have heard that issue. You saw one of them called Sipapa whom we have been afraid of on the roads, but in the end - colleagues, if you know you have sent me a chit, I will not pick you because I do not read those chits, and I see all of you here.5960PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEMS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker and colleagues, I request the Member to give me details of these conmen –(Interjection)- oh, yes! Because if you can identify Sipapa, you can also identify the others who are using the President’s portrait as number plates. Mr Speaker, I request that the Member gives me details.5.48MS MARGARET AYEBARE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to bring it to your attention that Mbarara District has now gone a year without a single culvert. My CAO has written, I have followed up, my LCV chairperson has come personally to the ministry, and I have also followed up again, and the rains have begun.How can we get culverts? Since September last year, I have copies of letters here that we have written and even followed up - how can the district get culverts? Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the procedure is very clear. The district requests for culverts from the Ministry of Works and Transport, and the culverts are provided because these are used for the national good. Therefore, I request the honourable colleague to get in touch with me and I direct the Ministry of Works and Transport to give culverts to her district.5.50MR DA VID LAGEN (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is very specific: Moroto-Kalong Road has been damaged by floods. Women are facing difficulties and many people are getting involved in accidents. It is very difficult for people to take the sick to the hospital because of the condition of the road.Orina Road to Laperebong Subcounty has been blocked by water; children are not able to access schools, and women are not able to access markets, and councillors have to swim through to go to the subcounty to attend council meetings. What is Government’s plan for these roads?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are about to conclude.MS NABBANJA:  I request the honourable member to give me details so that I can direct either UNRA or the works ministry to work on their roads.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lagen, write to the Prime Minister with the details. 5.52MR SIRAJI EZAMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Yumbe Hospital was elevated to a regional hospital status, but to date, the hospital does not have a blood bank, an oxygen production plant, a mental health department and an advanced imaging centre. What is Government’s plan for these facilities to be installed because these are the facilities that make a regional hospital? Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, Yumbe and Kayunga hospitals were elevated to regional status. Those other details will follow suit. I request him to be patient.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.5.54MR HENRY-MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Ebola is not a simple disease; the whole world now is covered with news about Ebola in Uganda.Government’s position is that we have so far lost two people, but the media everywhere is talking about eight. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Ugandans have the experience of COVID-19 where travels were banned and so, they are worried because of this information. How is Government or your office managing this information flow in the media that is circulating everywhere, distorting and causing fear among Ugandans?5961THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, let me take this opportunity to inform colleagues that the Ministry of Health and my office have reactivated the district taskforces in the neighbouring districts of Mubende, Kakumiro, Kyegegwa, Kassanda, Mityana, Gomba, including Kampala and Wakiso, so that we can train them on how to communicate appropriately.We have a national taskforce meeting on Sunday, and we have agreed that we meet in Mubende so that we can also have those other taskforces in Mubende attending.Mr Speaker –(Interjections)- yes, we want to meet in Mubende because that is where the problem is. It is not true that we have lost eight people. So far, only two people have died.The others being talked about - we do not know yet the cause of their death because they were buried before they were diagnosed. Mr Speaker, we shall be on top of our game. You are aware that Uganda is good at managing pandemics; we shall also be on top of this. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are concluding, colleagues. I am picking the three ladies only - oh, we have a new MP - let us end with the ladies; I shall start with the rest next time.5.55MS AISA AGABA (NRM, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Through the Prime Minister, it is good we have the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. We have camps under oil; we have a camp in Kyabalitwa.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have a problem. These camps have sand mines in places like Pasana and Amadongo. The trucks carrying sand from those mines have really destroyed our roads yet as you know, in this quarter, we do not have enough money for the roads in the districts.What plan is the energy ministry putting in place, together with the oil camps that are mining sand in different areas, to rehabilitate our roads that are now impassable and in a state of quagmire?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is enough, honourable colleague; you have ended with a heavy word, “quagmire.” (Laughter)5.56THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai): Mr Speaker, the oil companies have a provision for social corporate responsibility. I request her to give us information and we engage the companies on what can be done. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. But honourable minister, corporate social responsibility is at the discretion of - here, they have destroyed the roads. We are in a rainy season, and the district has no money; the MP is requesting that they restore what they have destroyed – simple!MR OKAASAI: Let me get the details of the companies and engage them. (A Member rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, colleague, you do not access the microphone without my permission. Yes, honourable member from Nebbi.5.57MS AGNES ACIBU (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have this question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister: During the COVID-19 period, Government gave money to the different SACCOs in the country. Nebbi District is one of the districts that did not receive the money. And, each time I am there, the private teachers ask me about that money. May the Rt Hon. Prime Minister tell us the whereabouts of the money? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When are people receiving the money, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?5962PRIME MINISTER’S TIME5.58THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES) (Mr Fredrick Ngobi Gume): Mr Speaker, that is a very serious issue. I will follow up next week and give you details. Thank you.5.58MS JANE BAINOMUGISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If there is a Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities , I would like to pose a question: In Ibanda District, we have a challenge of wild animals encroaching on our communities, specifically in Irimya  and Kanywambogo parishes. These people have refused to receive some of the seedlings we take to them because they know that later when they have germinated, these wild animals will come and destroy them. So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if there is a Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities,  I would like to know – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is here and she is the supervisor. MS BAINOMUGISHA: I would like to know: Is there any Government intervention so that my people can get relieved  of these wild animals? Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, you are aware that Parliament appropriated money to work on electric fencing and I believe Ibanda is one of those districts that will benefit from this project. I request the Member to get in touch with me so we can, together, engage the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities  to work on her problem.5.59MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In Pallisa District and other hospitals that I know, for any medical procedure, whether abscess, caesarean section or hernia, the patients must pay. And, it is not cheap, because it costs Shs 200,000 and above.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what is the policy of Government ? Is this money being charged officially or illegally? Thank you.MS NABBANJA: The answer is that it is illegal. Hon. Aisha Kabanda is aware that I was in Gombe Hospital and you are aware that I have been to Pallisa.Colleagues, I would like to appeal to you that during your time in your constituencies, try to reach these hospitals because it is our role to oversee them. Where you find such issues, please, report such that our people can be assisted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Leader of the Opposition?6.00THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must say that since the “Q and A” sessions resumed, the Prime Minister has actually facilitated  these sessions well. (Applause) However, what I highly doubt is whether these follow-up questions, whose responses are promised to be made later, are pursued and prosecuted to the logical end. Considering the honourable Member of Amolatar, raising the other question, she had raised severally on rape and the other one, where men in uniform have been roughing up people on the lake, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister had forgotten. I suppose those questions should be recorded and responded to, through writing like it is provided in our rules. Two quick ones: On the question raised by Hon. Ronald Afidra on the shoddy work of the construction works of Pawor Seed School, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, besides that technical assessment, there  should be a thorough investigation to examine and cross-examine, and even report on how these public funds have been expended or utilised. Actually, you should institute an independent evidence-based value-for-money audit. But you have not made mention of it.5963THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022The last one is on the wanton abuse of traffic laws unabated with impunity. Much as you say that there is a Directorate of Traffic Police that has constituted a Joint Security Taskforce, what I see even from the reports we have - you remember how the police suffered in the hands of big military men. One of them was Gen. Matayo Kyaligonza.In fact, the police officer was eventually compelled to transfer her services elsewhere and the case just died; justice was not dispensed. There was even a police officer who lost his life in cold blood because of this motorist being a security  agent . The truth of the matter is that cracking the whip by both the joint taskforce of the military and the police, should be seen to be done. What raises eyebrows is what happens to importers of sirens. They are doing business; they import and pay taxes. They allow them in, they have stocked them to capacity and now, their use is to be stopped at your directive. What happens to these people who are taxpayers, who have been allowed to import these gadgets into the country? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I am sorry for those I have not picked. I know how it feels and sometimes, you look at me; it feels personal to me, but I have nowhere to get more time.She has answered 64 questions, yet she was from the airport. (Applause) Next time, it will be you - and I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for donating more time to us because this is very important. That is in addition to the written questions and these were all oral questions. If we can always have more time so that the oral questions can be answered, then Members will leave satisfied.Rt Hon. Prime Minister –(Mr Feta rose_) Hon. Feta, I am talking to the Prime Minister. Can you take your seat? You will wait for her in the corridor. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is a vote of confidence in you to see that Members of Parliament are standing up and asking questions. (Applause)  Otherwise, if you were not answering well, then they would not see any reason for standing up to ask questions. So, thank you very much.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SUPPLY OF SEEDLINGSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, the statement is being uploaded, but I would like the minister to start right away. We are going to have it; it is a short one.MS KABASHARIRA:  Mr Speaker, a while ago, when we were going to start the questions – even the session – you said that matters of national importance would come together with Prime Minister’s Time.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. That is what I said and that is why I picked you. In fact, you were on the list and I picked you. Honourable colleague, you still have time. I have your issues. When I picked you – because I had my list here. I was mixing those on the list with those who were not on the list. When I picked you – I do not know whether it is one of the issues you raised. If not, on Tuesday, you will have time.MS KABASHARIRA: Sorry, Mr Speaker. I thought we were going to ask after she had finished.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Aah! Colleagues, I told you – because for the Prime Minister’s Time, by our rules, I cannot go beyond one hour. That is why I asked the Prime Minister to extend time for us and we bring issues of national importance and the ministers can support her. However, on Tuesday, you can raise your issues. Colleagues, on Tuesday, we are going to handle the Bill to do with organ transplant. We uploaded it and I hope you have read through. On Tuesday, it is going to be our major focus. 5964PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEOn Wednesday, we will handle the one of fisheries, which the President returned, plus other business.On Thursday, at 10.00 a.m., we shall start the campaigns. By law, each candidate is given seven minutes as a minimum. They will campaign and, afterwards, we will have elections. We shall be here for the campaigns and they will be using the strangers lobby – I do not know the exact language, but I will be guided. It will be at 10.00 a.m. and then, for voting, we shall be in the Conference Hall. We are ready – the booths are ready. I urge each one of you to be here and vote for your EALA representatives.6.03THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLAN-NING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOP-MENT  (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, this is a very brief statement regarding the supply of coffee and tea seedlings for this season.Mr Speaker, I was requested to brief Parliament on the supply of seedlings in view of the petitions from various stakeholders seeking intervention to avert:i) The risk of losses to nursery operators; and ii) The risk of farmers missing out on the second planting season on account of lack of seedlings to plant.Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, up until Financial Year 2021/2022, Government policy had been for Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) and the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) to procure seedlings from certified coffee and tea nursery operators. However, Government has since decided to transfer funding, previously appropriated for procurement of seedlings, from UCDA and NAADS to the Parish Development Model, starting this financial year. Mr Speaker, consultations are going on within the Executive and, as soon as they are complete, we shall definitely inform this august House and the public. However, what I would like to emphasise – you remember that about two months ago, I made a statement on this matter – is that we have now agreed that, definitely, these seedlings should be provided to the farmers –(Applause)- just hold on before you clap -(Laughter)- on two conditions – (A Member rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is still making his statementMR KASAIJA:  I am still making my statement. There are two things that we need to do, and one of them is on the question of ensuring that what one says he has supplied is what he has supplied. There is a problem of monitoring. We are working out how this will be monitored.Colleagues – I can see my colleague from Buhweju – assure the people who have those seedlings that they will definitely be asked to go and supply them to the –(Interjection)-  The rain? Yes, we appreciate it. It is not going to take a long time – so that we do not lose the seedlings and the farmers do not miss out. By the end of next week, Mr Speaker, I should be able to come back here and tell you the exact decision that will have been taken as to when we should begin this process.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, the Member’s concern is very simple: the rains are not waiting for us. Whereas you are consulting, the rains are not consulting. For them, they have their period. That is the biggest concern. We really appreciate what you are trying to cure, but what are we going to do about the rains? Can we say that, on Tuesday, you can come back here and confirm to us?MR KASAIJA:  Mr Speaker, next week, I will come back here to tell you the final decision on this matter. I have told you we are still [The Deputy Speaker] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5965THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022consulting – and I am telling you how that decision is already being -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, next week, I have Tuesday and Wednesday only because Thursday is for EALA elections. I do not have Thursday.MR KASAIJA: Can I promise that I will be here on Wednesday, then? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. However, I will allow colleagues whom I had allowed. Leader of the Opposition, wait a bit. You know, we have been grappling with this issue. I would want to hear from Members without issues of procedure, which might block us.MR ANGURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the finance minister for the brief statement that he has made. Mr Speaker, you will recall that we have been raising issues concerning seeds and seedlings. The minister has spoken about seedlings – and that is coffee and tea, specifically. We are also alive to the fact that our people are waiting for the seeds. You will recall that the money that used to provide us with seeds, through NAADS, was also taken to the Parish Development Model. However, because of the delay that is occasioned in the Parish Development Model, we are being challenged with famine that is bound to come in the near future. Our request has been: When can we also get seeds supplied to people in order for them to benefit from the ongoing rains other than only talking about coffee and tea seedlings, which are going to specific areas? We are also waiting in other areas. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, there are things we clap for, for which I want clarification. We are a House that must really speak the truth. Did we appropriate money for seeds? Hon. Omara?6.10MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There was an appropriation Bill, which was brought before this Parliament and approved. It was assented to by the President and, now, we have the Appropriation Act in place. The money for seedlings under UCDA – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, seeds. MR OMARA: Seeds? Yes, it was provided for under NAADS and seedlings under UCDA. (Interruption)MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, I am also a member of the Committee on Budget and I come with the written information. V ote 160 is that of UCDA and this House appropriated Shs 30 billion -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, seeds.MR NAMBESHE: That is for seedlings also, coffee roadmap, seedlings and seeds. Now, I come to vote 152 of NAADS; tea seedlings arrears, oil seeds - Shs 9 billion; then tea seedlings and seeds in arrears - Shs 12 billion, nothing like changing to Parish Development Model.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why I am asking, honourable member, is because you are reading arrears.MR NAMBESHE: Not arrears; this is the Budget of 2022/2023.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will ask the finance minister to help us because I want clarity.MR NAMBESHE: Hon. Musasizi is here, he knows this. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why I want clarity is; the chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture came on this Floor – where is Hon. Janet Okori-Moe, please, can you help; what did you tell us?5966PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEMS OKORI-MOE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, The Bible says, “You shall speak the truth and the truth will set you free.” No money was provided for any other seeds apart from the oil seeds. That is the information I have.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. If we never provided for money, we cannot tell the minister to give us seeds and that is why I was telling you, if it was an oversight on our side, colleagues – we accept, but what we can do is request. Is there any intervention you can do for us, Rt Hon. Prime Minister? MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the President in Cabinet – I think two or three weeks ago – was approached by farmers and nursery operators who requested him to at least allow them supply and then, they would be paid later. That is something we debated in Cabinet and agreed to let them supply the seedlings they have because they were overgrowing. They informed him that some of them had got loans from banks and the banks were on their necks.Therefore, we agreed – and I believe that is why the finance minister brought this statement. Colleagues, we did not budget for seedlings – not even for seeds. All that money was lumped together and put under the Parish Development Model. So, the suppliers, will supply these seedlings on credit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I can give you information. I can volunteer. Government refused to provide that money in the budget. Parliament, exercising its powers, when we were passing the Appropriation Bill, put in money under UCDA. You might not recognise it, but it is in the Appropriation Act.We understand - because you might not have realised that money right away. That is why we are supporting you. The proposal first came from here; I do not know why you waited for two weeks yet, we raised this over a month ago.Some of the issues we raise here, we would like you to take them to Cabinet, but now, you are telling us that the President said, “When the nursery bed operators approached me”, but we had approached you much earlier, as a House. We bring these issues and it pains – I have met some of these people coming to my office crying, saying, “I am going to be arrested because I was used to Government buying my seedlings. Without a warning at all, they have stopped.”We appreciate the effort, but can we expedite it? And we shall support you; even if you want to involve these MPs because we also support not paying people who are supplying air; if there has been air supply, we fight it. But we had appropriated money. Hon. Omara, please, conclude.MR OMARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I can see that the Executive is usurping the powers of Parliament because that provision for seedlings was made in the budget, and it was Shs 30 billion under UCDA.We are not mad people; unless they disagree with Parliament that they do not want to recognise it, then they should say, “This is in the budget, but we do not want to recognise it.” Then, we see whether the power of Parliament no longer matters. I submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, I would like to use a language that is helpful because we have reached somewhere. If we use language, which is pointing fingers, accusing “so-and-so.” That will not help.You remember when we were coming here, Government had a radical position saying; “We do not even want it… it is in Parish Development Model,” but now, they have come closer. We have a meeting of minds between the Executive and Parliament, saying, “Supply” the issue is when? The rains are not waiting for us.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just pick a few, respond and then, we conclude.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5967THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022DR BWANIKA: I just want to give information on the monitoring because that is what Government is grappling with. There are three levels - if you are going to provide the seedlings. The first level is to identify the certified nursery operators. For coffee, that work is for UCDA; for tea, it is NAADS. They have been doing it. It would not take them a day if you asked them.The next level is to identify the recipients who are the farmers for coffee; we can do that with UCDA, farmers and the MPs. These MPs know their people. We work with UCDA to identify the recipients. For tea, it is NAADS and the MPs.Then the last level is to monitor that the farmers received the seedlings and planted them. That work should be done by the Resident District Commissioners and MPs.We have structures of RDCs up to the parishes; the GISOs, RISOs can work with us to give you back the reports that the seedlings were received and are in the soil. When we do that it is very easy.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Bwanika, I love my MPs and we love each other, but it should not be MPs to identify beneficiaries. Then, how will you do your oversight? If the Auditor-General brings a report here and says they supplied air, how will you process that report when you were the ones who chose the beneficiaries? There is a structure; for example, Operation Wealth Creation.In my constituency, under Operation Wealth Creation, they asked for people who are interested in coffee seedlings and they even said, “For you to show us that you are interested, dig the holes. We shall come and we count the holes.”In some of our areas, in the evening, we take the other strong drink. Now, people are falling into the holes and breaking their legs. (Laughter) So, they are going back to cover the holes which they dug, while waiting for coffee seedlings. You can work very well with UCDA.The problem I have seen is, it seems you doubt UCDA and NAADS, which are your agencies. You cannot create new agencies in this short time. They are the ones you have; they are your officials.  You can reprimand them, deal with them and work with them. You cannot create a new structure in such a short time.6.21MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I came here, I talked to the Director NAADS. We are being told about consultation and he says they are waiting, but have heard nothing. They even heard that Cabinet had sat, but they have not been consulted. So, you ask, “Who are you consulting with?” In Buhweju, verification was done for tea by the agriculture ministry. There is a report by NAADS. You are not talking to NAADS and then, you ask: Whom are you consulting? Consultation is taking three weeks. Do you need two or three weeks to sit down, as the three agencies, to agree on how to give out tea seedlings? People have been waiting for seedlings - I think you remember - since March. Now, you want another month of consultation. Please, on Wednesday, I hope it will be the last day, because you remember you were here some time back and said, “I have already drafted the letter. Let me go and sign it.” You have never signed it. (Laughter) You were here. You said that, “on Buhweju, I have already drafted the letter.” It is on the Hansard record. I hope on Wednesday, you will not change your mind.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alioni? Did they deliver the cassava cuttings?6.23MR ODRIA ALIONI (NRM, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I am also a farmer. I know what the farmers are going through at the moment. I think, without wasting much time, we are getting into an agreement.5968PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEThe Prime Minister has been very clear about the President’s directive. The certified seed developers can go ahead to supply and be paid later. That was a directive from the President, and the Prime Minister has just mentioned it. Here, the minister is in agreement that his office is going to do all it takes to see that the farmers are supported.Mr Speaker, two days back, I had a meeting with the Executive Director of NAADS. He told me that his office – actually, he is under tension because of the farmers. These are people who put millions of shillings in their nurseries and the ministry has certified them; the rains are on.My humble prayer is that since the minister has promised to come on Wednesday, you give a directive for the certified seed developers to supply and wait to be paid. That is my humble submission and prayer. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The President has already given a directive and the minister has shown that they are complying. So, I think we do not need to put a directive on a directive. Minister, I would like you to get the concerns of Members. It is very important. We are under too much pressure.6.25MS AISHA KABANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas I appreciate the promised coffee and tea seedlings, I would like the minister to be cognisant of the fact that both plants are for farmers that do extensive farming.For some of us that come from areas where land is highly fragmented, you may find that we do not plant tea. Even now, coffee does not work for us, to a great extent, for some particular lands. We are food-stressed; people do not have food. Even when we give out maize, it does not work for such people that are on highly fragmented pieces of land.My prayer is that we add banana suckers so that we can solve the problem of food. Banana suckers can even be put on a 50 by 50 or even compounds. So, I pray that for the sake of food security, we add supply of banana suckers.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I had allowed Hon. Okwir and then the vice-chairperson, of the agriculture committee. Let us do a quick one and we finish, colleagues.6.26MR SAMUEL OKWIR (NRM, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that many farmers lost in the first season in areas where people are planting food crops. All hope was alive that the Parish Development Model would come quickly and save them. Now that Parish Development Model was delayed, Government is accepting that tree, tea and coffee seedlings can be given to farmers in some areas.I am requesting: Could there be a window for other seeds to be given? It is very painful for Government to bring a truck or trailer of posho to a district, yet, they could have given about 10 or 20 tonnes of seedlings for farmers to plant.However, we should not wait until there is not enough supply and then say, “Government is going to provide relief,” when there is still some rain left and a small intervention can be done. So, could Government open a small window? If they are doing it for coffee and tea, can they do it for other food crops so that we save our people? Thank you. (Applause)6.26MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of coffee and tea seedlings perturbs me as the vice-chairperson of the agriculture committee, because what we are talking about here is not that we are begging the finance ministry to supply seedlings. The money for seedlings was budgeted for and approved by this House. (Applause)The only issue here, which I do not even think the minister should talk about – is consultation. If you are consulting about why you did not release the money for seedlings, that is acceptable, but you cannot tell us you [Mr Alioni]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5969THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022are consulting about how to supply and who to supply. This is not a new Government programme. In fact, you are insinuating that there has been a problem.I am the vice-chairperson of the agriculture committee. We have consulted UCDA and it has a list of farmers. They do not give you the coffee seedlings without counting the number of holes. (Applause) Those coffee seedlings are not just got from anybody; they are already certified seedling suppliers. So, what are we consulting? Is it about the release or about how it should be done? The “how” has been done and that is why you hear about the increase of revenue in this country from coffee. Thank you.6.28 MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a very serious concern along the line of coffee and tea. We had been pestering and putting pressure on the finance minister to write a letter to UCDA and NAADS, giving a go-ahead that the nursery operators who are certified can now supply to farmers.In my district of Zombo, we grow Arabica coffee and tea. We have 5.1 million coffee seedlings. We needed three million seedlings of tea to do panel beating. However, from that time, in May, these seedlings were not supplied because there was no letter authorising UCDA to supply.The agriculture minister wrote a letter on the 20th of May to the finance minister, who is here, asking that they should give a go-ahead to UCDA to supply; that letter was not given.On the day I raised the issue of pre-funding and so on, it was at a time when there was a rumour in the corridors that they wanted to censure the finance minister. I met the minister and he told me, “I am going to work on the letter.” But that was a long time ago.I would like to end with a caution; the whole of northern Uganda - I am the Chairperson of the Committee on Climate Change - and we have been talking to NAADs and Operation Wealth Creation for a long time - Why do you supply seedlings when the dry season is about to fall? From early October, I don’t think anybody in northern Uganda and West Nile should pick coffee or tea seedlings and pretend to be planting; they will dry up. Our agriculture is rain-fed.Finally, honourable minister, what is Uganda known for? Which crop can we say Uganda has a niche in? We wanted to promote coffee and tea to boost our revenues, but instead, we are prioritising so many crops; we can’t concentrate and we can’t be mindful.I will give you the example of Vietnam; they prioritise coffee, and now they are exporting over 30 million 60-kilogramme bags; it is because they prioritise coffee and rice. They wanted the world to know them for that. But here you are growing carrots, macadamia, pumpkins and so on; please prioritise coffee and tea. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Let us hear from Hon. Kwizera then I will conclude with – no, we are just picking sentiments of colleagues.MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Colleagues, we have been in the business and we also do some business. I have not seen anywhere we can supply on hearsay. The minister is talking about how people can supply, but that is hearsay, which is very dangerous.Is Government going to commit funds by word of mouth? And, who is going to issue the call-off order or the order to supply? I would like the minister to tell me - honourable minister, you have said the people should go and supply. Who is going to give the order? Can you tell me? I thank you.MR AOGON: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to appreciate Government for whatever they have done so far. However, I ask them to please support the people who are making pleas on the issues of coffee and tea.5970PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEThe Members of Parliament here represent the people, and the people do not send fools to Parliament; they send brains. What they have said is exactly the truth and it should be followed.However, away from that, as we talk about coffee and tea, I do chair the greater north parliamentary forum. In the greater north, we have a problem of food insecurity. Recently, we were hit by drought and now our farmers don’t even have cassava cuttings to plant, for us who rely on cassava as a staple food. What is Government doing about this?As the rest of the country talks about the two exports, we are talking about survival. What are you doing about this? We used to have what we called ‘Nigeria species’ as the main thing for us to plant - I can tell you we are struggling, and not because we are lazy. We equally pay taxes. When will the greater, north benefit from the taxes? That is the question.In the whole country, people are dying of hunger. We saw what happened in Karamoja. Why should we be supplying food instead of supporting the country with planting materials? I beg to ask. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Kato.DR KATOOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Government for what they have tried to do. However, sometimes I fail to understand some of our ministers who are not sympathetic to our people.In my constituency, there is a gentleman called Rwemigio Muhwezi.  Right now, he should have been taken to Nyamushekera Prison - he is a coffee seedling farmer and supplies them. We have been frequenting UCDA and the MD is telling us, “Let me get a note from the finance ministry and I allow you to supply, and you demand money.”However, when the minister tells us A, B, C, D - Mr Speaker, Parliament has powers. Let us use our powers to instruct the finance minister to write a letter to allow these people to supply seedlings. I thank you.MR BALIMWEZO: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. I am a person living with a disability and it is hard for me to catch your eye. For a number of days, I have been trying to stand up to catch your eye in vain. I pray that next time you allow me to raise my hand.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member; that is not the procedure used. I know you very well and that is not how I conduct business in this House. Yes, Hon. Okupa  - Honourable colleagues, you will not use monkey tricks to attract my eye and do business here. I don’t like that at all. If you are trying to abuse my simplicity, please don’t rub me the wrong way. I am here to conduct business and I know and see you; because you don’t sleep, you are always seated and I pick Members when they are seated. That is not the right way to do things. Thank you.MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am just wondering why we took all this time debating this matter. If the minister did what he was supposed to do - because we have been told that the President gave a directive that suppliers must supply the seeds. Why is it so difficult for the finance minister or the permanent secretary (PS) to issue a letter of comfort to NAADs and UCDA?To me, this ping pong that the minister is playing wouldn’t arise. We have seen situations where the PS of the finance ministry has released money before signing a contract – like the issue of ROKO in Naguru; what about what affects our farmers?What is so difficult, especially after the President directed you in a Cabinet meeting? You made a commitment in this House to let the seedlings be supplied? What is so difficult with you signing a letter of comfort to NAADs and UCDA? Just tell us what is making it so difficult for you.[Mr Aogon]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5971THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Balimwezo, do you have a point to make on the same?MR BALIMWEZO: Thank you, Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  And, I am also sorry for being tough on you. We are good friends; I don’t know why you have abandoned me today. He is always with me in my office with -MR BALIMWEZO: Mr Speaker, thank you so much for the opportunity. Releases should be based on priority and today, we are talking about rains; we are going to miss out on the rains. And, because of that, releases for coffee seedlings should be a priority and as such, I request the minister to do it as fast as possible so that our farmers may begin. Thank you,THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture. MS OKORI MOE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to guide the minister so that when he comes on the Floor of the House on Wednesday, he looks at the bigger picture.I am saying this because when the minister wrote to the agriculture ministry, requesting them to facilitate the ministry of finance with the demand for coffee seedlings. The ministry responded by saying that the demand for coffee seedlings stood as follows: For Arabica coffee seedlings, the demand countrywide was 24,291,725 seedlings; then for coffee wilt disease resistant plantlets, the demand countrywide is 13,332,832 seedlings.That is what we should look at, and it is what is required by the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA), to supply the farmers. That is what you will need to get from the current coffee seedlings that are with the licenced coffee operators. Honourable minister, look at that big picture. Do not again come small. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is saying is that we already know the figures. NAADS and UCDA did an assessment. If you have any doubt, tell them to explain to you the criteria used to reach those figures. You cannot do a new audit.6.32MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For a minister who is on record saying the economy is now –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we do not know how to record that. (Laughter)MR OGUZU: To come and contemplate  -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, complete your sentence in a language, which we can record on the Hansard. (Laughter)MR OGUZU: Mr Speaker, I tried to use non-verbal communication to explain –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We cannot have it on the Hansard. What did the minister say?MR OGUZU: My understanding is that the economy is flying and everything is fine. For him to come here and contemplate whether we should release money to farmers is making farmers think he does not favour them. Why do I say this? The President of this republic directed the Prime Minister to direct ministries of finance and trade to pay tobacco farmers. This directive has not been implemented. This House has allocated money to support farmers in this country and the ministry is as if dodging. Before we leave this House, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should tell us whether there is money they can release. If there is no money, can you take up the proposal that you immediately go and issue a comfort letter, which would enable suppliers to reach those well-documented farmers?5972PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEWe have nothing to do about the weather situation in this country. The floods and hailstorms in the different areas have destroyed sources of livelihood of many farmers in this country. Just a few days ago, you were quoted in the media saying wetlands can be used by investors, but not farmers.Honourable minister, the farmers now think you are not for them. They think you favour the privileged people. Their situation is never attended to by the ministry under your stewardship. Therefore, I would like you to reflect on these matters so that your image among farmers can change. Thank you.6.35MS NAOME KABASHARIRA  (Indepen-dent, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I get constrained to tell my senior minister, Hon. Kasaija, that his min-istry is the ministry of finance and economic planning. Surely, is there a plan that is done? Like my friend said, do we have a niche? Let us have a niche. I trust you, Hon. Kasaija; you have done a lot and you can do better. Let us have a niche on our crops.When Members tell you about coffee - it was picking up. All of a sudden in the plan, “Go to the parish model.” Yes, we love it, but let us prioritise what we are taking there and how it should be taken. If there was that name “planning”, which you hate, I think we would be somehow very far and speaking another language.The other day, there was something I mentioned here; that we might be pushing Hon. Musasizi, when things are not – from the way Hon. Kasaija is talking - let us speak the truth because it will set us free. Things might be bad there. Thank you.6.37MR DA VID KABANDA  (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Recently, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development signed an agreement with the VINCI Company and the President was very bitter with some MPs. He said: “You people, why are you fighting my agreement? Why are you fighting my coffee? Why are you fighting people who are going to help this country?”I would like to seek clarification from the minister. Did you give VINCI air? VINCI says that she wants a big volume of coffee, but you are saying there is no money. Why did you come up with such an agreement when you know very well that on the ground there is no money, and VINCI will not have coffee to export? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleagues. Honourable minister, as you come, I think on the issue of verification and consultation, some people are not telling you the truth. These are people you are telling to supply, then you pay later. It means that you will have time to verify whether they supplied or not. When we had tea, I was one of the nursery bed operators. You told us to go and plant - In fact, for us, it was even worse. Under the garden-store concept, written clearly, we were told, as nursery bed operators, to go and identify farmers, clear bushes for them, plant for them and look after tea for six months, which we did. I invested Shs 684 million. How much did Government come and pay me? After Government came, it verified and did not consider seedlings, which had dried. It even did not consider the other costs and paid me only Shs 107 million. I made a loss and kept quiet.Since you came with your audit - these are nursery bed operators and you are telling them to go and supply. They have told you, “Even if you pay us in three years, at least, we would rather demand than lose everything in the nursery bed.”Why don’t you allow them to immediately supply and then you verify whether they supplied using your mechanism? If they did not supply, you would send your soldiers to count plant by plant. You verify and then pay. [Mr Oguzu]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT5973THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 22 SEPTEMBER 2022To me, honourable minister, this will be like some – anyway, everything here is on record, but there are supplementaries, which are approved, well knowing that they will not be utilised. You approve a supplementary, give it to an entity, but it is returned to the Consolidated Fund. I think this might also be the trick – you are going to give us approval after the rainy season and when we do not pick these seedlings you will say, “We allowed you. You are the ones who failed.” Honourable minister, we know you do not usually go into such schemes. Help us. Set us free next week so that we start planting. (Applause) Honourable minister, we have said a lot. You can now respond.THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLAN-NING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOP-MENT (MR Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to respond to the comment that I am not in favour of the farmers; I am a farmer – and a big one at that -(Inter -jection)-  nobody in Government supplies me anything. You can come to my farm.  I use my personal resources.Two, who will order to supply? Of course, ,Government will order to supply.Now, I am very glad that you have helped me – as we consult on Monday. You are saying “release the nursery operators so that they supply”. That is very good because the sticky point, as I told you, was: How shall we know that Kasaija, who is a nursery operator, has supplied 10,000 seedlings when actually, he supplied 5,000 seedlings? Mr Speaker, this has happened.Now, you have given me guidance that we shall put the burden on UCDA for coffee and on NAADS for the others, and that when we audit and find out that they have supplied “air” or “half-air”, then, those people will be held accountable. Thank you very much for this guidance -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not pay.MR KASAIJA:  Well, Mr Speaker, once you have signed, you cannot refuse to pay. Otherwise, they will go to court -(Interjection)–  yes, that is a contract.Once I have said I have given you 20,000 seedlings and you sign for them, you have to pay – unless you have a court order.So, let me promise this House: this matter will be concluded on Monday. That is why I told you that on Wednesday - I had thought that we would wait until Thursday. Once the matter is concluded on Monday – okay, let us agree that I come here on Tuesday, make a statement and show you the way forward. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I hereby adjourn the House until Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 6.53 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27 September 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 