Tuesday, 21 September 2010

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

THE SPEAKER: I welcome you to this sitting and I want to thank those who were here on Monday last week to process the budget. I am surprised that some people thought that there was no debate on the Budget. We had the issue of the valley dams in the Seventh Parliament and the minister responsible took members of the Committee on Agriculture to where they were. When they reached there, they asked where the dams were when they were sitting on them.

The Budget process started in June when the Minister of Finance read it and moved a motion for the House to resolve itself into a committee of supply and not on 13 September. The motion was extensively debated and in doing that motion the House was debating the budget. Even before that motion was debated, there was Vote-on-Account, which was approved by you after a debate. Following the presentation of the budget, your committees which are structures of this House considered the budget and policy statements and came to conclusions which were tabled here. For somebody to say that the budget was passed without a debate is like those people who were standing on valley dams and asking where the dams were.

We need to induct those covering us like we always do to Members of Parliament so that the public is not misled. I once again thank you for having passed the estimates on 13 September.

2.36
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono County North, Mukono): I rise on a matter of national importance. This is an issue that concerns security in my constituency, especially the two divisions that make up the new Mukono Municipal Council. Since May this year, 29 people in this area have been hit by iron bar wielding men and most of them have been killed. I have a list of some of the people that have been killed. They include: Reagan Amanya of Bugoba, Lubulwa Moses of Ntinda in Seeta, Muhumuza Moses of Bagala, Sekitoleko of Namyoya in Goma, Nsubuga of Seeta, Ntentuliye Peter of Bajjo, Sebwufu Fred of Nabuta, Munana Njini of Jjogo, Jackson Mukwaba of Gwefu, Ssenkumba Denis of Bajjo, Kugwa John of Kiwango-Namwezi, Kawoya Amos of Nyaja-Bukere, Senfuma of Mukono, Nalongo Najjuma of Kikooza-Mukono, Ekayu Baker of Kyambogo University, Ssentongo Dickson of Nantabulirwa-Goma, Kajubi of Nabuti, Kizito Mustafa Ssali of Kiwanga Goma, Glain of Buguju-Mukono, Kasumba of Nasuti-Mukono, Mukyala Musanje of Kigombya-Mukono, Ssenfuma of Nabuti, Grace Bizibu of Butebe, Babirye Nazziwa of Butebe and Sheik Busulwa of Nantabulirwa.

We are living in constant fear in Mukono because of these murders and it is alarming that the security organs in these areas have done nothing. No person has been arrested in connection with the death of these Ugandans. What is worrying is that most of these people are open supporters of the Opposition. 

I want this House to know that Mr Lubulwa Moses is the person who carried me on his boda boda when I was going for nomination; Mr Ssenfuma of Nasuti is the person who handed me the hoe as a symbol of DP when I was nominated. Sheik Busulwa of Nantabulirwa is our parish chairman of DP in that Parish. Ssentongo Jackson was the Secretary-General of the Democratic Party in Goma Sub-County, and was also a candidate who had displayed his campaign posters in this area. People in my area want to know whether it is a coincidence that it is the open supporters of the Opposition who are being targeted by thugs. It is a matter of concern that all the security organs in Mukono are keeping quiet over these murders. 

We want to especially recall the words of our RDC, Maj. Matovu, during the campaigns for the by-elections in Mukono North. He categorically stated that, “If you vote for Nambooze, when you get problems, you should never call me.” And he has not reacted to all these murders despite the fact that he is the chairman of the security committee in the area. I stand here with the request –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: I thank you honourable colleague for giving way. I just want to inform my colleague the MP for Mukono North that what I have observed, being a resident of Seeta, is that there is a lot of drug abuse in Mukono. A number of youth have taken to smoking contraband - smoking opium - and besides that, a number of pubs – I do not know whether they are licensed to operate 24 hours a day. A number of pubs actually operate up to morning hours and that could actually be one of the venues where such heinous crimes are being hatched.

I think there is need - this may really not be limited to Mukono. There is need for us to regulate the opening hours for pubs and then this very disturbing element of uncontrolled smoking of contraband. This reminds me about a Bill that has actually got stuck, on the control of narcotics and psychotropic substances in Uganda. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Did you want to tender the list?

2.43
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): I want to thank hon. Nambooze for raising this issue. I am also a resident of Nabuta, one of the areas being mentioned. But to the contrary, of recent, Mukono Police Post has a patrol and I always see very many policemen patrolling. I would love if hon. Nambooze can categorically mention or describe the deaths case by case because – 

THE SPEAKER: She has, and she has a list.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I am saying that is because they always patrol in Nabuti and if such incidents happen and there is no investigation, I am also surprised. So, I just want the Leader of Government Business to take this issue very seriously because the security people are always there and we see them. If such deaths occur and there is nothing being done, I think that our security is being affected. I thank you for raising this issue.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MS NAMBOOZE: Reacting to hon. Nsubuga’s concern, let me inform this House about, for example, the murder of Nnalongo Najjuma. Nnalongo Najjuma got up in the morning in Kikooza Village to go and work at 5.00 a.m. She was a shopkeeper. As she was opening her shop, people grabbed her and strangled her. It took the Police of Mukono over five hours to reach the scene of the crime, and when they were called to come and attend to this problem, the patrol people told the residents that, “We are first driving to Kampala to fuel the car.” You know they had fuel to travel to Kampala to pick fuel, but they had no fuel to drive half a kilometer away from the Police station to pick the dead body. 

And then Ekayu Baker was a student of Kyambogo University. He was shot at Total Petrol Station, Mukono – Bugerere Road, and when the Secretary of Defence, Hajji Isa Sebunya came, the boy was still breathing and he is reported to have told the people, that, “In fact you voted for Nambooze; why don’t you call her to come and assist you?” This is the pain the people of Mukono are going through. I am talking about 29 people who have either been killed or permanently maimed. Mr Speaker, it is our request as people of Mukono that this House orders for an investigation and a full report in this matter because we were warned. The people of Mukono were warned during the by-election that when they vote for me, there will be instability in the area and indeed in five months, 29 people have been killed. Allow me to tender in this list. I thank you.

Mr Speaker, this is the list with some of the victims that I have been talking about. I wish to lay it on Table. 

(Thereupon Ms Nambooze laid documents on the Table.)

THE SPEAKER: It is a sad story I must say, but I think the minister concerned will take it up and make an appropriate statement – not now. I do not expect him to be able to make a statement now, but you study the case and then come up with a statement in due course – unless you are prepared to make a statement now. Let him make the statement first.

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I wish to thank my colleague for raising this issue. I am not going to make a statement now, but I am seeking two clarifications from her; one is, who made a statement to say that, “If Nambooze is elected in Mukono North, the area will be destabilised?” I want that information –(Interjections)- and I wish I could get reference to that - concrete evidence. 

Two, I apologise on behalf of the Police if they did not act – I came in late when hon. Nambooze mentioned that the Police said they had to rush to Kampala to pick fuel in order to go and attend to something. I wish to apologise on behalf of the Police on that, but I hope that information is contained in this because I would like to get that evidence. Colleagues as you know, we have what we call the Professional Standards Unit that makes the Police behave the way they are supposed to behave – professionally. 

I want to promise this House that we shall handle that Police officer in a manner that he deserves for having fooled the population. He was supposed to go and take action and then you say, “Let me go to Kampala to pick fuel.” What sort of sense is that? But I want that information so that I may be able to give the correct directive and we handle that Police officer who behaved the way he behaved. I thank you.

I promise that we will take this list and we shall investigate and come back to this House to give a full report. I thank you and we regret the innocent deaths that took place.

2.50
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (DP, Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I find the - I will not say statement by the minister wanting in two aspects; one he failed to tell us when he is going to present this statement to this House. If we leave it open-ended, maybe it is going to be the Ninth Parliament to handle this. 

Secondly, the Police are being kept in a very sorry state. The other day, a Police officer acted on a court order in Natete, and his pips were taken off. In Ssembabule, when the officer tried to handle the situation in the best way he could, he was suspended; and we are likely to – 

THE SPEAKER: Why do you widen this issue? This issue is specifically for Mukono North where people have been killed; we want a statement from the minister about these unfortunate deaths. Otherwise, somebody might come from Kisoro and another from Abim – let us finish this and then we can talk about the policies in the Ministry of Internal Affairs later.

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was trying to note that the minister may not be in position to do what he is requested to do.

THE SPEAKER: Let us give him two weeks because these are over twenty cases; I think within two weeks, he would have investigated and come back with a statement to the House. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2010

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “Supplementary Appropriations Bill, 2010”, be read for the first time. And in accordance with Section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001, I beg to lay on Table the certificate of financial implications thereto.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration and subsequent report to the House.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

I) THE STATUS OF DRUGS AND OTHER MEDICAL SUPPLIES AT THE UGANDA CANCER INSTITUTE (OLD MULAGO) AND BRIEF ABOUT JIGGERS IN BUSOGA REGION

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. There were two questions which needed a response. The first one was regarding the Cancer Institute in Mulago and the second is about the jiggers in Busoga region. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You mean the Minister of Health is here to make a statement on jiggers?

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, there was a question here that was raised by a Member of Parliament and they need a response –

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue on which I wanted to rise has been addressed because I note this is a ministerial statement and we needed copies, but I have just received one. 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, you may remember that the Uganda Cancer Institute gained vote status at the start of fiscal year 2009/2010. The Uganda Cancer Institute managed 30 percent of their budget for medicine while 70 percent went to National Medical Stores. The total budget for medicine was Shs 500 million. Starting with fiscal year 2010/2011 there has been a policy shift where the whole budget for medicine is sent to the National Medical Stores. And this policy shift means that all medicines and medical supplies to hospitals and lower health units are handled centrally by the National Medical Stores. 

Members may remember that this was a recommendation in the report made by the Committee on Statutory Bodies and Commissions of 2008. The same was also recommended by the Social Services Committee.

Hospitals are required to generate lists of demand to medicines and medical supplies early in time so that National Medical Stores supplies these orders in time. National Medical Stores supplies medicines to each lower health units once every two months and for regional and national referral hospitals, the supplies are received once every month. 

There is information both in the press and from some members of society, that some patients at the Uganda Cancer Institute die due to shortage of medicines, that is, anti-cancer and supportive medicine. The information also suggests that a big number of cancer patients are in severe pain due to shortage of a pain killer medicine called Morphine. Morphine is required by cancer patients in order to reduce pain, which the patients suffer from. 

The situation at the Cancer Institute 

There is no evidence that there were deaths of cancer patients to the reported magnitude, but what happened is that there was temporary shortage of medicines and this resulted into less number of patients attending the Cancer Institute Clinic. The doctors assumed that poor attendance could be due to deaths of patients in their homes. Therefore, my ministry is still evaluating the information. 

The supplies of medicines to the Cancer Institute were briefly affected by the Vote-on-Account period.

There are many types of cancers among the patients tested and treated at the Uganda Cancer Institute and each type of cancer requires a unique medicine. This complicates the procurement process of these medicines, but also there are some measures which we have been taken to curb the situation, for example, getting the money from the ministry’s account so that we can procure these emergency medicines.

The cancer medicines are not readily available on local markets and, therefore, it takes some time to order them from international suppliers. For example, cancer medicines like Melphalan, Epirubicn, Doxorubicin, Bleomycin, et cetera are not readily available on the local market.

The Morphine making plant in Mulago is temporarily out of function, but plans are underway to revitalise it and the ministry is going to support Mulago Hospital to make sure that Morphine can be manufactured locally and distributed to Cancer Institute and other hospitals. You know, Morphine is in powder form which can be mixed with other ingredients and it can be given to a patient to reduce the pain. 

I have convened a joint meeting for the boards of the Uganda Cancer Institute, Ministry of Health and National Medical Stores. It is intended to generate ideas about how to overcome these challenges and have the cancer medicines readily available to the patients. More engagement in form of meetings will continue and through these meetings, joint decisions and actions to the magnitude that affects the shortage of anti-cancer medicine will be taken. 

In addition to this, we have made a weekly routine for my ministry to supervise all departments in Mulago. Therefore, this is to assure the country and our dear cancer patients that my ministry is determined to provide the health care you all need.

Hon. Speaker, there was a Member who raised the issue of jiggers in Busoga region -(Interjections)- I would like to report that it is true all the nine districts in Busoga region, especially in the rural areas, are affected by jiggers. Jiggers infect people who live in houses with dusty, cracked floors and walls. The infection can lead to severe inflammation, ulceration and fibrosis. It can also cause lymphangitis -(Interjections)- gangrene, sepsis and loss of toe nails. Auto amputation of the digits and death are potential outcomes. 

Because of the effect of jiggers on productivity of the people, the ministry has taken up a campaign to eradicate these parasites. The campaign includes hygiene promotion, health education, sensitisation and treatment of affected individuals. The ministry is working with the local leadership and a local non-governmental organisation called Friends of Community Health to promote hygiene among the affected people. 

I would like to be quoted as I take this opportunity, to thank the Deputy Speaker for her contribution to this campaign. She has been the champion. However, the challenges include:

Observed low levels of awareness about the cause, mode of spread, and prevention of jiggers among the people in the region.

Increased number of infected people: 
Of course there is a misconception about causes, which range from witchcraft to bad omen among some families -(Interjections)- sometimes treatment is sought from traditional healers instead of conventional healthcare givers.

Public Appeal

The ministry calls upon local leaders to sensitise and mobilise the public about the need to prevent and control these jiggers. The public is urged to observe personal hygiene; that is bathing with soap and water; urgently seek treatment if you are infested with jiggers; stop sharing accommodation with animals; repair cracks on walls and floors in the houses; sweep and keep houses clean. 

For God and my country! Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Regarding this statement on jiggers, I was told that during the colonial times, a very senior colonial leader had pain in one of his toes. He went to Mulago thinking that he required an operation. There happened to have been a nurse, an African young girl, who looked at the toe and said, “This is a jigger.” She got a safety pin and removed it. The colonial governor gave her an immediate scholarship to go to the United Kingdom. Of course she became a very qualified nurse when she returned to Uganda. (Laughter)

3.07
MS SARAH NYOMBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Health but I have a few concerns. The policy shift where the whole budget for medicines is sent to the National Medical Stores has a problem. Most hospitals – let me talk about Kayunga Hospital. This policy shift has affected the delivery of drugs. Instead of the two months you were talking about in your statement, they take six months without receiving drugs and when you ask them, they are helpless. They say, “You shifted the policy.” So, check it and see that our people get medicines on time.

Secondly, this supply of –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let me give you information on why that policy came and we supported it. Sometimes when they send the money to the districts, the districts have other problems and they use the money instead of purchasing the drugs. To make sure that the money meant for the drugs is for drugs, the policy shifted from sending money to the districts to the National Medical Stores.

MS NYOMBI: I agree with you, Mr Speaker, but the problem is bigger. The hospitals do not have drugs due to this policy shift. I am not against the policy shift, but I want them to make it really work for our people. 

Secondly, the supply of medicines to the cancer institute. Maybe I am getting things wrong. I thought this Vote-on-Account is covering the three months of July, August and September -(Interjections)- four months. Where is the missing link? Everything is blamed on the Vote-on-Account and people are dying. Can’t we get our priorities right because, this plant, for example, making morphine; we can’t temporarily put it out of function when people are dying of cancer. Everyone here almost has had the experience of a patient with cancer. The pain they go through – we cannot afford to just state that the machine is temporarily out of function. We should prioritise it and get these people out of pain.

Finally, regarding the jiggers, they should extend the campaign beyond Busoga and add spraying houses, people’s feet and fingers so that they treat them. I have ever done it and it worked. Thank you.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the hon. Minister regarding the cobalt machine. Last financial year, we shifted Shs 1,005,000,000 from the budget of the Ministry of Finance to Mulago to cater for the purchase of a new cobalt machine. But to date we are getting reports that patients cannot access treatment because the machine, which is 15 years old and I would suppose even written off, does not have spares and, therefore, cannot be repaired. What happened to the resources which were allocated by this House for the purchase of a new machine if up to today, we are still with that obsolete machine to treat our patients? I want clarification on that one. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

3.11
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am saddened by certain insinuations that the minister is making regarding the fate of the Uganda Cancer Institute. 

Perhaps let me start from the very first statement on page 1 to do with the policy shift. It is true that we argued, after a number of fact-finding missions, that the districts were really abusing the very resources that we were sending for purchase of drugs. So, Parliament recommended that we have a swap and 70 percent of the money which was meant for PHC goes directly to the credit line while 30 percent goes to PHC. That is what Parliament decided. I want to find out from the minister: Who gave the ministry authority to make the funding for drugs to be 100 percent directly to the credit line to National Medical Stores?

On interacting with a number of officials from National Medical Stores, I asked them if they had the capacity to handle all the drugs requirements since the money was now being sent to them 100 percent. The policy shift from 70 percent to 100 percent has actually even constrained National Medical Stores. This is because we pumped them with money and tasked them with that responsibility at a time when they had not built enough capacity to make sure that there are supplies for all health units in the country.

For God’s sake, how could we have undercut Parliament’s decision without even putting the resolution to some test? There was no test! We did not find reason enough to back that policy shift from 70 percent to 100 percent. The various hospitals and health units like Uganda Cancer Institute now have specialised medicine and National Medical Stores arguably cannot process these orders within the limited time as prescribed in the PPDA Act. 

I would like to urge Government to respect parliamentary resolutions. I find it very awkward now that the minister is arguing on page 2 that the death of patients at Uganda Cancer Institute was not to the magnitude that was reported. Honourable minister, let us be honest to each other. The fact that a cancer patient misses a dose over a certain period of time - actually it is not only cancer patients, but for any condition; once you have broken the treatment regimen, you are in danger. Your health is in danger. 

So, I really want to urge Government to honour parliamentary resolutions and let us test the efficiency of having at least 70 percent of the medicines bought directly through NMS and then let us try the 30 percent to enable those other drugs that may not be available in National Medical Stores to be purchased by the various health units. This of course should be only on condition that such a health unit produces a certificate of non-availability from the National Medical Stores so that they can only use the 30 percent for purchase of drugs which are not available in stock at the National Medical Stores. That way, we would avoid this ad hoc method that you are trying by using some money from the ministry’s account for purchase of specialised medicines which require emergency procurement.

I think we are even going to choke the ministry further. I know that whatever we are appropriating to the ministry is small and now we want to chop some of the money from the account for purchase of emergency medicine. 

Mr Speaker, the minister should help us. There is no way we can start blaming Parliament or any ministry for failing to undertake its job on the account of Vote-on-Account. We passed money according to the requirements of the various departments for four months. Why must we say there was temporary stock-out because of the Vote-on-Account? Surely, I am not agreeable to that reason No.2 that you have offered.

I would also like to observe on this issue of the jiggers. Certainly, it is not limited to Busoga; even the Karamoja sub-region is having similar problems. I would like to inform honourable members that within the ministry we have a vector control division. That division itself is also not capturing good light from the ministry; it is grossly under-funded. I thought that should be the division to spearhead this campaign on vector control, but now we are here lamenting. I would like to urge the ministry to save its face and recognise the contribution of the vector control division.

Finally, on the issue of the cobalt machine that my sister from Bukedea District has raised, we interfaced with Mulago Hospital management and also demanded answers to the same question - where has the more than Shs 1 billion that we allocated to Mulago Hospital for purchase of the cobalt machine disappeared to now that the cobalt machine is not there? The answer that we got really shocked me and I demanded that they must give us updated information on how they used the money. Some of the money was used for renovations of the nurses’ hostel and other renovations. So, I demand that we have accountability of that money. 

First of all, who gave them the authority to divert or to circumvent our parliamentary resolution? We gave that money specifically for the cobalt machine, but people are just doing their things with impunity. When we complain, they say we are just complaining about nothing. Really, we need sanity in the ministry. Let us try to recognise and appreciate the resolutions of Parliament whenever we make them. Respect them. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.18
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am only seeking some clarification in relation to the problem of jiggers. But before I seek clarification, I must say that as a Ugandan, I feel embarrassed and also challenged to note that at this time of the development of this country, we in Uganda are still grappling with the problem of jiggers. (Laughter) Members will agree with me that the scenario characterised by jiggers reflects a scenario of almost the lowest form of underdevelopment. I know you MPs and the minister have done a lot to help our people, but the fact that jiggers are still in our midst is a reminder that we still have a lot to do. 

I only need to seek clarification regarding the magnitude of the problem of jiggers. Hon. Minister of Health, I would like to know how many people are affected by jiggers. Minister, you are not paying attention to my important question. I want to know the number of people affected by jiggers. Ministry of Health, you have data and I want to know the extent of the problem. How many people are affected by jiggers?

Secondly, you talk about Busoga region. Busoga region is a huge region. If you are talking about a campaign, the campaign must be focused. You must indicate to us which places in Busoga are actually affected by this serious problem.  

Thirdly, jiggers in words alone is not enough. We must know the extent of the jiggers. How many jiggers or what population are we talking about? (Laughter) Yes! I may have a problem with how you understand it in terms of English, but it is very important for us to know what we are focusing on.

Lastly, you mentioned on page 4 that there is an increased number of people who are infected with jiggers. I want to know the percentage increase over the stated period - the number of people. After every month, how many more people are affected by jiggers? If I can get answers to this very simple question, hon. Minister, I believe I will be able to understand this problem and I believe we can work with you to get a solution. Thank you very much.

3.21
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just have a few concerns and I will start with the Cancer Institute on page 2. I want to appeal to the minister regarding the temporary closure of the factory that was manufacturing morphine. Now that the Minister of Finance has just tabled the supplementary fourth schedule, I want to urge Parliament to re-allocate some funds such that this factory can resume production. 

The explanation from the minister was not confirmatory. He said that the ministry is going to support Mulago Hospital to make sure that morphine can be manufactured locally, but it is actually a preamble; the time factor is not there yet; our people are dying. I just want to appeal to Parliament that since we are still in the budgeting process, let us find a way to have this factory resume production such that we can save some lives. 

Regarding the procurement of supplies not available on the market, it is an indicator of poor planning. I want to urge the ministry to plan so that we avoid lamentations in future. 

On the issue of jiggers, I am just surprised, because I recall that initially, five years ago, we had the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. We also had the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) and now we have Prosperity-For-All. The bottom line about jiggers is poverty. When you talk of houses with cracks, it is because these people are far below the poverty line. When you are poor, you are deemed to be ignorant. So, whereas jiggers are vectors, they are a concern of all Ugandans. The moment one person dies, even if it is in eastern Uganda, when you go for a conference in Europe the moment they learn that you are a Ugandan, people begin suspecting that you have jiggers.

I want to urge my colleagues in the eastern region to make sure we advocate for the eradication of these jiggers. When you go to primary schools, you find that almost half the class has jiggers. It implies that even some of our children cannot go to school because of fear that others will laugh at them. So, jiggers affect education, incomes and all sectors of the economy, and we should keep sensitizing our population.

I know that this time it will be very difficult to talk about jiggers when you are campaigning, because those with jiggers might not vote for you. However, we must eradicate jiggers by being open. I want to urge the MPs from eastern Uganda to tell their voters that unless they eradicate jiggers, they will continue being below the poverty line because when you have jiggers you cannot work.

I want to conclude by saying that the fight against jiggers in our homes, especially in eastern Uganda, should be at the fingertips of MPs and all the local leaders from those areas. Otherwise, it is a shame to this country. It is a shame to the policies we have been advocating for because you cannot talk of eradicating poverty when people are dying of jiggers. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.26
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of State for Health for his statement. However, after analyzing the statement, I have a lot of doubts in my head. If you went to the Cancer Institute in Mulago, you will shed tears. I have taken off time to visit different departments of Mulago Hospital besides Mbale Hospital where I come from. When you look at the reasons given by the minister, I do not think the patients at Mulago Hospital will believe in what he has said. Talking about the Vote-on-Account being one of the reasons why these people cannot get medicines is unbelievable. 

There is a chronic problem in the Cancer Institute - there is no medicine. You will find very many patients waiting with disfigured faces. It is a pathetic situation to see those patients. When you go to Old Mulago Cancer Institute, you will find only one doctor with very many people lining up. When eventually they get a chance to see a doctor, there is no medicine and yet cancer is very painful. It is terrible pain. If you talked to cancer patients, they will tell you this. 

Most of the hospitals use chemotherapy for these patients. Surely, the Ministry of Health brings a budget to this House and we appropriate it; why should they wait to run out of important drugs to reduce the pain of these unfortunate Ugandans? Even for morphine, which could be produced locally, the machine stopped working long ago and these are our people who pay taxes. Surely, for the ministry to fail to make a budget to bring in these drugs is absurd. 

Of course, when I listen to the budget speech and the President’s speech, he says he is going to increase doctors’ salaries. This country spends a lot of money to train doctors but they have gone to look for greener pastures. That is why you find only one doctor at the Cancer Institute. So, the Government should look at these issues critically because these are our people. Morphine should be there to at least to reduce the pain for some time, but you come here to tell us that it takes a long time to get these medicines from abroad. It takes a long time because there is no money! -(Interjections)- Vote-on-Account but what about the ministry’s budget? 

Mr Speaker, I did not want to talk about jiggers. Jiggers are all over in different places, but look at the causes. People cannot even afford to buy a pair of shoes. Poverty is there! Children in schools –

THE SPEAKER: But we have many of our people in villages without shoes; do they have jiggers?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, the shoes would help to reduce the jiggers. Children study under trees and the floors are terrible. This Parliament borrowed money for the construction of classrooms from the World Bank —

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am asking you: how many people wear shoes throughout the day in our villages, do they have jiggers?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Obliged, Mr Speaker, but what I am saying is: why aren’t there jiggers in town centres like Kampala? If you walked barefooted, you are exposed to chances of getting these jiggers. The reality is that there is poverty and it has contributed to these jiggers. So, it is not only the eastern part of this country as it has been said; it is all over. So, we should look at some of these issues. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.32
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (DP, Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is just to let the minister know that sometime back, I was reading a report by the IGG on National Medical Stores and there was an observation that there was gross mismanagement. It was said that some doctors were assigned some duty to go to China and visit some factories where we could procure some drugs, only to end up in substandard factories and these are the ones they recommended.

I also want to re-echo what Dr Epetait said, that the capacity for National Medical Stores to handle the situation is really lacking. You have even stated in your statement that because of having various drugs to attend to various patients for cancer, then there is a problem of procurement. I would like to remind you that the situation in National Medical Stores is that on one hand some drugs are getting expired while on the other hand, you have shortages of drugs. You need now to address this issue and it all revolves around capacity to manage the process. Thank you.

3.34
MR SIMON ROSS EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for trying to bring to light and to let the nation at least understand how the Cancer Institute is being operated. I thought the minister would have given us a comprehensive report on the management of Mulago as a whole, as a national referral hospital, but the way the minister has only limited his report to the Cancer Institute leaves a lot of questions on how we could evaluate the issues in Mulago Hospital.

Before I move on, I would like to find out from the minister why the treatment in Mulago Hospital is almost private. I have some patients there and if you have not spent any money, the patient may not get treatment. I have patients that I have taken to the private wing, but I also have some other patients that are being treated in the wing which is not private, but they still pay money so that the treatment can be effected. Maybe the minister will give us that explanation at an appropriate time.

The minister has given us some explanations on the Cancer Institute. In No.1 he says: “The doctors assumed that poor attendance could be due to death of patients in their homes. Therefore, my ministry is evaluating the information…” This statement shows that the minister was not ready. He had no information to give us because he is talking on assumption. He is not telling us the reality of what is taking place in the Cancer Institute. 

Above all, I have visited the Cancer Institute; I have three patients there. What hon. Epetait has said and what my colleague, the MP for Mbale, has said is true. Our people are suffering from there. Since these patients came, no treatment has been accorded to them, but the minister is telling us that maybe getting the cancer drugs takes long. I wonder how the management of the Cancer Institute is done if it takes that long for them to get the drugs.

It is now three weeks since they brought some of these patients. I moved around the cancer ward and I have some of the photographs here that I got from the Internet. Internationally, Mulago is known to be a sick health sector. It is there on the Internet. Internationally, Mulago is reflected as a sick health sector; it is here, from the Internet. 

I do not know whether it has now reached a stage where Government cannot manage health issues. If so, Mr Speaker, maybe we declare an emergency and the international community comes to our aid. If Mulago, a national referral hospital, is now reflected as a sick health sector, then there must be something wrong with our Government. I am really appealing to the government and I am appealing to this House, if there is an opportunity, maybe let us double financing of the health sector so that we save our people. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.38
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Lira): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. The delivery of services to our people is a total embarrassment and I want to inform Members that we are going to be victims in 2011. Our people are suffering and as Members of Parliament, I believe we are not doing enough.

Recently, I went to my constituency - and I raised it here on the Floor of Parliament. I went to all the health centres in my constituency and they got drugs; one was Shs 2 million and they gave them one tin of quinine and 100 ampoules of injection. That was to last for two months, but it got finished in one day. So, for two months, they had no medicine in the health centres. 

As Parliament, we need to do something because this is serious. What we need to do is allocate money to the health sector. It is not enough. We need to buy drugs and supply drugs to all the health units in the country. If we do not do that, Members of Parliament, be rest assured that 2011 is going to be very difficult for all of us.

It is not only the health sector, but even the roads. Our roads are in bad shape. When you go down there, it is all about “Members of Parliament, you have not done enough”. It is not Members of Parliament, but it is our government; we have given money but delivery is not good enough.

On jiggers, I believe that we can do something. Let us launch operation zero tolerance to jiggers. (Laughter) In that operation, we need to allot money from Parliament here and maybe appoint some committee to handle that and eradicate jiggers. It is an embarrassment. I can offer my service. I am available. We can eradicate jiggers in this country, but just talking now will not help. The other time it was shown on TV and it was serious; it was bad. The whole school with jiggers including the teachers! (Laughter) I was telling my friend from –(Interjections)– yes, even RDCs and all the other people. 

As leaders of this country, we need to make a clear statement to the effect that there is need to eradicate jiggers.  Actually, in this budget, we need to allocate money and launch a serious operation code-named zero –(Interjections)- I am willing to chair the committee –(Laughter)– and definitely, we shall eradicate jiggers from that region.

I would also like to appeal to Members of Parliament who come from that region not to keep quiet. Last time we raised this matter, but none of the members from Busoga talked about it. We have been raising this issue in Parliament here several times, but Members of Parliament are keeping quiet about it. I can be tempted to think it is a taboo to talk about jiggers. If it is so, then tell us so that we can help in that regard.

Mr Speaker, that is the little I had to say about this statement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think let us hear from Dr Baryomunsi before the others contribute.

3.42
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County, East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for his presentation and I would like to make a few comments.

One is that it is true the Ministry of Health is under funded, but I would also like to think that the money which it gets in terms of allocations has to be better managed for good results. I am saying this because when you look at a case like Mulago Hospital, time and again we have been sharing information with the Ministry of Health that we do allocate about Shs 10 billion for drugs to be purchased for it, but there is a racket within this hospital with people who just supply air. These people get pharmacies in time and they deal with the pharmacy operators who have air supplied to Mulago with no drugs delivered. This information has been given to the Ministry of Health officials in the Parliament Committee of Social Services although I doubt the ministry has followed up on it. I would like to say that the ministry needs to be more serious to follow up on some of these issues that are known so that the resources that Parliament allocates to it are managed better.

With regard to the Cancer Institute, we know that cancer is on the rise in Uganda and other African countries. Therefore, investing in cancer management is very important. The problem that the institute used to have was that the money that we used to allocate to it would be mismanaged by Mulago Hospital as a unit. That is why as Parliament we went on to give a vote status to that institute. As Parliament, we made policy shifts on the management of the drugs budget. I remember we resolved that 70 percent of the drugs budget be managed by the National Medical Stores and the units, including Mulago and the Cancer Institute, manage the remaining 30 percent. We had a reason for this. However, soon after we passed that resolution, the Ministry of Health changed the policy. It instead gave National Medical Stores 100 percent of the budget. 

Our reasoning had been that while we trusted National Medical Stores, there was need to still leave some money with the institutions to be able to buy drugs in situations where National Medical Stores would not be supplying drugs in time. I think the minister should clarify to us why that Parliament resolution was changed by Ministry of Health. I think it is because of this policy shift that we are now experiencing drug shortages in our institutions including the Uganda Cancer Institute.

I have a belief that the solution to Mulago Hospital is to decongest it. The problem is that this is a national tertiary referral hospital that is supposed to only handle special cases though today even somebody who has been cut by a razorblade ends up in Mulago Hospital yet the smaller health units within KCC would be able to handle such patients. There is no clear policy from the ministry on guiding Mulago Hospital to only handle special cases. I think the minister should work on that by making sure that the Kampala City Council health system becomes functional to let Mulago handle only special cases. That is when the budget will be adequate with the drugs being availed. Otherwise, the way Mulago Hospital is now being operated, everybody rushes there for treatment. I think that whether we increase the budget for it or not, it will not be adequate with those numerous patients who flock there –(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, honourable colleague, for giving way. I would like to inform the House that just this morning, while our committee was considering the loan on maternal health from the World Bank, we raised the same concern to Ministry of Health officials. We inquired if Mulago is a referral hospital, district hospital or a health centre II. 

I would like to say that we were actually told that there are “connected” people who find their ways to Mulago Hospital without referrals. Secondly, that administratively, they have kind of allowed the people around the hospital to go there for treatment. So, it operates as their health centre II and IV. So, there is really a big problem. Anybody would expect people to be referred from the regional and other lower health units to Mulago, but that is not what is happening. So, it is quite disturbing.

MR EUKU: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like to give information in regard to what the honourable colleague said on decongesting Mulago Hospital.

On the same printout from the Internet, it is said that Mulago Hospital now houses over 3000 beds instead of the original number of 1500 beds. Secondly, there is also a statement in this printout that says that Mulago Hospital now uses disposable health supplies. Let me read it verbatim: “Behind the nurse, a dozen breathing tubes hang drying in the windows for re-use…” It is a very interesting thing when they say that Mulago reflects a sick health sector. The ministry should take it upon themselves to find a solution to this problem. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much for the information though you should have given us the website from where you got that information.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to urge the Ministry of Health that while we strengthen the Uganda Cancer Institute, they should build capacity at the lower levels for the health units there to manage cancer treatment. I know that some types of cancer can be managed even at lower levels. This is in addition to the fact that some cancer patients may not afford to travel from Kisoro or Yumbe to Mulago Hospital for treatment. That is why the ministry should build capacity of those lower health facilities to manage some cases of cancer so that only those that cannot be managed from there can be referred to the Uganda Cancer Institute.

It is unfortunate that we can stand here as Parliament to discuss the issue of jiggers –(Laughter)– because surely, jiggers are just a case of hygiene. It is not shoes, not even good clothes but it is just about good hygiene. It is possible that we can eradicate them from wherever they are. What I would like to say is that the Ministry of Health should review the functionality of health services at district and lower levels – 

THE SPEAKER: Can’t Mulago Referral Hospital handle cases of jiggers? (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes, it can, but I think the presence of jiggers in our communities is partly due to the fact that our health system has collapsed. If we had a functioning local government system with effective health assistants and inspectors to provide health education to the communities and children in schools, jiggers would not still be a problem. 

I would like to urge the Minister of Health to review the functionality of health service provisions at decentralised levels, particularly at community and public health centres. Ensure the available health education systems give basic information to the communities on how to eliminate these jiggers. Otherwise, I would also like to support hon. Okot-Ogong that I will serve on the committee to eradicate jiggers in this country. Thank you.

I would also like to add my voice and thank the minister for this statement but I have just a few concerns regarding the policy shift. It was a very good idea to send the 70 percent to National Medical Stores although somewhere in the middle there, I understand even the 30 percent now was removed from these health centres but the minister is saying, “No.” I would like to strongly recommend that the 30 percent as we agreed here in Parliament be left at these centres.

I will cite an example. At Fort Portal referral hospital, there was a case of a caesarean operation but there was no money to buy this drug, which they use for anaesthesia. The operation could not be carried out and the mother ended up dying. So really we need this little money at these centres to have drugs for emergencies.

The National Medical Stores don’t have capacity, as of now, to distribute drugs to all referral hospitals and all health centres. We have recommended now and again that the National Medical Stores could decentralise and create regional centres or maybe sub-regional centres where they can carry out this drug distribution.

Another very crucial issue is that on page 1 of this report, the minister is saying that hospitals are required to generate lists of demand for medicines and medical supplies early so that NMS supplies these orders in time.

I have visited Fort Portal referral hospital. They have made these requests - in fact, out of the whole list they submit to the National Medical Stores, only about 50 to 60 percent is supplied.

When it comes to essential drugs, that is the biggest problem. They will always tell you the drugs are out of supply. What is very bad to me is that instead of giving a certificate of non availability of that drug, they just keep quiet about it and yet when these drugs are located to referral hospitals, they are located on monetary forms so where does this balance of the money go?

So, Mr Speaker, I would like to urge the minister to try and follow up this matter. If the referral hospital has put in their requisition, why is it given half of what they have requested for and the other half does not appear at all?

On the Cancer Institute, I would also like to agree with colleagues who have proposed that within our health system we should create some affiliate cancer institutes. At least at every referral hospital we could create an affiliate institute of cancer say at Fort Portal referral hospital and at Mbale regional referral hospital so that we can cut costs for these suffering patients. 

That notwithstanding, we can create outreach programmes. We can put aside some money as the Cancer Institute to facilitate people to go out. We can set days at these referral hospitals or district hospitals to treat these cancer patients because they are really becoming many. If you go to the Cancer Institute here at Mulago, the congestion is just too much so if we could really make outreaches, it would help our patients a lot.

On jiggers – I don’t have many words to talk about as this is really terrible. I would like to urge the ministry to lay emphasis on primary healthcare prevention. They were saying that as Members of Parliament, we should take over the role of health education but we have health educators and assistant health educators who are responsible for educating the masses regarding health. I think the ministry should empower and give these people enough money to go and disseminate information relating to elimination of jiggers from our society. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us end this debate because we have another statement.

3.57
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for the statement. As a person in Government, I just want to supplement the recommendations although here they are called public appeals.

I realise that there is actually a big challenge of jiggers and I think the appeal we are making is not effective. Simply saying that, “The Minister calls upon local leaders to sensitise and mobilise the public about the need of prevention”, is not enough. I really feel we need to have more action -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, the Minister in charge of Water is a Cabinet minister in the same way as the Minister of Health. I find it extremely distressing that she can stand on the Floor of this House and bring Cabinet debate here. I would wish that she gets back with her colleagues at Cabinet level and they harmonise a statement. This is a government statement from the ministry. Is she, therefore, in order to criticise her own colleague on the Floor?

THE SPEAKER: Well, this is a ministerial statement from the minister in charge of a sector and we are now debating it. She is just trying to help us expand.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Apart from being a Cabinet minister, I am an MP in this House and I think I have a right to contribute to the topic.

What I was saying is enriching the proposal made by my colleague. Rather than just calling upon the leaders to sensitise, can’t we come up with actions or ask them to come up with by-laws, which are implementable rather than asking them to sensitise? We have sensitised people, called them to workshops and seminars but the moment they leave the workshops and seminars, they don’t add up to anything.

So, I have requested the Minister of Health to work with the Minister of Local Government to actually come up with a real action plan of how to move in these areas and make sure that by-laws are put in place and the people to implement them are there.

Also, I would like to observe that we are telling people infected with jiggers to seek treatment. I think it is something that is not easy. People who get infected, as already stated above, don’t have the knowledge, willingness or capacity to move to the health centres. I would recommend that we actually deploy people to go down to where they are, help them and work with them until we bring them to the level of understanding that they need to be able to look after themselves. Those are the two additions I wanted to bring out, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

4.00
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, hon. Kamuntu knows that I used to visit Bushenyi every year but I never left any jiggers there. (Laughter)

The statement by the minister is welcome but it leaves a few gaps particularly when it comes to the management of cancer in this country. We have witnessed tributes paid to distinguished Members of this House, and also of the community who have died of cancer. Therefore, it is important that the issue of cancer is treated with some seriousness. It is not right to say that it is just the supply of medicine, which is an issue; it is the entire management of the cancer which needs to be reviewed so that we come up with a system that we know can really help a cancer patient. 

I witnessed one case of  the wife of the late Prof. Mujaju, who died of cancer after writing down the plight of a cancer patient. In her note she testified that when patients from rural hospitals are referred to Mulago hospital, they are told that there are no drugs. But by the time they are told that there are no drugs, they would have already become too weak to go back and do not even have transport to go back. So, these patients struggle to go back with the help of their relatives and by so doing they condemn themselves to death because they cannot come back again. This is what is happening everyday. And there are so many patients that are being refered to Mulago from upcountry but cannot get treatment there. So we really want to know whether the government is concerned about this grave situation.

For the Minister to say that because the public has raised concern, he is now going to cause a meeting between the ministry and the National Medical Stores and the other agencies that are involved in this exercise means he had no plan to deal with this situation. Why do they have to wait for the public to raise a concern and then the ministry wakes up in order to see what they can do? This shows that we really do not have anybody who cares about what is happening to cancer patients. So, I think that the entire exercise should be looked at and I would be very happy if the minister could come here and show us that actually they care about these patients. These are patients suffering from a terminal disease and should be given loving care in their last days of life. This is a very important message.    

The second message from this is that you have given us the treatment aspect. I think it is very important in this country now aware that cancer is widespread; everybody is now having cancer: children, women and so on; can we also look at the preventive aspect of cancer? Can we be sensitised on how we can prevent cancer? You know very well that already in the rural areas there are people who use kaveera for covering food, which is dangerous but nobody is running messages on radio warning the public not to use polythene bags for cooking. So, in other words, a rural person who is using polythene thinks it is normal to do it. This is one of the aspects; we should be told how to behave in order to prevent Cancer.

About jiggers, I think it is wrong to say that people get infected with jiggers when they are in cracked houses and so on. Our ancestors would have died of jiggers if that was the case because they lived in very rudimental structures. I do not even know whether they used to sleep in houses. And when you go to Karamoja where they live in those Manyattas you do not find them with jiggers. So, we must find the cause of jiggers and deal with it. I think that is it. 

Maybe one of the methods I would like to propose is to encourage intermarriages between the Basoga and others –(Laughter)- so that we can effectively deal with the jigger scourge because it is a social problem. We do not understand why a grown up person should be having jiggers. I do not think it is the kind of houses they live in or the poor state of the houses they live in. When you talk of poverty, poverty is spread all over Uganda. I have been to Masaka, where you come from, hon. Speaker, and there are still mud houses but I did not see anybody having jiggers there. So, it is a social problem; let us deal with it, let us encourage intermarriages, let other tribes marry these Basoga and we deal with the jiggers once and for all. (Laughter) Thank you.   

4.06
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I still find gaps in hon. Kakooza’s statement because when we raised this matter about a month or so ago, there was an issue of lack of drugs at the Cancer Institute. But I do not get a specific answer here whether the drugs are now available or not because, hon. Minister, I am now supporting a patient at the Cancer Institute, a lady called Akiror from Kasilo. 

I was in Mulago Hospital yesterday; they called me there because there were no drugs and I had to go to Wandegeya to buy the drugs. So, when you tell us here that the drugs are available or there are plans, I do not know what to take. I have to support this family in Mulago weekly because I get in there - they do not know Kampala! So, I either send somebody or I personally do it like I did yesterday. So, what are you telling us, are drugs there or not? That is the problem. 

You have gone ahead to say, “The problem is that sometimes drugs are not readily available on the market.” Why are drugs in the pharmacies in Wandegeya if they are not on the market? The drugs are there in plenty but the problem is the cost. And what has happened to our plea? 

We even read in the papers that the President had visited the Cancer Institute although they used an old photograph of about six years ago when the President had visited that place. So, can you tell us the truth? What is happening, are the drugs now available or not or it is the people working in Mulago who are selling the drugs? I would not have bought drugs yesterday if your statement was correct. 

Last time, when we raised this matter, they raised the issues of procurement. I went out - the Prime Minister had told me to co-ordinate – we called the National Medical Stores because they were giving reasons that procurement was a problem. So, we called Mr Agaba, the Executive Director of PPDA, and he said that that was not a problem if they requested to waive and have these drugs available on the market in the shortest time. “You know, we have four ways of procuring those under emergency. So, Medical Stores should not deceive you that it is issues of procurement,” he said. So, it was not procurement. 

Now you have put it here that it was the Vote-on-Account. It is not the issue of the Vote-on-Account, it is about management. Can we sort out the issues of management and help these people? There are people I saw there last evening in pain; people are in terrible pain in Mulago Hospital. Can we help them? We could be the victims tomorrow; we could even be victims already.   So, those are the things we need to hear from you, hon. Minister. 

Two, is the issue of jiggers. If you remember very well, hon. Kakooza, it is me who raised it. You remember very well we had a meeting amongst you, the hon. Deputy Speaker and I on this matter. Schools had closed in Busoga because of these vectors. And if you had seen that footage on NTV where pupils had jiggers on their lips and eyelids and it took a celebrity from Kenya and an NGO, I do not know whether this is the NGO, to come to Uganda to treat these vectors! It is an embarrassment to us leaders at all levels. 

When we called you, you said you were going directly to the Vector Control Department to handle this. I would love to hear from you whether these schools have re-opened, whether the treatment has been received and it is very simple to deal with. There was a family at one time in Kasilo that got infected with these jiggers. I went to a veterinary drug shop and bought the drugs and within one week, it was eradicated.

The people of Teso are living in mud houses but jiggers are not there because we use the cow dung to smear the houses. The fleas cannot survive after smelling the cow dung. This is a very simple sanitation problem.

I want to call upon the leaders in Busoga, such as hon. Kivejinja, to help and mobilise our colleagues. It is an embarrassment for someone to come from Kenya to do this when we are here.

THE SPEAKER: I think you have noted the views expressed. You go and see how best they can be utilised to benefit us.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

II) ON STEPS BEING TAKEN TO SET UP A NATIONAL SECURITY INFORMATION SYSTEM
	
4.12
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): I want to brief Parliament on the steps being taken to set up a National Security Information System.

Government has recognised the critical importance of having a National Security Information System that can be used for:
a)	Citizenship identification, that is, timely registration and monitoring of citizenship, births, marriages, deaths, aliens and refuges.

b)	Issuance of national identity cards, passports and other travel documents. 

c)	Provision of social services such as health and education.

d)	Electoral purposes.

e)	Tax administration, that is, collection and management of taxes.

f)	Law enforcement, ability to track illegal activities of criminals such as those in money laundering.

g)	Employment will be planned for and social security contributions will be organised.

h)	National population statistics, censuses, surveys segregation and monitoring trends for planning purposes.

In an attempt to address some of these problems, individual institutions have tried to set up information systems of their own to handle their specific schedules. The type of information stored in these data bases is specifically geared to the purpose of the respective institutions, for example:

•	The Uganda Bureau of Statistics: their emphasis is on aggregated figures such as characteristics of the community rather than individual citizens.

•	The Electoral Commission: their emphasis is on those eligible and interested in participating in elections and the unique identification of voters to safeguard against multiple voting.

•	Uganda Revenue Authority: their emphasis is on the taxpayer irrespective of age or gender.

•	National Social Security Fund: they handle those who save with them.

The Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prison Services, the Ministry of Education and sports, the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control, all these deal with specific segments of society in which they have a specific interest.

The efforts being made by the institutions mentioned were commendable. It is, however, clear that none of the data bases mentioned above is comprehensive enough to be used for purposes indicated in one above.

Secondly, each time information, which is in a data base such as that of the Electoral Commission has to be updated, we have to go back to the population to collect the necessary data, a process that wastes time and money. It is for this reason that Cabinet, on 11 February 2004 approved the setting up of a comprehensive national bio-data bank for easy access by other government institutions.

In line with this decision and considering the current seemingly uncoordinated procurements of ICT related equipments and services in government ministries and departments, the Prime Minister set up an inter-ministerial committee on ICT procurement to study this matter. A key recommendation that the study came up with was the establishment of comprehensive national population data bank which would allow the sharing of citizenship personal data across different government institutions.

Obviously, the system will be designed with all the necessary controls to ensure that access, additions, modification of the information contained in will be only by those authorised. 
 
Due to financial constraints, these recommendations could not be carried forward immediately. However, on the 2nd of April 2008 Cabinet adopted a standing cabinet committee chaired by the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs to provide political leadership in revamping efforts to set up the information.

In April 2009, the standing committee adopted a number of measures to push the idea forward significantly among these were: 

To take advantage of any registration process to register Ugandan. In line with this, collection and processing of such data will be done in such a way that it will be made available to other government agencies that require it.

In the same spirit, the standing committee considered the idea of coordinating with the bureau of statistics and the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development to broaden the anticipated 2012 population census. To create a comprehensive data bank that will enable every Ugandan to have an identity card. To work with the Ministry of Local Government through the population officer at district and parish level to keep updating data by registering births and deaths.

An opportunity to procure the equipment and services required to set up the information system came when the Electoral Commission wanted to purchase equipment for voter registration exercise. The equipment the Electoral Commission wanted to procure was similar to that required by the Ministry of Internal Affairs for the National Security Information System.

In view of this, given the need to avoid duplication of efforts, wastage of resources and the fact that the electoral timetable had already been set and time was running out, the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the 12 February 2010, wrote requesting the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Internal Affairs to start on consultations with the secretary of the Electoral Commission to move forward with that process of setting up the national information system in line with the objectives of:

1.	Setting up an information system that would allow sharing of information across government ministries and agencies with all necessary access controls.

2.	Taking advantage of the voter registration exercise to collect that data that can be used to issue national identity cards.

The security nature of the system that was envisaged to be set up dictated that we had to pay particular attention to:

i)	The equipment and service provider’s capacity to deliver the required service.
ii)	Comparative prices of the service from similar companies.
iii)	Due diligence reports on the service provider.

With all this in mind, a series of meetings of stakeholders were called. Those who participated in the various meetings included:

i)	The Minister of Finance
ii)	The  Minister of Security
iii)	The Solicitor-General
iv)	The Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury
v)	The Permanent Secretary Information Communication  Technology
vi)	The Permanent Secretary Internal Affairs.
vii)	The Chairman Electoral Commission
viii)	The Secretary Electoral Commission
ix)	The Executive Director UBOS
x)	The Inspector-General of Police
xi)	The Director-General ESO

As a result of these meetings, a technical document detailing what we want was drawn up and a selected team of technical officers was dispatched to the German manufacturing facility that was being considered for the award of the contract to supply the required equipment and provision of the service. The intention was to assess the company’s ability to deliver.  The team was given very clear terms of reference that included:

(i)	Checking on the company’s capacity to deliver the required service (their performance on precisely the same tasks in countries similar to ours).

(ii)	Checking the company’s comparative prices of the services from similar companies. This was to be done through discreet inquiries.

The team dispatched to German submitted a satisfactory report. Following this, a negotiating team selected from the stakeholders and headed by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs was appointed to negotiate the contract.

Similarly, the negotiating team was given very clear Terms of Reference. They were to crosscheck on the company’s ability and consider the due diligence reports. In addition, in order to fully answer the Terms of Reference, other initiatives were made. These included obtaining assurances from the German Embassy about the suitability and capacity of the company to deliver. We were able to get a copy of a sample agreement the company has with the German Government. We were assured that the company is one of the five companies the German Government uses for security printing. A signed copy of an agreement the company has with the German Ministry of Internal Affairs, for security printing was provided.

To ensure that the correct procurement procedures were being followed, the Permanent Secretary on 11 March 2010, under reference ADM 156/270/01, wrote asking the PPDA for a no-objection to using the Single Sourcing Method to procure the System. On 12 March 2010, PPDA, under their reference PPDA/M11/000, wrote turning down the request. It is believed their response was based on a misunderstanding of the system requirements.

Having gone through all the necessary steps as guided by the various meetings held, and with time for the electoral process rapidly running out, a meeting chaired by His Excellency, the President, was convened to consider the matter. Those who participated in the meeting included:

•	The Minister of Internal Affairs
•	The Attorney-General
•	The Minister of Finance
•	The Minister of State/Local Government
•	The Minister of State/ICT.
•	The Chairman, Electoral Commission
•	The Chairman of the Board, PPDA
•	The Executive Director, PPDA
•	The Solicitor-General
•	The Permanent Secretary Ministry of Internal Affairs
•	The Permanent Secretary/Ministry of Local Government
•	The Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury.

During this meeting, it was clarified that the procurement of a National Security Information System cannot be handled the way we handle other government procurements like stationery or other items for public use. Once issues of security were involved, use of the Single Sourcing Procurement Method in accordance with the law was the way forward. In such cases consideration is always given to:

•	The company’s ability to deliver the required service.
•	Positive due diligence reports of the company.
•	Ensuring value for money. This is achieved through discreet means, for example, checking of comparative prices of the service from similar companies.

With all this in place, what remained were clearances from the Ministry of Finance to work out a payment schedule and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to ensure that our national interests are legally safe guarded.  

Both ministries gave their clearances via letters - reference letter PAD 47/255/01 of 17 March 2010 and reference ADM/7/162/01 of 19 March 2010 respectively.  The agreement was signed on 19 March 2010. We are now implementing the programme as per agreement.

The contract negotiated by the multi-sectoral team that was set up, was cleared by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The total contract sum is Euros 64,231,371.49 to be paid in instalments according to a schedule that was agreed to.  This sum does not include what the ministry requires to set up a data centre, a personalisation centre, a data recovery site and costs to be incurred in the process of registering citizens for the purpose of issuing them national identity cards.  

The Ministry of Finance was informed about this and it is the reason the Ministry of Internal Affairs captured this as an unfunded priority. The Ministry of Internal Affairs made it clear to the Ministry of Finance that without this funding, the procured equipment will not be put to use.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank Parliament and the general public for the support, guidance and encouragement that we have received so far and continue to receive.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs has had many interactions with Parliament’s Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs over this matter; their total support for the programme and guidance have been invaluable.

We had an interaction with Parliamentary Sessional Committee on ICT. Their views were taken and continue to be taken into account as we implement the programme.

A consultative meeting was held with members of the Presidential Investors Round Table.  Their guidance is appreciated.

In exercise of their overseer role, some members of the Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs inspected the contracted service provider’s manufacturing facility in German. The positive report they came up with confirmed our findings about the company; that the company is well reputed, capable of delivering and that the prices are comparable.  Indeed, the company has already delivered on some of the milestones that were agreed to.

Mr Speaker, all the procured equipment is here. The next steps are to install, test and commission the equipment.  We also need to register all citizens for the purpose of issuing them with national identity cards.  I request all of us to support the programme, to give it the necessary assistance it requires and to fully cooperate with the ministry. This is a programme of tremendous national importance. It will help us stop the wastage of time and resources that we are currently experiencing. It will also answer our long quest for identification for our citizens and foreigners for better management especially for security purposes. Let us give it all the support is deserves.

I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. Yes, hon. Kyanjo, the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs.

4.31
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): I thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for availing Parliament with this detailed information. I would also like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing the Minister to read this report in detail because we had a lot of trouble going through this exercise at this stage. This formed the background against which I was arguing last Monday against the presentation of a report from the Ministry of Internal Affairs because we had agreed in principle that the minister had to come and explain this situation before that report was brought to the House. 

I would like to clearly say that all of us in the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs made specific consultations and we are in total support of this project. The Minister has, in his document, mentioned that there was a team which was sent to Germany; I was among the people who travelled to Germany with hon. Kamba and hon. Kasamba. 

I was impressed by the capacity of the company I saw in Germany. It is important to appropriate this technology up to the end and to keep the standards for a reasonable time. 

The areas where some Members of Parliament and more specifically from the Opposition were not satisfied with are the areas of procurement. The PPDA turned down the request from the ministry to proceed with an arrangement which was rather than that established by PPDA. I am not fully satisfied with the explanation of the Minister. I would be very glad if the House were satisfied and we got convinced from the presentation of the Minister that there is not going to be any roadblock regarding the procurement process. 

The actual authorisation of this process was not explained; my major interest was to go and see whether the company was capable and I have given you my honest report; but about the procurement process, I have strong reservations. It is up to this House to scrutinise it further and give us satisfying information for each of us to go and spread the message of this project as a clean one. 

Mr Speaker, the other issue was the absence of this particular budget – 

THE SPEAKER: Do you think this House is competent to decide on that issue or it has to be assisted by other agents of Government?

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, my belief is that when we come to this House we bring together different competencies and it is possible for a committee not to have any member with a certain competence and this competence could be widely available through the Members present here. That is why I am making this appeal so that if they can be able to assist us, we would not waste time going to any other person for further consultation.

The budget specifically required was not reflected in the MTEF and it did not even feature in the minister’s policy statement. So, I found difficulty in understanding that. We had agreed that the minister would come here early enough and he would bring information from the House to the committee and the committee would make appropriate recommendations.

THE SPEAKER: Now, which budget are you referring to?

MR KYANJO: The one we have just passed – it is the one covering this –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, the minister has talked about the contract sum – I am not highly technical but I did not find much trouble understanding the difference between the figure and the equipment I saw. So, I do not have a lot of trouble with that. But I would still be interested in having more technical individuals in this area.

The committee also wanted to see the budget component that will be shared by other users rather than the Ministry of Internal Affairs alone. The minister has clearly placed down those other organs, which are going to use the same technology like the Electoral Commission, the National Bureau of Statistics, the Uganda Police, URA, Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of ICT, National Social Security Fund, et cetera. But these are not indicated anywhere as those going to contribute to a technology they will use.

THE SPEAKER: Are you referring to the fee they are going to pay for the use?

MR KYANJO: No, not the fee, I mean the budget component that they are going to contribute. 

THE SPEAKER: If they pay fees, then they have made a contribution to the budget. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, my last point is seeking clarification from the Minister because part of the major reason that precipitated the procurement and the arrangement as it were was regarding the forthcoming electoral process. It would be of interest to me and the Members in this House and even members of the public to know whether in the next elections, these biometric identity cards are going to be used. If they are going to be used, we would have every justification to give our unreserved support. If they are not going to be used, then we would find a lot of difficulty explaining to the public why we rushed into a project that was not going to be used. 

I am very grateful for the Minister’s presentation and I would be very happy to hear from him about those issues I have raised. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.38
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora Country, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. From the statement, the Cabinet took a decision to set up a national bio-data bank in February 2004 and got stuck, only to wake up six years later, in February 2010 and the PS to the Ministry of Internal Affairs started consultations with the Electoral Commission to advance the process of the national information system.

This causes mixed reactions; how could a process that was endorsed in 2004 be stayed only to get fused with the electoral process? The Electoral Commission is now being stampeded; they are attending meetings in order to have their equipment ready for this purpose. I think this was not a proper mechanism for undertaking the setting up of our national bio-data bank. In any case, the stampede has even caused single-sourcing approach in the procurement of the equipment. We have not been told details of the letter that came up from PPDA turning down the request for single sourcing. 

I am glad the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs was part of the technical team that went to Germany to verify the capacity of the company that was to undertake this contract; but we have to be very conscious about these approaches. Surely, the procurement process ought to be handled with due diligence. It ought to be handled – in fact I am even wondering what consequence our debate will have on this report because everything has been done. The equipment is here. We are literally doing a post mortem. The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, the ICT Committee who consulted the Ministry of Internal Affairs over this also never updated us on how far they had gone; only to be told that everything is here. I do not know of what consequence –

THE SPEAKER: I think this is because the PPDA turned down single sourcing and they give the reason that because of security, they had to do it that way. Then they sat and agreed. I think what you have to do now is to wait for the Auditor-General to audit this exercise. That is why I was asking. We need some expert advice on what happened. We are lay people. Even the Public Accounts Committee is a lay committee. It has to use the Auditor-General. That is what I was asking hon. Kyanjo. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I think your observation is really very good because here now we cannot give technical input in this whole exercise. I do not see of what consequence it will be. But let us wait until we get an alternative opinion. I thank you. 

4.42
MR NATHAN NABETA (NRM, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The whole thing here is that we are dealing with technology, which is just a tool to help us do whatever we want to do. It is like you take a clerk here. If she has a problem with her computer, she will call the computer department to help her in order for her to do what she is doing. 

You have a Ministry of Internal Affairs, which is trying to become the computer man. It is now dealing with things. We passed a law creating the National Information Technology Authority (NITA) and in that law, it is mandatory to streamline technology applications across Government. What we have heard all over this country is that everyone is procuring whatever they want. 

When you come to integration of one system with the other; they cannot talk. One is using Oracle, the other is using Sun. These are technological things. We have interacted with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and told them, “You do not have the capacity to deal with the technology part. Let NITA, which is still mandated and directed by the President himself to be the secretariat, deal with the technology aspect.” 

When it comes to the issue of collecting the data in terms of the national ID, let the Ministry of Internal Affairs lead the way. When it comes to registering, let the people responsible deal with that; but let the technology be done by those who are mandated by law and who have the expertise to deal with it.

When you look at the agreement they signed with the company – by the way hon. Minister, the committee met and asked you to give us a report. We wanted to know the technical committee, which went and the report they wrote because we know those who went were not technical. So, we want to know those people who understand software, those who understand hardware. You have laptops. When you buy a laptop today, tomorrow it is outdated. It is recollecting thus it is running out of time. If you are leaving that to NITA, they can procure the laptops, use them, offload them to schools, you now acquire more technologies; but now you have technology and it is getting old. It is getting old and some of the computers are not working; they are malfunctioning and you do not have the people to upgrade them or even rebrand - 

THE SPEAKER: What is the way forward of dealing with these people? This is the question.

MR NABETA: We recommended to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to leave the technology bit and deal with what they are good at. We asked them and they even wrote a letter and handed over this project to the Ministry of ICT and NITA. They said, “Now, you handle,” and they came to the committee and gave us a copy of the report and the letter. After that, they still went on and did their things. They have never gone back to NITA; they have never gone back to ICT. Now, they are running again, asking for more money. There is no communication. They want to create data centres; they are not talking about the communication. If you are communicating these computer needs, you need communication.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nabeta, the question is; can we finally handle this report now? 

MR NABETA: No, we do not have capacity to handle this here because even the information we need is not here. They should go back to the respective committees and give the details that we need before we can handle it here. We do not have the information to handle it now.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, this is why it was problematic for us to proceed with the budget before the minister came here. This was a very serious agreement because I knew that there were individuals who knew something extra. We wanted Parliament to be satisfied first so we can come and talk about the money; but we did the first thing first and I washed my hands here in front of you and told you, “There is a problem, let us wait”. But the chairperson went and made a report and said it was a committee report. I objected three times and I was unable to win the House to my side.

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that we should not have passed the budget because we did not have the technical advice on the matter? Is that how Government budgets are handled? I told you the only equipment you had; the missile you had if you are dissatisfied with policy, is to move a motion to reduce the budget by Shs 10,000 only. You do not say, “We do not pass the budget,” because if we do not pass the budget, then it means other things cannot be run. That is why our procedure only gives you one weapon; to reduce the budget by Shs 10,000 but not to reject it totally.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, the matter is in your hands -

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not mine; I am referring you to our Rules of Procedure. According to our Rules of Procedure, if you want to show dissatisfaction you move a motion to reduce the figure by only Shs 10,000.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, probably you could guide me.

THE SPEAKER: No, those are the rules. 

MR KYANJO: On the issue of discrepancies in a report that has to be adopted by Parliament through the correct rules; if there are discrepancies, do we simply follow the rules?

THE SPEAKER: You see, this is rule 129(12)(a): “Any Member may move to reduce the amount of Vote-on-Account, but every such motion shall relate to the total amount,” and you reduce it by Shs 10,000 only. Although it is taken, that shows that you are dissatisfied with what is going on. But you do not reject the total vote. 

Maybe we have to look at this procedure and change it in that you can move a motion to totally reject a vote of a ministry. These are our Rules of Procedure.

4.49
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for this statement. I also thank Government for the intention of this project. The intention, no doubt, is very noble because it is going to tremendously assist us from the perspective of detecting crime, taxes, education, elections and many others. The intention is tremendously good. 

However, I am disappointed because Government started thinking about this project in 2004. [MR OKUPA: “Even before.”] Maybe even before. But what is disturbing me is that it appears nobody has collected the different components to get a total project -(Interjections)- they have not and we have even signed to pay a contract of over € 64 million when we do not even know where we are going. To me, this is very disappointing. 

On page 9, here are our officials rushing to sign contracts of over € 64 million; but this sum does not include what the ministry requires to set up a data centre. Now, why are you rushing when you are not going to get the data centre? Personalisation – you know if you read that entire paragraph, this is very disappointing. I remind the ministry that it is not too late.  Let them go back now, assemble people specialised in this and we get a clear and complete way to where we are going because at the moment, nobody knows, evidenced from this report. Let them go back, get specialists and then we see where we are moving, to ensure that – 

In my view, I think it would even have been better for the suppliers to install this because we are going to get equipment here and then they will say it is badly installed. They should have thought about this; this is € 64 million. The package should be supply and install and even test run for a year. But we -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Those who were in the last Parliament you remember that in the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, when we were handling the issues of Radio Uganda and UTV, there was equipment, which was imported which we paid for and it lay idle in Nakasero for over five years. It was not installed and over US $10 million had been used. In the end, it just gathered rust and became obsolete. I think the best thing is for us to have a total package of the required amount such that we are able to install, have the database, these other centres and all that such that we import the machine and have all this data input.

And I remember when Internal Affairs and Defence committees met, you said that you needed to come to the committee and explain and take the views of the Members before you bring this matter to the House. I am surprised that you have decided to short cut that agreement that we had reached at that time. If we had done that, we would not be having these things here now.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon.  Members, what I suggest is that this statement has been made and in this statement the minister talks about an agreement. What should be done is that this statement and all the other documents including the agreement should be studied by the relevant committee of our Parliament and then they report to us because the relevant committee will also use technical people to help it to understand the agreement and be able to make recommendations on this statement. Otherwise, we are lacking certain information. 

MR BYANDALA: No, Mr Speaker, I think sending this to the committee without the total package will still be disjointed. Let our technical staff from these ministries bring a total package of how the thing is going to move so that our committee goes through it and it is flowing, continuous.

THE SPEAKER: This is exactly what I am saying because when it goes to the committee, the committee will be able to summon those people to help it understand this. This is what I am saying. The experts will not come here. They cannot come here. They can only go to the committee. 

MR BYANDALA: But Mr Speaker, I think it would have been better to let the technical people go and sit, prepare a well worked out flow and send it to the committee. The committee may even ask other people before they come. Let us be given time. 

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is an adage that great minds think alike and actually the anxiety of the Members of Parliament is exactly what was done. First of all, I want the House to appreciate that since the conception up to now, there have been failed attempts. Many attempts have been made and they have aborted. So, just because there was abortion it does not mean that we are not going to have any conception. 

Secondly, the project and the agreement are comprehensive. The agreement is comprehensive except the one aspect which came in was the capture of the new registered voters. Now, that aspect was part of this machinery and it came and was utilised by the Electoral Commission and they used it to capture the new registration. So, that was a different matter but now the personalisation and the other programmes are comprehensive and the company is the one going to do most of the things through the whole process until the end. That is what I wanted to clarify on.

4.55
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope after abortion we shall not have a still birth. First of all, I want to thank the minister that for sometime we have been yearning to hear about the national bio-data bank - some of us actually for over a decade even before we came here, we thought it was very important even before the Electoral Commission attempted any exercise to first have a national bio-data bank then those of voting age could be derived. 

But now I want to appeal to Parliament and whoever is going to get involved in this process: we have lost a lot of time; we have been yearning for this exercise and this tool, which has far reaching effects. As you have heard, it affects so many organisations of this country right from security; even the planning authority should be using this, UBOS and everywhere. There have been so many speed governors and I hope whatever decision is going to be made should really be mindful of the time lost and how much we needed this facility yesterday.  

So, I would like to urge that we should now urge for the integration of the total package. Our focus should be mostly on trying to fast track the total package and also even when we talk about the single sourcing. Single sourcing by practice - 

THE SPEAKER: Is this still an issue because they did?

MR MUKITALE: What I am saying is that single sourcing for security reasons, as the Speaker has said, should be granted. What is important is that you should have gone for something credible and with proven performance where systems have worked in other countries. So, I would like to end by appealing that what we need most is to improve this product. What we need is the output. What improvement can be made at this point in time to make sure that we add value and derive more value for money out of what has already been expended? Thank you.   

THE SPEAKER: Where do you do it? Do you do it in the plenary here? (Laughter) This is the question.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I want to agree that the committee stage would be involved and also for those who are looking at auditing, there will be other departments which can do it later but it is important even at committee stage that we are mindful of fast tracking this process and having it as fast as possible with all the products.

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. You have helped the House on how we can logically come to the conclusion on this statement because frankly speaking, the country needs a formal identity system that can save us from a long struggle we have had over time, that in this country, anybody can enter, anybody can pose as a citizen, anybody can have a driver’s licence, anybody can pose to be anything and he will pass. There is no method of detecting who is a Ugandan and this thing has been on for a very long time.

Secondly, the third Deputy Prime Minister has informed this House of failed efforts in the past. He used the word “abortion”. Surely, we have now reached a stage where this system should not abort this time.

What I propose, Mr Speaker, is along your lines because this thing is quite heavy. The cost is about € 64 million. That is a lot of money but weigh it against what we have lost in the past and I can tell you the cost to this country for failing to have an identity card is ten times the € 64 million that we are looking at this time -(Interjections)- yes, time has a value. Every time over the years that you have not had this, you simply do not know the hidden costs this country has suffered. 

On the issue hon. Kyanjo has raised of procurement, I notice on the procurement there is a comment here, on page 8, paragraph 10. The comment is, “Having gone through all the necessary steps as guided by the various meetings held and with the time for the electoral process running rapidly out, the meeting chaired by the President was convened to consider the matter. Those who participated in the meeting included the Chairman and Director PPDA …” all the names are listed on page 8 and the conclusion of that meeting was: “It was clarified that the procurement of a national security information system cannot be handled the way we handle other Government procurement like stationery and other items ….” 

Essentially, the point was made; the company’s ability to deliver, the due diligence about the company, ensuring value for money. If these are ensured, Mr Speaker, I would concur with you if this matter be scrutinized by the committee so be it, but let there be speed, so that this matter is concluded. Thank you very much.

MR DOMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are two issues I want to raise in this report. In support of your wisdom and guidance to this House that the details of what is happening under this report can best be handled under a committee. But before we go there, we are likely to enter into a problem in future if some of these issues are not raised now.

There is the overlapping roles of having Members of Parliament going to perform an executive function, and later coming back to oversee what is happening. We have had problems in the past, where Members of Parliament have gone and come here to give a report as the minister’s statement says. What competences did the Members of Parliament have? Did they look at the size of the equipment? Did they look at the colour of employees? What did they use for them to give the report as the minister reports? Yet if anything goes wrong with the procurement, it must be Members of Parliament, who must come up to hold the Executive accountable.

Another reason I want clarification on; you read and briefed Parliament on steps taken to set up a national security information system. You would imagine that the word “security” was incorporated here basically because they wanted to have a single sourcing. But when you look at the front page and see the functions, the best Parliament and Government would have done in procuring such a system other than looking for discreet information about prices, would have been through competitive bidding.

But to call it a “security information system” and then read the functions given by the Minister on page 1, you would wonder what the problem would be if we used competitive bidding. Actually, better technology, through competitive bidding would ensure Government gets these. May I ask the hon. Minister what insecurity or security would have been created – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, who is able to tell you whether the single sourcing was prejudicial? Are we competent to say single sourcing was prejudicial? Are we?

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, like you ruled, let this matter go to the committee so that we deal with it in that place. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should send this matter to the appropriate committee, which will be free to use technical people.

DR EPETAIT: I am proposing that the Committee of ICT and the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs sit together.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, there is no problem, but we send it to that small one then you can use other people to help you analyse this and then you come back to give us a report.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, would one month be enough to accomplish this?

THE SPEAKER: 20 days? If we give them one month, I get worried for the reasons you know.

MR NABETA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information we are asking the Minister of Internal Affairs to bring - if they bring it as soon as possible, we could actually report in a week or two.

THE SPEAKER: No. You do not have to tell us that here. As soon as you see them tomorrow, you make those directives to them. We do not make directives to them because we do not know the people you want. That would be the work of the committee. I think we agree.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, in the meantime, therefore, what is supposed to be happening?

THE SPEAKER: The status quo remains.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have two matters that need clarification. On page 8, I would want legal interpretation of that statement where that particular meeting decided that the procurement system should not be applied in this respect. I do not know whether a meeting can bend the rules. I would like to seek legal clarification.

THE SPEAKER: They will raise it in the committee and bring it back to us.

MRS OGWAL: I agree. The second one is on page 9, paragraph 12, where we talk about the figure of € 64 million. Does this technical team have the mandate to commit the country to this magnitude without seeking the endorsement of Parliament? 

THE SPEAKER: This is a query, which will be handled by a competent agency of Government. I think the matter ends here; it is sent to the two committees; ICT and Internal Affairs. That ends the debate on this issue until they report back.

4.56
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you. I have consulted with the Ministries of Public Service and Finance to the effect that Public Service, which should have furnished Finance with the information had not seen the motion and they were pleading with us that on this matter they are given time to consult. I, however, need your guidance on whether the motion can be read now and we give them time to give us a written statement. Would it be proper if we went ahead with our motion and then …?

THE SPEAKER: I think you go as you agreed. I think it is better that way.

I understand there is a Bill, which the Ministry of Finance wants to introduce. Therefore, we adjust the Order Paper to allow the Minister get the First Reading of that Bill.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2010

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2010” be read for the first time. 

I would also like to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications certifying that the Appropriation Bill has been examined under the required law.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament to handle and report back as soon as possible.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure on the matter that has been deferred. I think it is incumbent upon all of us to move in tandem with situations rather than having to move forward and back because this matter of the Uganda Management Institute and Ministry of Public Service, if we do not put our foot down - I know Ministry of Public Service is fully aware of what they are trying to do and they are just dodging things around. In the future, I think we need to respect the resolution of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, when you say dodging, you imply improper motive but this motion belongs to a mover and a seconder and we have been told that because of some negotiations and consultations, they are not ready to deal with it. How long is it going to take you? Will you have finished the consultations by next week?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, the consultation is not on the side of the mover and the seconder. The Office of the Clerk did not serve the ministry with the motion and they are saying they want to come with a written response. The guidance I was seeking from the Speaker was whether we could go ahead and present our motion.

THE SPEAKER: The consultations you are going to make may affect the motion; why don’t you wait? I am asking you, how long do you think this consultation will take so that we line it up for next week?

MR MUKITALE: Two days would be proper for me.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, after two days, we shall put it on the Order Paper. (Mr Okupa rose_)

THE SPEAKER: I think that matter is finished.

MR OKUPA: It is for the future, it is not for now -

THE SPEAKER: No, that matter is finished. Hon. Members, I thank you for what you have been able to do. This brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow, at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.14 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 22 September 2010 at 2.00 p.m.) 


