Tuesday, 23 September 2014

Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you can see on the Order Paper, we have the Value Added Tax Bill which has been with us for a while. I hope today we will be able to finalise it. We also hope to finalise with the Supplementary Appropriation Bill which will close the last financial year and pave us the way for handling the issues to do with this financial year including the Appropriation Bill.

The Manager of the Parliamentary Netball Team is inviting members for training at 7.00 a.m. daily at Sheraton Hotel. The East African Parliamentary Sports Tournament, 2014 is scheduled for early December and our team needs to shine. Please come for training. 

Truly, hon. Jalia Bintu Abwooli; Manager, Netball Team of the Parliament of Uganda. Thank you.

2.12
MS ANN AURU (NRM, District Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. It is a follow up of the issue which I raised on the 18th of this month in this House, regarding the conflict between South Sudan and Moyo District. I requested that Government should bring a comprehensive statement on what it is really doing on that issue. I am also grateful to your Office, Mr Speaker, because I got a letter, a copy of which was to the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, to bring to this House today a statement on the issue of the conflict between Moyo and South Sudan. But Mr Speaker, I do not see it on the order paper. My people are still desperate. 

Last Saturday, as we were for a meeting with the Second Deputy Prime Minister and a team from South Sudan, 57 houses were torched in Goki village. So many people are in Adjumani District as displaced people and there are about seven internally displaced camps. Children are not going to school because most of these people are camped in primary schools. So, we are really desperate. We want to know what Government is doing or what it has done so far. People are dying; there is no food. 

Mr Speaker, I visited three of those camps yesterday. Children and women are just lying on the ground. What they previously heard that they would maybe go back and collect has all disappeared. It has all been stolen. The situation is desperate. I am appealing to Government and I would like to know why it is not on the order paper. I want to request Government to come on the ground to help the people with food and shelter. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Member for Moyo. The Parliament of Uganda is truly sorry for what is happening there and indeed if there was something this Parliament could do immediately, it would have done so but as you will recall, the Leader of Government Business made a commitment to the House that a comprehensive statement would be made today this afternoon at 2 O’clock. We did not receive a confirmation of the statement and that is why it is not on the order paper. Where is the statement from Government? Is it ready so that you can present it? 

2.15
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter has been around for some time and some effort has been made to see whether the situation would be improved and that effort continues to be made and as soon as I finish this statement, I will go and find out what is happening and push all our efforts in improving the situation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A comprehensive statement was promised to this House; do you have a comprehensive statement for the House today?
 
MR KAJURA: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you don’t, what is going to happen?

MR KAJURA: Mr Speaker, we are not ready because we are still preparing the statement but the matter is being worked upon. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry that I have to put our elder to order but the issue at hand is a sad situation as I heard from my sister and – (Interjections) – that Government takes it as a matter of urgency and comes to the rescue of the people who are suffering. So many are even still trapped down there waiting to know whether to come back or not. Is the honourable member in order to treat these issues lightly without giving a specific response and time when Government will do something tangible to rescue the situation of our people? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are two things here. Where is the comprehensive statement that should have been today? Two, is what has been done in this situation on the ground. That is what we need to know from Government. What steps have been taken to try and rescue the people on the ground from their suffering, and then do something? Give them human intervention and secondly, the comprehensive statement that was promised before the House. There are two issues; one was the situation on the border of Moyo and surrounding areas and the second one was on the ultimatum and Government then said an envoy was to be sent to the President of South Sudan and that today’s statement would cover both subjects. That is what we are waiting for. 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the Leader of Government Business, who pledged here on behalf of Government to bring a comprehensive statement and as you are aware, during the weekend, there were some changes in that office by the appointing authority but as that was happening, he had already sent the Deputy Leader of Government Business with the Minister of Internal Affairs to go and handle this issue on the ground. So, the Office of the Prime Minister and the Office of the Ministry of Internal Affairs are both on the ground in this area to make sure everything is handled well. But I want to pledge before you, Mr Speaker, that since the Leader of Government business has not yet – (Interjections) - you are aware of what happened during the weekend. I want to pledge before this House that on Thursday, we will make a comprehensive statement detailing even what will have happened up to that date. I thank you. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural point. The very fact that the hon. Patrick Amama Mbabazi was replaced at the weekend does not mean that government business should stop. You have just observed, Mr Speaker, that there are two issues on our hands at the moment: one is that of the statement that Government promised to bring here and hon. Amama Mbabazi was speaking on behalf of Government today. And the other is what deliberately the government is doing to try to alleviate the suffering of the people of Moyo. From what I heard from the First Deputy Prime Minister and I assume the Leader of Government Business in the House now, and the Government Chief Whip, nothing to do with addressing the immediate needs of the people has been addressed and yet, children, the elderly, continue suffering.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedural point –

MR AMURIAT: The procedural point I would like to raise is whether it couldn’t be right to complete Government that is present in the House to say to this House and to the world and to the people of Moyo particularly, what they as the Government are doing to try and help the people of Moyo in as far as logistical support is concerned, because that is what is immediately required.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let this House receive a statement on the actual situation on the ground tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Let the undertaking that the comprehensive statement be made on Thursday be honoured by the government.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.22
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Pursuant to our rules of procedure, permit me to present a personal statement. The government newspaper, known as the New Vision published today on page 2, carries a picture of a public rally seen organised by me at Kibumbilo Busega on the 21st September 2014 showing the picture of a purposely aborted rally attended by four children in the presence of empty chairs.

I am greatly alarmed by that sad fictitious story reported by one Ramathan Addy and I hope that name is not fictitious. The reporter who carried that name is a black Ugandan whom I expected to have a local surname.

Mr Speaker, permit me therefore to react to the said report as hereunder in honour of the constitutional rights given to me.

The report on the public rally paints a clear picture that the rally convened by the Rubaga South MP was abandoned, aborted and it was witnessed by only four children plus empty chairs. (Laughter)

That picture is torturous, cruel and degrading to my political image as the person who has low popularity in the area and that negates the contents of Article 24 of the Constitution of Uganda.

The picture was taken when I had just landed at the scene of fear, paraded by a multiplicity of police men and women. The public rally had not started and it was still drizzling when I arrived at the scene. I was merely calling the residents to come and attend the rally which the Inspector General of Police had just cleared. Can you imagine?

Mr Speaker, the New Vision report was, therefore, defamatory in law to me, it also subjected me to torture and equally degrade by political image in the constituency. It was unfair and the most unreasonable. As if that was not enough, the story printed today was fictitious and deceptive. I therefore demand for an apology from the New Vision in its edition tomorrow. Mind you, this is a government paper which must live to its expectations.

Members of Parliament should be respected. They are the people’s representatives, they deserve some respect and honour and I urge honourable members to insist that no newspaper should simply distort a story on you. You should come out in the open and defend your integrity and constitutional rights.

The press should check what it publishes. The Members of Parliament deserve some respect and honour. I have never addressed a poorly attended assembly in Rubaga. Many people gauge my popularity, everywhere I step people are coming in big numbers to receive my words of wisdom. So, what is New Vision talking about?

The rally was well attended in spite of the fear police had planted in the area, it was also addressed by a number of prominent people including local leaders, as well as hon. Latif Ssebagala, the MP for Kawempe North and the Imam of this Parliament.

Above all, the success story of the public rally was reported by media stations like Capital FM, Top Television, CBS, NBS among so many others. My mission on conclusion at the rally was to brief the residents about the present mess mounted on the people by KCCA and the need for KCCA Members of Parliament to persuade their colleagues in the House to rescue the taxpayers’ money amounting to Shs 37 billion under the cover of USAFI before the budget is concluded.
We are doing all we can to make sure that we rescue that tax payers’ money and the mission is still on. 

Mr Speaker, I also appeal to the Government of Uganda to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is a personal statement.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, finally, I also appeal to the Government of Uganda in that rally to open a fund for our disabled people. I launched a fund of Shs 4 million for the disabled people in Rubaga South, where each parish will receive Shs 500,000 per year for the disabled. Busega share was handed over to the LC administration in that area on that day.

The New Vision did not see any sense in reporting that development. What a shame?

Finally, I would like to thank you for the opportunity you have accorded me. Let it be a practice that whenever a Member of Parliament is distorted, he or she has a right to come up and say something instead of leaving those people to write the way they want.

I thank the constituents of Rubaga South for the support they have always accorded me. Why is police, for example, failing the Rubaga South political rally from time to time? I was elected, where does one get the powers to deregister me? With those few words, I would like to thank you for the support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the rules as to how we manage personal statements are clear. The foundations of personal statements are also clear. It arises from circumstances where it would put the whole picture of the House in disrepute because one Member has been misrepresented so the Member owes it to the House to explain why that kind of situation has happened to him because the whole House is put in bad image. But the circumstances portrayed by the hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi do not directly fall within that category. The prayers he is trying to make to the House are prayers you make to courts of law. For example, the issue of an apology because the statement was unfair or untrue, that is a matter for court to determine not this Parliament. The question as to whether as of now your image has been reduced or greatly diminished among right thinking members of the public; that is the matter for court to determine not this House. But we are giving you the opportunity; you have to know that each time a Member has to make a personal statement, the Speaker must receive a copy and look through before.

I was waiting for your statement but I did not see it. Let it pass like that but for the future, I will have to look at a copy of the statement so that it conforms to the rules. That will be helpful.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, this is one of those small Bills that have really taken the time of this House. It is a four clause Bill with one clause being commencement and substantially only three clauses but it has taken us the whole of last week and we are here on it again today. But I had directed that some consultations be made by way of trying to resolve the issues that were pending on clause 4 paragraphs B specifically under g; that is machinery, tools and that category of things that have to do with agriculture. Has any progress been made on this chair?

Clause 4

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. Following that decision, a committee comprising of volunteer Members of Parliament sat yesterday in effort to secure a compromise position on the proposed VAT on agricultural machinery, tools and implements for agricultural use only. The meeting was divided between two schools of thought. The first school of thought was advocating that the item be moved from the third schedule to the second schedule. The second schedule is about the exempt categories, the reason is that VAT registered players will have no right when they are moved to the second schedule to claim from Government or URA VAT refunds and by doing this the burden on Government will be reduced.

There was a group that was advocating that the standard rate of 18 percent be applied and they argued that VAT exemption would render locally manufactured machinery and tools less competitive and may in the long run not help the economy. These were the forward looking advocates. Despite these differences we had to move forward and we agreed that in the interim, interim being this financial year, we adopt the first option of exempting these agricultural machinery as described and we shall come up with detailed amendments and that during this interim period of one year, a study is undertaken to determine the most viable option for Uganda.

Mr Chairman, I have the proposed amendments ready with me and I do not know whether I should proceed or we should debate that one first. But I need to add that we came up with a detailed list of the machinery, tools and implements that we are referring to in this category and they include the Knapsack sprayers, ox-ploughs, drinkers and sprayers for chicken, agricultural tractors including walking tractors, disc hallows, cultivators, ploughs, weeders, seeders, planters, sub-soilers, seed drills, threshers, bell wrappers, milk machinery, milk coolers, maize mills, wheat flour mills, homogenisers, dairy  machinery, grain cleaners and sorters, feed grinders and hatchers. That is the list that we think should be exempt from VAT. If you allow me, I can proceed straight to the proposed amendment. That has since been updated. To cater for what they are indicating, any other item outside the list that I have read above would be placed under the VAT differed category. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Just hold on, hon. Members. The clause we have called now is clause 4. What you seem to be proposing to amend is in clause 3, which is second schedule. What was pending was on clause 4(b)(1)(g) that is the issue of machinery and those tools that relate to agriculture. We are right now in clause 4. We had already passed clause 3 so what you are proposing has to come in clause 3, which means we have to recommit this clause because we had already passed it.

I do not know whether you are proposing that under clause (g),(b) should be deleted because they cannot appear under clause 4, third schedule and also clause 3, under second schedule. So would that be the correct position for the situation now under clause 4? What are you doing in clause 4? Deleting (g) from here?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. You are right but in order for us to move in a harmonised way, since the other one was a harmonisation committee, it is important that the minister of finance is on record with what the chairperson has read before we can move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I thought you were going to say that the minister of finance was going to rise if he wanted to say something. I cannot compel people to speak in this House.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. May I request through you, Mr Chair -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I thought you were coming to tell me the situation in 4(b) item 1(g). I thought you were going to speak to me on that. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, what I have said is that what you have started is the right procedure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, then you can resume your seat.

MR EKANYA: But our fear, Mr Chairman, is that we need the good will of the minister before we proceed to delete.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chairperson of the committee, what are we doing in clause 4? Chairperson of the committee, why don’t you come near here?

MR SSEBUNYA: I am sorry, Mr Chairman, I forgot my glasses. Mr Chairman, we had deleted (d) in clause 4 about machinery.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We deleted it?

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes, we had proposed to delete it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, we had proposed to delete but we hadn’t pronounced ourselves on it. So, is the amendment to go with now that we delete (g) from these paragraphs in which we then pass clause 4 as amended? What is the situation? Paragraph (g) is about machinery and it is in the Third Schedule. Chairperson of the committee, you propose to make amendment on Schedule III –

MR MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete (g) in order to generate the required amendments under Schedule II.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, in paragraph (b), we are deleting (e). Is that correct? We agreed to delete (e) which is about seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and hoes. We are deleting it and also deleting (g). Not so? So, what is going to be left in paragraph (b) will be (f) and (h). Is that the position? Can I put the question to that amendment?  I put the question that in clause 4, paragraph (b), (e) and (g) be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, is there any other amendment in clause 4? I put the question that clause 4 as amended stand part of the Bill.

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 1, on commencement date. Have we made any alterations that have an impact on the commencement date? We might have to deal with the recommittal of clause 3 before we deal with the commencement date.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, where we have made amendments, then we presume that it shall be effective on assent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Who will process the presumption?

MR SSEBUNYA: It will be us.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then we have to pronounce ourselves on it. But it looks like there might be other changes in clause 3 that will also have an impact on the commencement date.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I think you are right; we have to consider commencement after we have recommitted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, since we are already at committee stage, we can still review whatever decisions were taken earlier. Can we adopt clause 3 as amended? 

Clause 3

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I had wanted to settle the new clause first on deferment before we go to clause 3.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I propose to repeal paragraph 1(s) and insert the following: “The supply of machinery, tools and implements suitable for use only in agriculture.” And this comes under the Second Schedule of the VAT Act. And in (b), we insert, immediately after paragraph (4) of the principal Act, the following: “For the purpose of paragraph (1)(s) – machinery, tools and implements suitable for use only in agriculture, shall mean: 1. Ox-ploughs, drinkers, and feeders for chicken, agricultural tractors including walking tractors, dick arrows, cultivators, ploughs, weeders, seeders, planters, sub-soilers, seed drills, threshers, bell rappers, milking machinery, milk coolers, maize mills, wheat flour mills, homogenisers,  diary machinery, grain cleaners and sorters, feed grinders and hatcheries.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Those are the ones from the harmonised – yes one other item.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to add machinery use for artificial insemination – the cans and associated containers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay, honourable minister?

MR OMACH: No objection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, on that list, we add equipment used for artificial insemination. Okay, does that relate to farming?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, that is used in the animal husbandry. The equipment contains the cans, the gas containers, the nitrogen cans, the tubes and so on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, it is only done to animals, not so?

MR EKANYA: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we are proposing to insert a new clause after clause 2 as follows: in sub-section (1) by inserting immediately after paragraph (d) the following new paragraph: “(c) At the beginning of any tax period of more than three calendar months where there are reasonable grounds to expect that the total value exclusive of any tax of taxable supplies to be made by the person will exceed the annual threshold set out in sub-section 2.”

(b) by inserting immediately after sub-section 5, the following new sub-section (6): “The registration under paragraph (c) of sub-section (1) of section 7 shall be valid only for purposes of accessing terms and conditions of payment of tax on plant and machinery as provided in 34(8).”

The justification is that the VAT Act currently allows the person to register for VAT only if that person is to produce goods or services subject to VAT within three months. Once registered, that person will be allowed to claim a refund or a credit on VAT paid on inputs used in production.

The proposed amendment is intended to allow people to invest in long term projects, which take more than three months to mature to register for VAT and procure plant and machinery free of VAT, which is an incentive allowed to registered taxpayers only.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear, honourable members? Honourable minister -

MR OMACH: I have no objection, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No objection from the minister. Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is a new clause, which forms an amendment to what is in the Bill.

New clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Commencement.

MR SSEBUNYA: We need to be guided by the chairman on commencement and how - because there are some proposed items that -

MR EKANYA: Let me help you. Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the commencement of the VAT is 1st July, save for clause 3(s) regarding machinery, tools and supply for use only in agriculture, which would commence upon publication.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What about those in clause 4? Don’t they have implications in clause 4?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, the reason is that these items were under -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, can we have the chairman?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, commencement is on the date of assent where amendments have been made otherwise on 1st July. Can I repeat? Commencement is on the date of assent where amendments have been made otherwise on the 1st day of July 2014.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear? Because the people will have to take it out properly and then they present it for the assent copy -

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, because we have made amendments on the schedules and these amendments will apply on the date of assent otherwise we continue with the provisional collection order, which was effective on 1st July.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, is that appropriate, honourable members? Would that formulation suffice? I put the question to the amendment in clause 1.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chair, have you resolved those other issues on zero rating and exemptions? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, maybe let me start by explaining. I propose the repealing of paragraph (g) under the Third Schedule. However, the way to express that in the Bill that is before us is to maintain under paragraph 4(b) that particular paragraph (g) in order that it can be deleted from the Third Schedule.

So I am amending my earlier submission in this clause 4 that (g) should be maintained under paragraph 4(b) of the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014.

The implication is that we are deleting it from the Third Schedule where the agricultural machinery was zero-rated and we have already moved an amendment to put it in the exempt category just to remove the lacuna. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So that is in clause 4. The Bill proposes that the Third Schedule to the Principal Act is amended by repealing paragraph (g). That is what the Bill is proposing; repealing paragraph (g). So we leave it as it is in the Bill because it is repealing it. Is that clear? Our original view was that it was not put properly but the Bill itself is proposing to delete (g) from Schedule III, which we were actually doing the wrong way round. So we now confirm what is actually in the Bill that (g) should remain where it is because it is going to be deleted by this Bill. Is that okay?

So what does it mean? It means we only deleted (e) and so (f), (g) and (h) will remain in the Bill as it is for repeal. So can I put the question to this clarification now? We had initially said that we delete (g) from the Bill. Even (e) is going to be retained here? 

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Sub-clause (e) is the only paragraph going to be deleted from here. So (g) will remain in the Bill as it is. I now put the question for retention of (g) in clause 4 (b). I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Jachan Omach): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Jachan Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014” and has passed it with some amendments.  

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Jachan Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Jachan Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014” be read for the third time and do pass. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2014”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Minister. Congratulations chairpersons and members of this committee and congratulations, hon. Members, for finally seeing it through.

Hon. Members, in the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have Members of Parliament and staff of the Public Accounts Committee from the Parliament of Zimbabwe. They are here to benchmark and share experiences with their counterparts. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

MR SSEBUNYA: Can I have an opportunity to lay these minutes that were used and the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay minutes and reports used in these tax Bills belatedly. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report and minutes of the committee.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
I)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2013/2014
II)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015

MR EKANYA: Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR EKANYA: I rise on a point of procedure and I am seeking for your indulgence in regard to Article 108(a). The Constitution under Article 108(a) says that, “There shall be a Prime Minister who shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament by simple majority from among Members of Parliament or a person qualified to be elected a Member of Parliament. The Prime Minister shall be the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and be responsible for coordination and implementation of government policies across ministries, government departments and other public institutions.” 

We received a letter addressed to you and copied to us through our iPads that the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister Amama Mbabazi had been relieved of his duties with immediate effect and that another person had been appointed. Until that person is appointed, according to my understanding, we do not have a Prime Minister. In such circumstances, how are we operating and how is Government operating? I am seeking for your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have always known in this House that there has always been a Deputy Leader of Government Business and we also know that that office is supposed to coordinate the affairs of the government. We have a full Front Bench and so the Government is there and they know how they are going to handle business for now. For us, we shall proceed as the House.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was the motion moved already? Hon. Members, this motion was moved on 12 June by the Minister for Finance and it is now the moment for us to go and do just that. So, it is Committee of Supply.

SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE, 2014

RECURRENT EXPENDITURE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, this matter has gone to the committee and it has come back in terms of the Supplementary Appropriation Bill but we need to supply before we come to the Bill itself and so this is the time.

I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 277,591,857,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2014.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: Procedure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now propose that a total sum of Shs 277,591,857,000 be provided for as Supplementary Recurrent Expenditure for the Financial Year 2014.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: Procedure.

DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 202,337,712,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2013/2014. I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 202,337,712,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2013/2014.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Recurrent and development expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 479,929,569,000 be provided for as grand total supplementary recurrent and development expenditure for financial year 2013/2014. I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 479,929,569,000 be provided for as grand total supplementary current and development expenditure for the financial year 2014. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of Supply report thereto. I put the question to that motion. 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.01
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2014 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we haven’t done the Bill; we have just supplied. 

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered and approved the expenditure for 2013/2014. I beg to move. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move a motion that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of Supply. I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2014 –

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move -(Mr Ekanya rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure? We want to hear the report of the committee. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I know we have to move because of time but we needed to suspend certain provisions of our Rules in order to move the way we are moving - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no requirement or necessity for suspension of any rules. There is no way we  can assent to the committee report - so, why should we suspend any rules?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the Bill was read but – (Hon. Amama Mbabazi enters the Chamber)
 
THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, I still recall the time when we were interviewing the then Prime Minister Apollo Nsibambi; we asked him what big difference he found between theoretical politics in the university and actual politics since he was a professor of politics at Makerere and he also had been involved in active politics.  He said, “The big difference is this; that in politics the minute you enter it, you spend your life in the departure lounge. You do everything, you think, you prepare everything but you are actually in the departure lounge.” That means any time – and it is for all of us by the way – (Laughter) – we are actually working from the departure lounge according to the wise statement from Prof. Apollo Nsibambi, who is actually launching a book on Friday 26th at the Sheraton and he is inviting all of you to come and attend.

So, I have seen some excitement about the coming in of the Member for Kinkiizi West but that is it -you are very welcome. (Applause) So, while in the departure lounge, you keep moving, left, right and centre but you are still within the departure lounge.  You are welcome, honourable member. Thank you.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Now that the former Prime Minister has entered, can he formally be initiated to the back bench and we allow him to give his maiden speech? (Laughter)- in the recognition of the fact that the role has changed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is required that there must be a debate on the Floor for a Member to give a maiden speech, but there is no matter on the Floor as of now.

BILLS
SECOND READING

SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2014

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2014” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that motion seconded, Minister of Local Government? Okay, secondment from local government, Minister of Works, good. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR OMACH: Yes, Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to provide for supplementary appropriation out of the consolidated fund under Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 of a sum of Shs 479,929,569,000 to meet additional expenditure for the financial year 2013/2014. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Bill was received for first reading and sent to the committee of budget. The committee is ready to report.

3.24
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to present the report of the Committee on Budget on the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2014. 

Introduction

On 18 September 2013, the minister of Finance, planning and economic development presented a Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2014 to Parliament. The Speaker, in accordance with rule 161 (32), referred the Bill to the Budget Committee.

Methodology

The Budget Committee held a meeting with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and examined the Bill in detail and the following are the observations. 

The total supplementary expenditure request to Parliament initially amounted to Shs 579.505 billion. The amount withdrawn by the Ministry of 	Finance which is annexture one, amounted to Shs 98.42 billion, leaving a balance of Shs 480.63 billion as the amount spent by the end of the financial year 2013/2014. 

In table one in the supplementary report, we present the figures; recurrent expenditure, under Supplementary Schedule I for financial year 2013/2014. We have the following figures, Shs 80,505,000,000 for development expenditure and Shs 156,141,000,000; the total appropriation excluding statutory. Therefore, Shs 236,646,977,000 and a grand total including statutory is Shs 237,267,828,000.

Under Schedule II, the figures are as follows: recurrent for 2013/2014 is Shs 197,086,829,000; development Shs 46,195,763,000 and the total appropriation excluding statutory expenditure under Schedule II is Shs 243,355,150,000 and the total including statutory expenditure is Shs 243,355,150,000. 

The committee notes that the total expenditure presented under the Supplementary Appropriation Bill stands at 3.4 per cent of the total approved budget of financial year 2013/2014. This figure is higher than the 3 percent stipulated under section 12 of the Budget Act.

To be compliant with the Budget Act, this figure should be kept within the 3 percent of the total approved budget for the financial year. The excess of 0.4 percent which translates to Shs 59.641 billion should be treated as excess expenditure under Section 17 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act 2003.

The Bill has a total supplementary expenditure of Shs 479,929,569,000 excluding statutory expenditure. 

The committee notes that by the end of January 2014, URA revenue collection shortfalls were projected at Shs 475 billion. In order to finance the expenditures at the levels appropriated by Parliament, the Ministry of Finance had to borrow from the domestic market Shs 675 billion to cover the projected revenue shortfalls. 

It is in this regard that a supplementary requirement of Shs 454.14 billion out of a total of Shs 480.63 billion was financed through re-allocation of the domestically borrowed funds. The matter was brought before the House and debate deferred to a future date. Other sources of financing are donor financing, non-tax revenue unspent balances and non-resource taxes.

Mr Speaker, remember the passing of schedule I and II was deferred pending harmonisation of information regarding the procurement of Ankole cows for breeding at Aswa ranch in Pader District as well as ensuring that the supplementary expenditure limit does not exceed 3 percent of total appropriation. 

The committee has since confirmed that the land at Aswa is owned by Government under the names of Uganda Livestock Industries for a lease period of 99 years. A copy of the title has been availed to the committee. In addition, the committee has received evidence of documents pertaining to the procurement of the requisite materials for the works currently going on at the ranch. 

Recommendations

1)	The committee recommends that the excess of 0.4 percent as described above, that is Shs 59.641 billion, which is beyond the 3 percent provided for in the Budget Act be excluded from the 	Bill.

2) 	The excluded 59.61 billion be treated as excess expenditure and handled under section 17 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.

3) 	The supplementary expenditure of Shs 420,288,569,000 be approved for the financial year 2013/2014. 

Conclusion

The committee recommends that Parliament approves the supplementary appropriation 2014 with an amount of Shs 420, 288,569,000. I beg to move.

Mr Speaker I have just been served with a minority report while seated on the Floor. So I just wanted to put that on record.

3.30
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Rt hon. Speaker, I wish to present a minority report which is signed by the shadow Minister of Finance and myself with a member of the budget committee. My concern if members recall is based on a statement made by the Speaker to this House on the 10th of July giving bold guidelines to the presentation of the supplementary expenditures. 

The minority report has already been uploaded on to our iPads if it has not come then it is a question of time. It is a very brief report. Whereas the Supplementary Schedule No.1 and No. II of financial year 2013/2014 of the Government of Uganda was laid before Parliament and referred to the budget committee for thorough scrutiny, analysis and reporting. As a member of the committee I dissent from the main report. 

I therefore move under rule 194 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that the House considers and adopts this minority which is moved in good spirit to save the reputation of this institution of Parliament. 
The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Budget Act of 2001 and the Public Finance and Accountability Act of 2003 provides give checklist considerations before passing supplementary budget.
Among other questions to be raised are:
    1) Is the supplementary request legal within the limit?
    2) What are the sources of funding? Is it additional resources, suppression, reallocation or borrowing?
    3) Is it characterised of budget items occasioned by unforeseen circumstances or emergencies that could not have been captured under the normal budgeting process.
    4) Whether the budget items are the most urgent in nature and cannot be postponed without detriment to the public interest.
    5) When a request is based on money spent. Is there evidence on the ground to show the value for money expenditure?
    6) Whether the supplementary estimates indicate any effect on the financing requirements of Governments submitted under paragraph a) or subsection 1 of subsection 16 of any expected changes to the statement provided under sub paragraph 3 of paragraph c and sub section 1 of section 15 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act of 2003. 

In view of the above checklist which was contained in the Speaker’s presentation to the House as a broad guideline the budget committee was informed of the sources of funding being borrowing and reallocation. These were the two specific areas. 
The key to such areas, we would like to draw your attention to specific areas we have identified and analysed:-

Borrowing as a Source of Funding 

Rt hon. Speaker it is unfortunate that Parliament is being used to pass fraud which will affect the reputation of the institution. We should strongly not ever think of attempting to pass this fraud. 

The Minister of Finance informed the budget committee that the sources of funding for this supplementary are: 1) borrowing and 2) reallocation. The resolution to borrow was referred to the committee on National Economy and borrowing was not approved. It is sadly disrespectful to the institution of Parliament that officers in the Ministry of Finance appointed themselves and turned to themselves the power to approve borrowing and appropriate the spending of public money and they want Parliament to endorse the illegality. This is a test to Parliament whether we took oath to defend the constitutionalism or not. 

Legal requirements not adhered to 

In the consideration of supplementary expenditure under Schedule II, two fundamental laws were breached and not at all adhered to as required. They are the Budget Act of 2001 and  the Public Finance and Accountability Act of 2003. Both the Public Finance and Accountability Act and the Budget Act are operationalised under Article 156(2) of Constitution of  Republic of Uganda. Once all the laws governing supplementary expenditure are read together the following guidelines emerge contrary to what the executive has presented to this supplementary request before and even after this afternoon.

Section 16(2) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act of 2003 states that a supplementary estimate prepared under sub section 1 shall indicate any effect on the financing requirements of the Government submitted under paragraph a of subsection 1 of section 15 and any expected changes to the statement provided under sub paragraph III of paragraph C of subsection 15. 

Why is the Budget Act of 2001 under section 12(3) states that any reallocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations. There was clear evidence in the committee deliberations and interactions with the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development that the referred to consultations never took place. 

Instead there was arbitrary reallocation of sector budgets to finance activities that were not of any emergency as required by the law. This is a total violation of the law including the Article 156 (2) of the Constitution that sanctions supplementary expenditure on the foreseen and unpredictable expenditure or emergencies.

Recommendation

    1) That Parliament rejects this supplementary Schedule No. 2 on the basis of the aforementioned reasons;

    2) Ensure adherence to requirements as clearly stipulated. The Ministry of Finance should be responsive to and follow the procedural statutory and institutional requirements that govern supplementary budgets including presentation of sufficient evidence as requested on some votes, consulting key sectors, presenting work plans and procurements plans, ministerial policy statements, among others; and

    3) It also recommended that the ministry committed itself to respond to the unanswered question or clarify on them as requested by the Budget Committee, which is absent in this report.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker and honourable members, if we endorse this illegality, we shall have handed over our legislative function to the Ministry of Finance.

Mr Speaker, given the above analysis, I recommend that House rejects the Supplementary Appropriation, 2014. It is our humble appeal that the House adopts the recommendations laid down in the report for the good governance of our country and a show of the responsibility of Parliament to manage the scarce resources for the good of our people.

Mr Speaker, it would have been a waste of time for the Speaker to have made a lengthy statement to this House providing guidelines to the Government for the purpose of this subject. I say all this for God and my country. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Cecilia Ogwal for presenting the minority report. Thank you, Chairman of the Committee for presenting the main report.

Honourable members, the motion before the House and for your debate is that the Bill entitled “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2014” be read the second time.  At this stage, we will proceed to debate only the principles of the Bill. We do the details at the committee stage. Debate begins now. We will do only three minutes so that we can cover as many members as possible.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have carefully listened to the minority report that raises fundamental issues and in particular the issue of illegality in the Bill itself. I seek your guidance, as the Speaker, whether it would be proper for the House to start debating on a matter which apparently is illegal? That is the guidance I am seeking from you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I don’t know whether at this stage we should go back to the debate we had on the issue of the motion for domestic borrowing of Shs 675billion that was borrowed domestically – I do not know whether we should go back into that debate again now. Otherwise, I thought I had separated the issues to enable us move on in terms of closing the last financial year – separate the issues of borrowing as we find an appropriate to deal with that issue because that borrowing was done without parliamentary approval.

I thought we had agreed that we would deal with the issue of spending which constitutes now the supplementary expenditure. So, to facilitate this House to conclude business of the last financial year and pave way for us to finalise also issues in the budget of this financial year, we have to allow this to happen. 
But we also said that we will have to find enough time to deal with the issue of borrowing without parliamentary approval. I think we also went into the details of, for example, the first letter that requested for the opinion of the Solicitor-General, which was only in respect to a specific matter and he responded properly to that matter because that was the only request.

The second request was separate from the first one.  The actions done under the authority of the first opinion were beyond what had been contained in that opinion. And I think we agreed that there were mistakes committed but there should be sufficient time for us to look at that. That is why the House, handling the report of the committee on that domestic borrowing, passed it but said that at that time, the House was equally constrained to sufficient decision that would put that matter to rest.
So, that is why the House resolved that we get that money that relates to the money spent, which was about this budget process – we should handle the issue of the money that was spent to enable us close the financial year before we come back to the issue of domestic borrowing. That is how we agreed. So, I don’t know whether we still want to go back to the debate on the borrowing being illegal or not – because while the borrowing was illegal, the expenditure was not. That is why we thought that by separating those two issues, we would find a way out of this situation and move on.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, my deepest concern, no matter whether we separate the expenditure from the borrowing, is us proceeding to debate a motion which is fundamentally based on violation of the laws made by this Parliament. And I wanted your clear guidance – if this was a cost raising the issue of illegality, we would have sorted this matter there and then. So, that is why I want your guidance – should Parliament proceed on a motion, which has been brought here by the Executive in total disregard of the laws already passed by this Parliament? Should we condone an illegality and move on as if it has not been seen?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this particular motion before the House, in the opinion of the Speaker, is legal. The issue of the borrowing was illegal. This particular motion is for the monies that wee expended – please we already agreed on this issue and I don’t want us to open that debate again. 

In order for us to be able to close this last financial year’s business and then move forward with this budget for this year because we cannot handle this budget without closing the accounts and that is why I even went further because they said the need –(Interjection)– order! The need arose under different circumstances. One was revenue shortfall collection from URA. Money had already been appropriated but there was no money to spend under that appropriation. Okay, that is what happened and at that time, the figure that was given to the Speaker was about Shs 475 billion, which was moved to Finance. This was money already appropriated but there was a revenue shortage. Uganda Revenue Authority did not collect enough money to meet the amounts appropriated by Parliament so they went and got money through this other method, which is illegal and used it to fill the money that was needed for that financial year.

There was then the one that was over and above what was appropriated by Parliament, which amount now keeps changing. I think what has been presented here is the final figure for now because then I think it was Shs 200 billion. That is what was presented to us at that time and we said okay, let us see. If you want to treat the Shs 200 billion as supplementary expenditure then do it accordingly. If it exceeds the 3 per cent, which I now see being recommended by the committee then you might want to proceed under excess expenditure under section 17 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

The sum total of this, honourable members, is for us - and I wish all the members could be listening unless these matters are too complicated - for us to be able to do our work of appropriation for this coming financial year. We have to close the last financial year and when we do that, we can then do what we need to do for this financial year; go to supply and do appropriation and that is the budget because as of now, what we are using is vote-on-account whose period is about to lapse and we are going to need to go into that.

So to avoid a situation that would lead us to a shutdown of the operations of Government –(Interjections) - Please, let me just conclude then you can do your guidance and you know it is not in the Rules; this guidance issue.

So that is why we are proceeding in this way and the spirit was okay, let us deal with this issue and close the financial year. Let us not shut down the operations of Government as it will affect many different people who are completely innocent of the mistakes of these people from Finance. They will be affected by this and should we not pass the budget, there will be issues involved.

So that is why we had said let us move this way and get sufficient time to deal with the issue of the illegal or unlawful act from the Ministry of Finance. Yes, procedure. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker. As I give my opinion on this procedural matter, I hope it will not in any way injure my chance when it comes to making contributions to this important debate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That would be up to me.

MR WADRI: Rt hon. Speaker, you have rightly guided that before we consider 2014/2015 financial year, we must close the old financial year of 2013/2014. Our limitation in that responsibility I would want to believe relates to the amounts of money that this Parliament appropriated. If there was any money, which came outside our appropriation, we are not duty bound to close what we did not open. In terms of operational management, we are only responsible for what we appropriated.

Since this money was appropriated by technocrats in Ministry of Finance who did not have this mandate as provided under Article 164 of the Constitution, are we really duty bound to continue nagging our heads with a role and responsibility, which is not ours? That is the guidance I want to seek from you, Rt hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay this is the situation. This money was spent within the financial year. A supplementary schedule was brought to the House for its approval; two supplementary schedules. The committee rejected them but they had been brought to this House. The request was brought to this House under Article 156, as required. If it is in excess, you bring it within four months and they were brought within four months.

The House committee rejected it, querying only one thing: the source of money and nothing else. Where did you get the money? So because of that question and the answer, which was not proper, they declined to handle supplementary schedules 1 and II. Some of these monies were not related to the borrowing but the whole lot was rejected. All that was required from the Ministry of Finance under Article 156(2) was to lay before Parliament, which they did. If it was money already spent, they were to lay within four months after the expenditure and they did that too but the House did not approve. 

In other words, all these requests, which led to that aspect and even to the one that was beyond appropriation, which should have been considered supplementary were not considered by the House. That begs the question then that since the House did not approve it at the time it was supposed to approve it and now it is before us, what do we do with it? Part of it was appropriated so we did not have to do anything with it because that is what was already appropriated. Another part of it is beyond what was appropriated and thereby raising the question of a supplementary request, which request was not approved at the time it came to the House.

So the question is, how do you proceed from there? Let me first finish with the honourable member as it looks like he still has some issues.

MR WADRI: Rt hon. Speaker, what is the essence of a supplementary schedule being requisitioned or requested of Parliament? The essence of coming here with a supplementary request is to say, these are the planned activities in this ministry and department for this quarter of this financial year but we have not received a similar allocation or release of money from Ministry of Finance, which may be as a result of a shortfall in the collections by Uganda Revenue Authority.

So the relevant ministry through Ministry of Finance comes before Parliament with a request that please, provide us money. It may be money from the consolidated fund as one shows or it may be through borrowing-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, wait. If there is money in the consolidated fund and the money is already appropriated, nobody would come to this Parliament. To do what? If the money is in the consolidated fund then you cannot talk of money not being there. What is happening honourable- Please, let us not mix up these issues. What is happening is that there was no money on the consolidated fund. The amount, which was appropriated by this House, could not be met by what was in the consolidated fund.

MR WADRI: Can I make myself clearer, Mr Speaker? I think we are confusing two issues: Authorisation whereby money is already available in the consolidated fund. If it was there then there would be no problem but here is a situation where there is no money. Ministry X has no money for implementing its activities. It brings a supplementary schedule here through Ministry of Finance saying look, this is the approved work plan for this ministry in this financial year. This is the amount of money we are supposed to have but unfortunately this money is not available even in the Consolidated Fund. Can you as a Parliament and as the appropriating authority go and find this money for us either through borrowing from a bank or from external sources? That is how we come in. Now here is a situation where the Ministry of Finance, at the back of Parliament, goes ahead and attains money through its own means and uses it without appropriation from Parliament under Article 164 – (Interjections) - yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, that is where you are confusing the House again.
 
MR WADRI: I am not confusing the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot say “without appropriation” 478,000 was already appropriated. Please separate the issues.

MR WADRI: It was not approved and so is this really how we are going to operate? There is a leeway for the relevant ministry to come here and say – (Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, I want to agree with my colleague that monies not appropriated by this House are outside what we are doing now. However, I also want to refer my colleague to Section 12 of the Budget Act. It reads, “Total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed three percent of the total approved budget for the financial year without prior approval of Parliament.” So what this means is that as long as it is three percent, the Government is allowed to spend it and therefore, we can include it in what we are doing here. (Applause) But the excess expenditure outside the three percent which the chairman read as 0.4 percent has nothing to do with what we are doing here unless it is explained by the minister.  I thank you.

MR EKANYA: Supplementary information. You see colleague –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you still holding the Floor?

MR EKANYA: There are two issues: when we handle budget, we handle expenditure and revenue. We have the medium term expenditure framework that shows the expenditure and revenue and the Minister for Finance, while reading the budget always declares how the budget is to be funded. The Minister for Finance declared that the money will be from URA, comes with tax measures and we approve those tax measures or tax measures which are in existence. She says that some will be from external borrowing and we approve those loans that are brought here or some are draw down and we approve this. 

Therefore, if in the middle of the financial year the revenue measure has not achieved, it is just prudent that the Minister for Finance comes back and says that, “I promised that I will collect Shs 15 trillion. I have failed to collect this trillion and these are the new revenue measures.” Because what we approved was expenditure with revenue measures, there was a shortfall and you come back to us. The revenue measure of borrowing and that is why the Constitution provides that if you want to borrow because you have not hit the revenue measure, you come back to the House because while reading the budget, the Minister for Finance declared what they were going to borrow in the budget speech – all sources of revenue and therefore if you do not reach that revenue measure, you come back and that was the wisdom of the framers of the Constitution and the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, I am getting worried because if a honourable member reads a clear provision of the law; Section 12 of the Budget Act and then we go on to entertain persuasive arguments – (Interjections) – because that is just persuasive. That is prudent for the minister to come report to the House. (Interjection) Under which law? Mr Speaker, for me I think that we have a clear provision of the law which allows this House to proceed under Clause 12 of the Budget Act.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please. In this House, the people who are responsible for this do not even reach one percent of this House. It does not but we find ourselves in this situation together for which we must find a solution that does not shut down Government and cannot hurt innocent people. That is the solution we are looking for. How many ministers for finance are here because they are the people responsible for this problem? I think that there is hon. Omach, hon. Kajara and hon. Ajedra but the rest of us were not there. I was not there.
 
My concern is as somebody presiding is for us to find a workable solution that must not cause suffering to people who are not part of this mess, and that is my plea to you. This means that we adopt a method – there is absolutely no illegality in handling the expenditure but we deal with the issue of the illegal borrowing when we have sufficient time and nobody is in the way of being hurt. That is my plea to the House. 

Please, honourable member, conclude and then we move.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much. I want to thank the Shadow Minister for Education and hon. Henry Musasizi for the information. However, I have this to say about the information that hon. Musasizi gave me. There is an excess of Shs 59.6 billion which is 0.4 percent outside. If only they had come with three percent, we would have had no reason but this is a lump sum that came, including Shs 59.6 billion as excess expenditure for which they got money and used it.

So, Mr Speaker, every financial year, we have got a watchdog in the name of the Auditor-General who audits books of accounts of government ministries, departments and agencies and clearly indicates which activities were planned for and either money was allocated or no money was allocated for and what activities were not carried out. What was so special that the four months could not be waited for after all, if there is any supplementary, it receives first call on the budget of the successive financial year? What was so special with this arrangement that the law could not be followed? That they could not even withhold implementation of these activities which they considered so dear to their hearts as if Uganda was going to end that day? What emergency was there? Let them tell us because surely what we are talking about is financial management discipline in this country and that should be the bottom line.

We have the Constitution and all the other subsidiary laws all addressing issues of financial discipline. The moment we do not respect these institutions, our being in this institution of Parliament will be in vain. It will mean that anybody can wake up anytime and decide to do anything that he wants like allocate money to himself and consider what is of priority to him.
 
Mr Speaker, as a Parliament, this is something that we should closely follow; this is a litmus test paper for us as far as our appropriative laws are concerned; this is a test for us. It is not about whether we are this and that but it is about whether we are respecting the principles, whether we are respecting the laws that we set for us and whether we can stand up to be counted as people who respect the rule of law and good governance. 

Mr Speaker, I beg that this document be sent back to the Ministry of Finance because they – (Interjection) – and that they are the ones usurping your powers as Parliament. Are we serious? For how long are we going to contain such things? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS ROSE AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Parliament is the only Arm of Government that makes laws. I am a member of the committee and I want to explain how we came up with this. In 2001, this Parliament, through a Private Member’s Bill, passed the Budget Act, 2001 and in this Budget Act, we, as Members of Parliament, put a provision. 

In this provision section 21(1) that has been already quoted by my colleague here says that, “The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed three percent of the total approved budget for that financial year without prior approval of Parliament.” Then section 21(2) says, “Where funds are expended under subsection (1), supplementary estimates showing the sum spent shall be made before Parliament within four months after the money is spent.” “After the money is spent” - this is what we are dealing with and we are the ones who made this law. Government did its work. It spent this money and laid the expenditure on Table within four months. So, what the committee has done and what we are requesting Parliament to do is that we send the provisions of the Budget Act for the monies for which we allowed Government to spend and then come and lay that expenditure on Table. We are requesting that we approve because we have already given them authority to spend it. So, they have rightly done what they have done and brought it here to us for approval.

On the excess expenditure, the committee has rightly said that let us deal with it in accordance with section 17 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act. So, the total of about Shs 220 billion - if we read the three percent and that is within the provisions of the Public Finance and Accountability Act - that is what we are dealing with; that expenditure which we allowed the executive to spend and then within four months, come and lay on Table and request for parliamentary approval. That is the information I wanted to give the House. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we can go on with this debate probably for another four days without closing it because the same arguments that we had last time are the ones that keep coming up. Colleagues will all agree that the borrowing that happened was illegal and the then Prime Minister and Member for Kinkiizi West came here and apologised but the House should know that is not enough. We must come back and debate this issue and make sure that something is done to whoever was responsible. And I think if we can do that immediately after appropriation, then that would probably help because the scenario that we have is that we cannot appropriate if we don’t close the old financial year and for us not to appropriate actually means that we are shutting down government and I do not think this is what members want to do. What we want to do is to make sure that somebody who is responsible for the illegal borrowing is brought to book and as we do that, the Speaker then rules that we should first finish this and have a clear day.

I think if we can be given time after immediately appropriation, before we handle any other business, to go into this and make sure that whoever did this report goes because for you to violate the laws of this country, the Constitution of this country is certainly not right. So, Mr Speaker, we can go on with this debate – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And what is the procedural point?

MR BAHATI: Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, to again guide as you guided that we proceed and have you probably pronounce to us a day when we can handle this issue of illegal borrowing and then we move forward? There are two options: we can have it now or we can have it after the appropriation and move like that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was a procedural point; can I rule on it? Honourable members, I do not know how to say this but let me say it again. There aren’t things that have happened about these situations that are not taken care of by the law; all of them are taken care of by the law. The appropriation you are talking about is taken care of by that Appropriation Act that we passed; it shows the amount and if there were shortages, it is reflected; that is what happened there. Whether it relates to supplementary, the rules are clear to what kind of supplementary you can entertain – three percent, according to the Budget Act. When it is beyond three percent, the laws do take care of that and section 17 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act is still being taken care of there; that whatever is in excess will be treated as excess expenditure where the minister is required to bring a memoranda of that excess and lay it before Parliament and this House takes a decision within six months on those issues of excess expenditure. So, there is no situation that is not taken care of by the law. 

The last situation, which is the borrowing, is also taken care of by the law. Section 17(8) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act says you should let Parliament look at the excess expenditure and if they find that they cannot approve it, it shall be treated as a public loss and the person responsible for it will be responsible. This is what the law says. So, there is no situation we are anxious about here that the law has left uncovered. What the law has left uncovered is this, which we must take a position on as people of this House; that as of now, we are the ones here, we are confronted by this problem; we are confronted by the need to conclude business for the last financial year. To enable us deal with this budget for this financial year and deal with all the expenditure issues that we have approved though our sectoral committees. We will have a hitch and that hitch has to do with the borrowing, should we do the borrowing on the way of finalising the financial year issues and stall the budget process, shut down Government, without resolving the issue of the borrowing? Or can we take the more pragmatic way as a House of representatives of the people of this country?

Take the situation, there is no bend in the law here. Because we are dealing with expenditure and there is bending the law about it. So, please, there is no bending the law when you are handling the issue of expenditure, because money was spent in excess. What happened when they spent? When they spent this money, they came to Parliament within the time that the Constitution provides, the section that honourable member for Bukedea has read from the Budget Act is actually 156 (2) of the Constitution, so, it is a constitutional command about what you do with those moneys that are signed beyond what was appropriated.

If you have already spent it, it says within two months bring it to Parliament, so that Parliament can act on it. So, these issues are all there.

So, honourable members, please, let us not rush with this issue. The indulgence I am seeking from the House is this; there is nothing unlawful about dealing of expenditure, because the money was spent. So, there is nothing illegal about dealing with it. There is nothing unlawful about it. There is nothing unconstitutional about it, so, please, don’t try to use these big words and threaten everybody that there is something wrong with the expenditure.

There is something wrong with the borrowing; there is something clearly wrong with the borrowing and that we can have sufficient time to handle properly and bring the people responsible to book. We can do that. But in the process of doing that, we should not jeopardise the lives of the ordinary people of this country. That is the only issue.

CAPT. MUKULA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have carefully listened to the reasoning on both sides of the House and it would appear to me that no matter amount of forensic eloquence by the most brilliant legislator in this House, will help us to get out of this quagmire. And yet, it would appear the dividing line is clear; the first line is that we are confronted with the roles of appropriation; the second one is that somebody has made a mistake somewhere, therefore, it is the role of this House to maybe debate this matter at an appropriate time and pick on a way to deal with that person.

Therefore, it would appear to me you do not have to actually get inextricably interwoven in this confusion. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if my wig is woven, so –(Laughter)– 

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I am pleading with my colleagues that as far as I am concerned, I seem to be persuaded, and I think rightly, by the reasoning of the Rt Hon. Speaker and some men of books that according to the law, there is a mistake that has been committed by those who appropriated, who spent upwards of Shs 59 billion in excess of three percent, that one will be dealt with at an appropriate time. Can we therefore propose that the first thing we do as a matter of procedure is that we agree that we are going to move on with the motion and proceed with appropriation but on condition that the first thing that we shall do after this will be to debate the final way of handling the wrong doers and appoint an axe man to deal with the people who did this. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay members? Will that be the position?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can we make progress on this? But while we are making progress on this, there is what the committee has recommended, that Shs 59 billion goes beyond the three percent and it is prohibited by the law. The committee has recommended that it be excluded from this so that the ministry can later come back –(Interjection)– please, honourable members, you are going to be rising on procedure when you are not listening to what I am saying.

The Member with forensic eloquence –(Laughter)– so, then, can I hear from the ministry on this particular issue which the committee is recommending?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the concerns of the members but first of all I would like to make it clear that the overall expenditure at the end of the year was within the Shs 14.02 trillion that had been appropriated. That is why we said that the supplementary was finalised and funded through internal reallocations across the votes because once any vote exceeds what had been appropriated, then you treat that as a supplementary expenditure. It is a supplementary because the votes have gone beyond their levels of appropriation.

In effect, the issue of expenditure not being appropriated therefore does not arise because both under the Constitution and the Budget Act, it is allowed for government to spend and come and seek authority.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the committee has recommended that Shs 59 billion is beyond what any law allows and it should be treated separately under the Public Finance and Accountability Act. If you have an opinion on that, say it now and nothing more than that, please.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, we did lay before the committee the financing sources. Reallocation amounted to Shs 554 billion, excess financing was provided, non-revenue expenditure was provided, so, all of it including the shs 59 billion is actually part of what we laid before Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have the chair, budget. Please, address the House on this Shs 59 billion and we take a decision.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, we had a lengthy discussion on this matter yesterday involving ministry of finance represented by hon. Jachan Omach and we did agree that this Shs 59 billion is over and above what is provided for in the law. That principle was agreed on yesterday and was clearly demonstrated by the numbers that were availed to us. So that is the position then. 

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, we thank you for your guidance and we also thank my colleague for letting the House know that we have lived with the Shs 14.032 trillion that was appropriated. However, that notwithstanding and even notwithstanding the fact that a number of supplementaries also included statutory - we had an issue with the ministry of education where some of the districts had excess funds given to them and others had less and this totalled up to Shs 19 billion of statutory supplementary. But we respect your ruling and we agree that the Shs 59 billion be handled separately afterwards.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, in view of the developments that have emerged I would like to move a motion that a question be put and we adopt the report of the committee. 

We have two reports on the Floor of Parliament: there is a report of the committee -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is seconded by the honourable member for Kabula and when it comes to Bills we do not approve committee reports. When it comes to Bills we pronounce ourselves on the motion for the second reading of the Bill where we will approve principles of the Bill. In approving the principles of the Bill will have adopted the position on how we will handle the details of the Bill at the committee stage. Now we are not adopting whichever committee report but the committee reports have guided us in taking our decision on the second reading motion of the Bill, and then when we go to committee stage we see what to exclude and what to include whether to adopt it as a whole or make amendments; that will be our prerogative.

The motion has been moved that a question be put. I will first put a question to that motion. I now put the question to motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2014” be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2014

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 1 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1 agreed to.


Schedule 1

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman -

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, the only problem we are still having has been where to position the 59 billion within the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It will be within the total.

MR LUGOLOOBI: It is within the total but then it has to be identified within the Bill. That is the dilemma that we are still having.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, really here, the minister of finance should have first apologised. The chairperson and the members of the committee agreed that the excess - with even the Secretary to the Treasury, they will come and then within the schedule show us where to shift that figure. The whole day the chairperson of the budget committee called the minister of finance and nobody was responding. They instead sent a junior officer. That puts us in a difficult situation because we have to approve vote by vote so how do we remove the Shs 59 from which vote, may be finance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We will not go vote by vote. We were approving the schedules we just do the total, and then deal with the details of the adjustments.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I need your guidance because when auditor general is entering this, he has to enter vote by vote for audit purpose and even the Bill, the President must assent to a Bill which shows that ministry of finance got this. If we approve the overall total omnibus then we are leaving our responsibility to somebody to go and decide. We shall not have completed our work because during appropriation of Bills we handle vote by vote. That is what is provided for in the Public Finance Act, the Constitution and the budget Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, honourable members, the time we are here what this House is supposed to do at this committee stage is to approve the schedule as the schedule to the Bill not the contents of the schedule. All we need to do is to take from the content of the total the amount we are going to exclude. Is that correct? Because we are adopting a schedule and the schedule we are adopting is a complete total. We are taking out from the total and we are removing something then it is up to them to deal with it at the end. We treat whatever is excess as excess expenditure for which they will come back.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, we have already indicated a figure in the report and the figure is Shs 420,288,569,000 and that is what we have recommended for approval. Then the other balance of Shs 59.641 billion is what we have recommended to be treated as excess expenditure and to be handled under Section 17 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, then what was the essence of bringing a schedule with votes and different figures? The schedule has Shs 49,799,256 – each vote has a different figure. If were to just approve a blanked, they would bring here just one sheet of paper and we do so. Otherwise, this Bill must be assented to by the President.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let me say this again. We did not go into the units of the schedule. What do is to adopt that schedule but we cannot do that now because there is a problem with our schedule. That is why we are now amending it in terms of its total. And I will have to vote that schedule, as amended.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I am sorry to differ from the direction that seem to be leading us into –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you know the rules, if you disagree with the Speaker’s ruling. So, please resume your seat.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, point of procedure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, please resume your seat.

MR AMURAIT: But that is not fair.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, you know the procedure. Honourable member, you cannot stand to say you are disagreeing with the Speaker. If you are to say that, you know the rules. Please, honourable member.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There is an issue that I would like to ask the committee to clarify on because looking at these figures, I notice that all of them can be allowable expenditures yet the committee is saying we exclude Shs 59 billion without giving us any reason. We would very much appreciate –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is beyond the three per cent provided for in the law.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, why I am seeking that clarification is because last year, we passed a total supplementary expenditure of about Shs 4.7 per cent. So, it is not that this House has never passed a supplementary expenditure above the stated three per cent. My question, therefore, is why are you against it now?

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, you talked about something that I think members have to reflect on in regard to closure of a financial year –(Interjections)– because when you are closing a financial year, you must balance your figures. And that is what the chairman talked about. When you are balancing off your financial year, the other expended money should be – that is why I want to implore members – even if we pass a total, we can subtract that amount of money that the Chairman is talking about after all the Auditor-General to do the auditing and bring us a query is if is not expended properly. 

So, I would like to propose that we pronounce ourselves on the total and we exclude the other Shs 59billion which will be audited and we will get the audited books of accounts by the Auditor-General so that those who will have misused that money will be held accountable by Section 43 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act. It is as simple as that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, can we deal with the total figure in the schedule? Honourable members, the total figure in the schedule is Shs 420,288,569,000. I now put the question to the amendment in the schedule.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2014” and passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2014

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2014” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION ACT, 2014”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much, honourable chairperson of the committee and the minister. I also would like to thank you, honourable members. We have moved this far. Now we should be able to deal with the issue of the budget. And from tomorrow, Madam Speaker will be in the Chair.

Honourable members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 4.48 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 September at 2.00 p.m.)

