Wednesday, 11 September 2013

Parliament met at 3.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I hope that the reports that are coming up will be presented as executive summaries so that we can make progress quickly. 

Honourable members, yesterday I launched the Human Rights Checklist produced by our Standing Committee on Human Rights. It will be a requirement for all the ministries to ensure that they comply with that checklist and ensure that they have involved human rights in their programmes, Bills and policies that come to this House. It will be distributed to all the ministries and Members of Parliament. I thank you.

 LAYING OF PAPERS

3.35
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing in for hon. Jack Sabiti. 

I beg to lay on the Table the Bukwo Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Jinja Municipal Council financial statements for the year ended 30June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Koboko Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Kakiri Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Ngoma Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Muhorro Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Lamwo Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Rwebisengo Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Kamwenge Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Kitgum Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious handling and report back to the House.

MOTION TO CONGRATULATE THE RT HON. SPEAKER, REBECCA A. KADAGA, FOR HER ELECTION TO THE OFFICE OF PRESIDENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH WOMEN PARLIAMENTARIANS (CWP) INTERNATIONAL

3.37
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I beg to move, under rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure, a motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate you for your election to the position of the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians - International.

“WHEREAS the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, was on Wednesday, 4 September 2013 voted the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Women ParliamentariansInternational during the 59thCommonwealth Parliamentarians Association International conference in Johannesburg;

CONSIDERING THAT prior to taking the chair of the CWP International, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga has been the Chairperson for CWP Africa Region for three years since 2009, in addition to having the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians International and an Executive Committee Member for the Inter-Parliamentary Union Assembly representing Africa;

NOTING THAT during her tenure as the Chairperson of CWP Africa Region, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga spearheaded a campaign of engaging leaders of political parties to appreciate the value of increasing the number of women in high leadership positions;

FURTHER NOTING that to rise to this prestigious position, Rt Hon. Kadaga has served in several capacities in the Government of Uganda and the Parliament including being the Minister for Regional Co-operation in charge of Africa and Middle East, Minister of State for Communication and Civil Aviation, Minister for Parliamentary Affairs and Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda; and throughout her tenure, her main objective has been spearheading key reforms that have enhanced effective participation of women in politics in Uganda, Africa and the world;

COGNIZANT of the fact that CWP is a forum that offers women an opportunity to exchange ideas on policies and strategies that have worked and resulted in increased women participation in political leadership in the Commonwealth;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this Parliament:

1. 	Extends its appreciation to countries that nominated and seconded her candidature, namely the Republic of South Africa, Singapore and the United Republic of Tanzania and all countries that participated in the election.

2.	Takes cognizance of this great achievement and collectively joins hands in congratulating the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, for her election to this prestigious position and for making Uganda proud as a nation.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much. The motion is seconded by hon. Amongi, hon. Katwiremu, honourable –(Laughter) –It is seconded by everybody. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: In speaking to the motion, Rt Hon. Speaker, last week we received with great joy the news of your election to the office of the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians International.

We were even happier to hear that out of the 98 delegates who voted, you scored a massive 70 percent of the vote. (Applause) This percentage score is a true reflection of the truth and the confidence that the 175 Parliaments under the association have in you.Madam Speaker, we congratulate you and wish you the best in this new position.

Your election to this position is a testimony of the success of the struggle for women emancipation in Uganda, obviously ushered in by the National Resistance Movement. (Applause) It validates the empirical research that shows that when women participate in the politics of their nations, they can make a difference. Indeed, you, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, are one of the most shining examples of this evidence in our country that continues to light the path for greater opportunities for women and girls in our continent. (Applause)

Your election to this position gives encouragement to the young generation of women and girls to participate in leadership without fear. It gives hope to that little girl in Kabale, Kamuli, Karamoja and Otukeand a reason for them to study hard knowing that one day, they too can achieve greater heights.It gives hope to that woman in Serere, Sironko, Sembabule and Pader and a reason for them to work hard knowing that men and women are all equal before God. It gives hope that equal participation of women in the activities of their various societies is not a privilege but a human rightand that they too have equal potential like the men.

This motion also gives us an opportunity to take stock of where we currently stand and what more needs to be done in advancing the rights and opportunities for our women, especially those vulnerable ones in this country. Dear colleagues, Uganda has made and continues to make progress in advancing opportunities for women in education, leadership, business, here in Parliament as well as in the general body of politics in this country at various levels.However, we still have a lot of challenges to address in order to advance the wellbeing of our children. We still have unfinished business.

This week, Madam Speaker, the country woke up to the most shocking news of a little nine-year-old girl, Hanifah Nambi, who was raped and later brutally killed in a nearby suburb of Kyebando. As people’s representatives, we must rise up to mount more pressure on law enforcing officers to ensure the culprits are punished.

Similarly, we have a challenge as a country to protect and defend the rights of the most vulnerable women in our rural areas. These women continue to walk miles in search for water, firewood and food while at the same time carrying their children on their backs. We have a task to address the historical reversal where many Ugandan women today are living shorter lives than their mothers and grandmothers because of diseases that are preventable. 

Madam Speaker, these and many other examples should be part of the unfinished business that you should address from this vantage position at the Commonwealth. I am now more confident than ever before that you have no excuse whatsoever not to give such vulnerable women and girls a voice at the highest policy making level. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Before I call on the seconder, I want to ask you to join me in welcoming teachers and pupils of St Benedict Alwo Girls’ Primary Boarding School from Siaya in Kenya, our neighbours. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have teachers and pupils of Dr Ambrosoli Memorial Primary School in Agago. I do not know where they. Are they still touring? There are also other guests here; I hope we shall get to know who they are. Thank you.

3.39
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion, hon. David Bahati, who is also a full member of UWOPA - (Laughter) - and has always supported our cause.

Madam Speaker, I know you feel uneasy chairing this session, but you will bear with us because this is the opportune time.We could not wait; we had to move this motion to congratulate you.

To the women of this country and the girls and the men, it is important to take note of the fact that this success has not come on a silver plate. Madam Speaker, I think we need to thank your parents and those who educated you. We also thank the people of Kamuli who gave you votes and trusted you. They gave you the platform within which you became our Speaker and now also the chairperson of this prestigious association, the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Association.

Madam Speaker, we should also note that with this position, you have broken several barriers. It is not easy for a woman. One of the key issues women of Africa looked at was this person who has broken so many barriers by becoming one of the first women Speakers in Africa; in the whole world, there are only 36. It was for that reason that the African region adopted the candidature of the RtHon. Speaker, and we thank them very much.They sold the candidature as one for Africa. 

Madam Speaker, to the honourable members at the international level, the name Kadaga – actually they do not know your first name, Rebecca – is synonymous with Uganda. We have gone to the UN Commission on the Status of Women meetings, the IPU, Commonwealth and when you say you are from Uganda and it is a parliamentary meeting, they will  say, “oh, Kadaga”. (Applause)So, I think this name has also sold Uganda very much and we want to thank you. 

Also, the name “Kadaga” is synonymous with a very firm and principled personality. (Applause) When you are with the African region members and there is a difficult position that they want to push for at the international level, they will look out for Kadaga. You will hear them ask, “Where is Kadaga?” 

As you are aware, in Canada and even in South Africa, very difficult positions came up and they wanted a vote. There was that issue of homosexuality, and actually, this time she decided to keep quiet but as we got out of the meeting, many asked, “What happened, hon. Kadaga?” It was all because that name is synonymous with articulating the position of Africa on very crucial issues. You have done us proud.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and the House at large for supporting you. Now as you go to occupy this position, we have to appeal to the House – at times, you will not be seeing her because she will have to divide her time between Parliament and the work of – (Interjections) – Leaving you with who? She will leave you with the Deputy Speaker. However, I know she will balance because she has always done that. 

Most importantly, for us in Africa, this work is now taking her to the highest level to deal with 175 Commonwealth legislatures across the world. Her work will be to ensure she mainstreams gender equality issues in these legislatures; to ensure that she fights for the increase in women participation in those 175 Commonwealth legislatures; to ensure policies being articulated in those parliaments take into consideration the interests of women.

Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate you on behalf of the people of Oyam, UWOPA and on behalf of the women out there who do not have the privilege to speak on the Floor of this Parliament. You have done this country proud and you have done all of us in the Africa region proud.

We need to thank Tanzania and South Africa, which were at the forefront, sometimes even using their own resources to canvass support for the Speaker. When she was declared winner, we were few and so we could not celebrate but because South Africa was there, they got up and sang the anti-apartheid songs. It was very touching. (Applause)Congratulations. 

I hope that the Clerk to Parliament will transmit these congratulations to the people of South Africa, Tanzania and all the other countries in the African region. I congratulate you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, before we proceed, I want to ask you to join me in welcoming a delegation from the National Assembly of Ethiopia. It is led by the Deputy Speaker, hon. ShitayeMinale. (Applause)Others are: hon. AbebaHaitu, Member of Parliament, hon. AyesechEshete, Member of Parliament, hon. Dr KebedeKachule, Member of Parliament, hon. Wanna Wake, Member of Parliament, and hon. AlemtsehamPaulos. They are here with the following members of staff from their Parliament: Mr Hole Fole, Mr Fikre Gesso, Mr FekaduAseme and Mrs BalatitoOganbiyi. You are all welcome. (Applause)

They are here to meet colleagues especially on the issues of food security, population and development. I also informed them this morning that we shall be entering a memorandum of understanding between our Parliament and the Parliament of Ethiopia. We shall let you know when we do that at a later stage. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.47
MS SARAH KAYAGI NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion for a resolution to congratulate you for having been elected the President of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians.

Madam Speaker, this has come because of your hard work, consistency, believing in the truth, upholding and defending the Constitution, keeping your legacy and continuity and also the way you have conducted business in this House. This has put you in the limelight and many people who follow what happens in Uganda have continued to believe in you.
We want to thank you, as women of this country and as Members of Parliament who sit under your leadership, for putting Uganda on the map. As president of that international association, I want to inform you that we still have many issues around, which affect our girls in this country.

Our girls still face a lot of challenges under the cruel hands of bad men who rape and defile and even infect some of them with HIV. As was reported in the Red Pepper two days ago, a young girl of five years was raped to death. There is also another who was defiled and infected with HIV/AIDS. 

These are challenges that we still face as a country.  Our girls still suffer under the hands of these cruel men. Teenage pregnancies in our country are still on the increase with girls getting pregnant at a very early age. Girls are becoming parents at a tender age and yet they cannot look after themselves with the children. Our young girls and boys are becoming grandparents when they are still youth.

Madam Speaker, as you chair the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians, I appeal to you to put those issues high on the agenda. I want to congratulate and thank you for putting Uganda on the map and lifting the women of Uganda to that position. Thank you.

3.50
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also stand to congratulate you for having been elected to the position of Chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians. We appreciate the countries that elected you. 

When we travel out, we get many good comments about you. One time we travelled to Seychelles and as we were there, we met the Speaker and immediately she saw us she asked, “How is Rebecca?” We had travelled with hon. Fox Odoi. After she asked that, we looked at each other wondering which Rebecca she was talking about; actually, she meant you. She made very many positive comments about you, which made us very proud to be part of this Parliament where you are the Speaker.

Another time, somebody from Sweden told us that you, Madam Speaker, went there and talked to them in Canada about homosexuality and that after talking to them, they gave you a standing ovation. All this shows that you are a hardworking person and that you practice what you believe in. As a woman, that encourages me to also practice what I believe in. You have shown us the light and the way to practice what we believe in without fear or favour. 

My appeal to you is that you continue encouraging us, the women, to also excel the way you are doing - (Member timed out.)

3.53
MR HOOD KIRIBEDDA KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to congratulate you upon being elected to this highest office in the Commonwealth fraternity. This victory is not personal; it is a victory for all the women in Uganda and for all the women in the world and for all Ugandans as citizens.

Madam Speaker, you have demonstrated that you are an able leader. Indeed, your election to head the African region in the Commonwealth was a signal of what is yet to come for you as you assume this office. The Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Association is a very important association in the running of affairs of this world. Therefore, Uganda’s membership and full participation has indeed resulted into having one of our own assume this important leadership position.

I served on the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association-Africa Region as a member of the executive committee for five years. Indeed, this association has got a lot of work; there is a lot of commitment and dedication from all members in this fraternity – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute for you to complete.

MR KATURAMU: There have been previous declarations made, among them we have the Beijing Platform, and all have been aimed at emancipating women in the world. I am aware that the Rt.Hon. Rebecca Kadaga has been participating in these fora. I implore you that after sitting at the helm, please pursue these good resolutions in this declaration to ensure that there is women empowerment, starting with the Commonwealth and going to other nations outside the Commonwealth. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I congratulate you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabasharira, hon. Wangolo, hon. Magyezi and hon. Atwooki. I think I will now reduce it to one minute. You know, we have to do the budget - okay, two minutes. 

3.56
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is good you are mentioning one minute after I had already got the three. 

I stand to congratulate you wholeheartedly. I congratulate the women of Uganda and the men too because you have represented us very well.(Applause) We have to congratulate these men also for getting such a wonderful woman to rise to that post of President of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians.  

Madam Speaker, I think you deserved it because you are a hardworking woman; they could not just pick anyhow. You stand firm on principles. I was not there but some people were rumour mongering that you did not support homosexuality and so they wanted to refuse to give you a vote because of that. (Applause)

How many of those men outside there, - Africans mainly - who know that men do not practice homosexuality, have come up to speak out like you did? A woman!(Applause) We are very grateful and that is why I want to thank this Parliament for voting wisely for you as a Speaker and now, you are known internationally. As the Ninth Parliament, we should also congratulate ourselves. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I wish Yemen was also in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. Today, people who read the newspapers –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, complete that point about Yemen; half a minute.

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you. A 40-year-old man in Yemen was given an eight-year-old girl for marriage. Those who have not heard, it is even in the papers. Definitely, there was no way that girl could perform conjugal rights properly and so when the man tried, the girl bled and died. 

I wish it was in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association; I know if that country was there, you would have taken a step. All the same, we need to rise and see what we can do about such actions taking place in such countries. I thank you. 

3.59
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to thank hon. Bahati for moving this important motion. 

I will first of all thank God who has protected you and who knew you before your parents.You have kept your image before him and now, He is leading and you are following. You have kept our Parliament and the mantle burning.

Allow me also to thank the people of Kamuli who voted for you for now more than 30 years – [Hon. Members: “20.”] - You do not know; she was a leader in school and those are the people of Kamuli. For more than 30 years, they have been supporting you and you have not discouraged them but worked for them.

Now that all Ugandans know you, Africa has come to know you and the whole world is going to know you. You were in a forest like a rock; now, the forest has been destroyed and the rock is seen. Let everybody see you.  

Madam Speaker, let me take this opportunity to thank you very much – (Member timed out.)

4.02
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to join my colleagues to congratulate you on this achievement.  

I feel proud to belong to the Ninth Parliament and thank you for making us proud. Thank you for marketing Uganda and for being a very good minister for investment - for attracting investors in the country. Thank you for being the right minister for tourism. I am sure that the tourists coming to Uganda will increase. (Applause)

I am sure  you would not be what you are if you did not allow us speak about you and say good things about you even for the benefit of those who may not like to hear them. I am sure you are what you are because of the education you received. I have no doubt that the character of “stamina”, the character of strength, the character of balancing the women and men’s affairs emanates from the training you got from your teachers. 

However, today the plight of teachers stares at us as government, and next week they are saying they are going on strike. I believe this would be the occasion for us as Parliament to stand up strong and say if we want more Kadagas tomorrow, we improve the welfare of the teachers.  (Applause) 

Every other day, we get heroes in this Parliament and some of them are sports people.We acclaim and give them dignity and so on.I believe that today we have a heroine in our midst, and there is nothing wrong with moving a motion that at an appropriate time, Government should consider you as a hero for this country and give you the right award that you deserve. Congratulations, Madam Speaker.

4.05
PROF. KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Bahati and hon. Amongi who moved the motion and seconded it respectively. 

I would like to bring congratulations from Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom, and you know what that means. I want to thank all those colleagues who were in South Africa, who did the foot work.I also thank those of us who stayed here and we were praying that the Almighty God takes you through your election.

Madam Speaker, I also want to thank you. Whereas you may campaign for somebody, that person has to have already portrayed himself or herself well. So, we want to thank you for portraying yourself very well. 

Madam Speaker, Jeremiah 1:4 says, “Before I created you, I knew what you would be.” Madam Speaker, you have been, and what God created you to be, you will be. The only thing is that you must position yourself to be what He created you to be. (Applause)

Lastly, as hon. Amongi was speaking, hon. Magyezi said you were going to be a minister for tourism, but the name “Kadaga” is already a tourist attraction. I am sure Members of the Commonwealth and beyond,according to the testimony from hon. Amongi,are now focusing themselves to come and see the land where you come from. When they come, we should be able to welcome them and- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming the children of Agago from Dr AmbrosoliMemorial Primary School,Kalongo. I am told they have now come. They are represented by hon. John Amos Akot and hon. Judith Franca. They are most welcome. (Applause)

4.07
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole):Madam Speaker, I add my voice to congratulate you.The people of Fort Portal have sent me messages asking me not to miss this opportunity to congratulate you for making Uganda proud. The world has seen, Africa has seen and Uganda saw you long time ago. Your integrity, your principles, your motherly character and nurturing of leaders is unquestionable. 

I am very sure that when you keep this torch burning, the sky is the limit because in Uganda, we are in dire need of good leaders. We are in dire need of good people and we want the future of this country to be guaranteed. (Applause) I can see there is a token of hope because Uganda has to go on. The President of this country must be very happy because we have people who can keep this country going. I congratulate you, Madam Speaker.

4.09
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Congratulations, Madam Speaker. As I support this motion, I am overjoyed to be talking about you when you are actually in that chair. All your grandparents from Bunyoro do congratulate you and they feel proud that their grandchild has received this honour.

You did work for this position. For those who may not know, when the Commonwealth was less gender-sensitive, you did start lobbying for the Commonwealth to be more gender-sensitive.That was way back when you were in the NRC, the Sixth Parliament and now it is no wonder that you were elected to be the Chairpersonof the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians. Congratulations. 

I do know that for avoidance of doubt, it is a very good thing for a country to have a pool of leaders of integrity like you. You have shown your capability and I know as a country, we cannot fail to have you as one of our leaders at whatever level. 

Kindly, Madam Speaker, let us use this opportunity to promote the women’s cause starting with our country, Uganda - a lot is missing –and also going regional and international. I have no doubt that you will perform and deliver while in this position and the whole world will be proud of you and proud of Uganda. Congratulations, Madam Speaker. 

4.11
MS RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I take this opportunity to congratulate you upon your election as the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Association. 

I want to congratulate you as Acheng, KoleDistrict, and as an old girl of St Katherine (SK). On behalf of SKold girls, we congratulate you very much upon this achievement.This achievement did not starttoday; your record at SK gives us a lot of pride. You were a very disciplined and hardworking girl of St Katherine and that is why you have built yourself to this level. 

If I remember, when I went to Bern for IPU, when we entered we wanted to nominate you as an executive for IPU and other delegates from other countries said,“No; Speaker Kadaga is our own. You are not going to nominate her; we are going to nominate her.” Thank you very much for being an exemplary woman, for being a good girl- (Laughter) - for keeping Uganda on the international map. 

I also want you not to stop there. I want us to work together and promote girls’ education in this country because it is a child that grows into a girl and into a respectful responsible woman like you. We have to work together to create an enabling environment that enhances education for the girl child. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Bravo, Speaker Kadaga. SK, songambele. (Laughter)

4.13
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity to add my voice to that of many people who have also congratulated you upon your success. 

I was looking at your performance and out of 98 delegates you got 75 people who entrusted you, which means you got 76.5 percent. This is a very good performance.I think there was no rigging this time. At this rate, I think there is nothing, which can stop you from advancing from this stage upwards. The message sent to us is very clear; if people from outside can entrust you, why not Ugandans? I think Ugandans can also entrust with the highest office. 

Madam Speaker, I know every position comes with a challenge. You have come at a time when things are very bad in this country. I was looking at the newspapers yesterday; how can a gentleman go for a four-year-old girl? Madam Speaker, everybody has hope in you to speak sense into these people. I do not know why somebody can leave all the women who are free –(Member timed out.)

4.15
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman representative Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to congratulate you on having won the race. There was a lot of excitement and Members who were back home were calling us trying to find out whether the voting machines were actually ready. 

I want to tell you that we did the work and that is why we are excited. Some of you saw us when we were jumping up and down; we were celebrating the womanhood in the RtHon. Speaker, and I want to tell you she has a lot of respect wherever she goes. 

There are lots and lots of challenges ahead of you and MPs, we need to support her. As soon we finished voting and she was put in the chair, women from the Pacific region came to surround her and said, “We want you to uplift us so that we can become like the women of Uganda.” They have very many challenges. 

There are many parliaments in the Commonwealth that do not have women representation and all the women and other speakers said “Yes, this is Rebecca Kadaga who is going to do it for us.” So, Madam Speaker, you have carried the flag. We want this flag to crisscross the entire Commonwealth countries so that they can get women in Parliament like we have here in Uganda.

I would like to re-echo what hon. Magyezi said, that indeed you are a tourist attraction. When we were there, people were talking about Kiprotich, – you know when they talk about Uganda these days they talk about Kiprotich – but as we were mingling, everywhere people were talking about Rt Hon. Kadaga. Please, take this tourist attraction across the entire globe so that we can have more tourists getting to know about Uganda and carry the flag up high.

When we were concluding the whole exercise, we could see women from Cameroon, Singapore, the Pacific and everywhere; they wanted to come here. Commissioners of Parliament, you need to support the RtHon. Speaker to ensure that those women who supported us, those women who stood the odds of being diverted from everything, those women who wanted to come to Uganda and celebrate with us should come to Uganda to celebrate the victory that we had.It was not an easy thing. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.18
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Bahati and other colleagues who seconded this motion.

I would like to say that the RtHon. Speaker is not only the Speaker but she is the right Speaker. I want to say that this motion is timely. You recall in the recent past, you did give your ruling here in the House pertaining to our colleagues, hon. Ssekikubo, hon. Niwagaba, hon. Tinkasiimire and hon. Nsereko,saying that their seats are still in Parliament. I want to report that today the judges have ruled that they should remain in Parliament. (Applause)What does this mean? It means that the Speaker is not only Speaker but she also understands the legal regime of this country.

Madam Speaker, the other time, I told you–(Laughter)-I told you that actually, you have delayed to contest for the first office of this country. I can tell you that honestly, from the steps that you are taking today, I think you will make a good President in future. (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: I thank hon. Nzoghu for having given way. The day you were elected, my brother who lives in Liberia rang me and said, “This is the right person we need for the President of Uganda come 2016”. He says that you make them who are living in the Diaspora extremely proud. You are the true hunter; wherever you go hunting, you will never come back empty handed. I congratulate you, Madam Speaker.

MR NZOGHU: As I conclude, I want to bring it to the attention of this House and the entire country that you are a woman of stamina.

4.22
MR PHILLIP WAFULA-OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion and to congratulate you on what you have achieved for yourself and for this country. You are a very lucky person to be hearing the things you are hearing. Many people do not get the opportunity to hear them; they would be in a coffin. People are saying this because they are genuine. They judge you as a good person and we all judge you as a good person.

Madam Speaker, I first heard about you in 1980. I was a journalist at the Weekly Topic newspaper - I was an assistant editor –and they were talking about this young lady who had set up her chambers and she was the first woman to set up chambers in Kampala.I caused you to be interviewed and we gave you two pages about your life. That interview exposed you as a person who had potential, who would be a leader of this country and you are a leader of this country.

I have followed you. You are a principled person. You are focused on what you are doing. You are a democrat. From the way you have conducted this House, you love Uganda and you are brave. I also know that you love the children of Uganda. You have been a great Speaker, even for just one year. It is for this reason that you are being elected to higher offices outside this country. You now play in a league, which is different from all of us here, of the Akii-Buas and Kiprotichs, people who have sold Uganda out there, erasing the league of Iddi Amin.

I hope that the things that we are saying to you and to the people of Uganda will not cause you trouble, because we know that there are people who are also plotting against your moving forward and rising higher, people who do not love this country as you do. We pray that the words we say are in the interest of our country and will not cause you trouble, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much.

4.26
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the mover and the seconders of this motion, and on behalf of the people of Busoga, especially those from Jinja, to once again congratulate you upon achieving this highest office. 

It may take us another century for us to achieve this again because there are very many countries in the Commonwealth. If we start rotating, by the time it comes back to Uganda it may be during the time of our grandchildren. So, we have to cherish this and support the RtHon. Kadaga to make sure that during this time when she is the chair or the president, Uganda is put on the map. By being there, we are already up there. 

We who travel a lot know that even the Commonwealth countries remember Uganda for Iddi Amin. You mention Uganda and they say, “Oh, Iddi Amin.” That is what they remember, but soon they will be remembering the lady from Busoga and they will say, “Oh, Kadaga from Kamuli”. (Laughter)

To us, that is very important because the first thing that people ask is, “which part of Uganda does she come from?” As Busoga and Kamuli, we are very proud of the Speaker because Uganda has produced somebody else from Busoga. Watch us very carefully because we, the people of Busoga, calculate very well.  (Laughter) We know that with where we have reached, we have put Uganda on the map and there is no doubt that she will not perform a good job. 

Madam Speaker, let us have a clear thanksgiving as Parliament for your achievement. Also, let the Commission organise a formal victory party for you so that we can celebrate and thank God for your achievements. I once again congratulate you and say God bless you in your endeavours, and we are behind you. Thank you very much.

4.27
MR FRED OMACH (NRM, Jonam County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, longevity, longevity and longevity. Longevity is a blessing and it is also a weapon. Madam Speaker, you are the longest serving member of this Parliament; congratulations. You are also the longest serving member of the Parliamentary Commission. I have been there also since 2009; so, that is longevity and that is why you are steering us very well. Members should strive to stay here longer and longer so that all these blessings come their way. We are very proud of your achievements. 

Madam Speaker, Tanzania was only paying back. When you sent us to the Pan African Parliament, and I am happy that hon. Katuntu with whom I was in the Pan African Parliament is here, we pledged the first President of the Pan African Parliament from Tanzania, the honourable Dr Gertrude Mongela. It was Uganda that fought very hard to put her there. So, if Tanzania did participate very heavily, I think they were paying back. It is important to be good and it is good to be good for good. I thank you and may God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Mutagamba comes up, I want you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Kashozi Boarding Primary School. They come from Bushenyi and their MPs are hon. Magyezi and hon. Okurut. You are welcome, children. (Applause)

4.30
MS MARIA MUTAGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to add my voice to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for having brought honour to the women of Africa, the women of Uganda, the women of Kamuli who elected you, and of course, the entire Ugandan population. 

I want to thank your parents who brought you up in such a way that you would be a leader and they gave you that grain, the mustard seed as they call it. That seed is now what has brought us here together so that we can share that experience, and the global community is sharing from that seed. We really honour the parents that brought you up.

We also want to thank God who has given you life, because everything starts with Him and ends with Him. We also thank Him for having made us Members of Parliament of this House so that we are here to share in this glory when you become the President of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians. It could have been another Parliament but it is our Parliament. So, we really feel proud and we thank God for that.

I also want to thank our President for having given that support to every potential that there is in this country, and especially the women and the girl child. We really feel proud that the women of Uganda have been able to perform. I am sure you can attest to that; wherever they have been, they have performed well and now you are our star. We are very grateful and we want to cherish those principles that have enabled all of us here to perfume well. 

I want to point out one thing; I am one of those few people who saw you come because we came to Parliament together. One thing I want to tell the honourable Members of Parliament is that the trick behind it all is to make sure that you survive –(Interruption)

MRS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: I want to thank hon. Mutagamba for giving way. The information I want to give this honourable House is that it is not only President Museveni who has given opportunity to women.Other leaders in other political parties such as Dr KawangaSsemwogerere gave women like hon. Mutagambaan opportunity to serve as secretary-general in the DP and hon. Rose Namayanja as a UYD and others, including myself. That is the information I want to give. (Laughter)

MS MUTAGAMBA: I really want to thank hon. Nambooze because that is history and that is a fact. It is always written; we really appreciate and you must appreciate whoever supports you. I came to know hon. Kadaga through the NRM Government and through the President and that is why I am thanking the President; I am sure every one of us does. 

One of the tricks hon. Kadaga has employed is to stay alive politically and in everything. If you are a “short-liver” -you are here today and tomorrow you are not here - you cannot be hon. Kadaga. 

Secondly, you must respect your constituency. I am sure that is how hon. Kadaga has been able to come back all this time, because the constituency has confidence in her. It is a challenge to all of us who are here. Please, make sure you stay alive and relevant. 

I want to thank hon. Kadaga, in particular for being a product for tourism. You are marketing Uganda. You are just like Kiprotich. We now have another product to market. I want to assure this House that I visited hon. Kadaga’s ancestral home and they were leaders;they have a palace. I requestthe Busoga Tourism Initiative to work with us to develop that place in honour of hon. Kadaga so that we can always have that product to move and inspire others. 

I must congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for having supported the tourism sector. I want to assure you, I have written to very many of you but the tourism initiative of Busoga chaired by hon. Kadaga has moved us faster and more aggressively. So, I thank you for being an advocate, a marketeer and a promoter of tourism. (Applause)

Finally, Madam Speaker, the women of Uganda whom we represent and speak for still have many issues to handle. I worked in the water ministry and the issue of water and sanitation is still a big problem. I ask you to work with us and every woman in this House and outside, to ensure that we help the women of Uganda to have access to clean and safe water and sanitation. I congratulate you once again and congratulate Parliament for having got us such a name. Thank you. 

4.35
MRS AMELIA KYAMBADDE (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Madam Speaker, I stand to congratulate you and honestly, support this motion. 

There is a school of thought that leadership skills are in-born but not attained. These skills are indeed reflected in the way you manage your business in all dimensions - political, parliamentary, gender, legal – with a lot of dedication, perseverance, commitment and professionalism. Your election to this post of President of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians was not an accident but welldeserved. 

MwalimuKambarageNyerere, while addressing OAU in 1973, told Africans that all Africans who attained skills and knowledge should use them to uplift the underprivileged Africans. I can see we are confident that with this position, you will indeed contribute to the salvaging of the calamities that are bedevilled by Africa, especially the gender issue. 

I congratulate you, I congratulate the people of Kamuli; I extend congratulations from the women and the people of Mawokota North. Thank you for this opportunity. 

4.38
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Bahati and hon. Amongi for moving this motion and seconding it respectively. I also thank you, honourable members, for your contributions. 

This morning, we were paying tribute to the late hon. Fiona Egunyu and we said very many good things about her when she had already passed on. It is pleasing to say all this about you when you are listening and able to say, “thank you” and know that individuals, and indeed the country, appreciate what you are doing for this country. 

You inspired many of us at different levels before we got here. In this country, you have inspired many;you have inspired many in the African region; and you are now inspiring many that you may not even know at the world stage. Your achievements are not just individual achievements; they are achievements for the country. 

When you were in the leadership of the IPU, Uganda hosted the first ever IPU conference here and the country benefited from that. All Ugandans at different levels benefited, let alone the politicians; even people like the traders benefited. 

I would like to thank this Government for playing a vanguard role in the women empowerment programme. I want to thank the people of Uganda across the political divide for embracing that role, which Government plays. 

Last week, I watched on television and I saw the Governor of Nairobi, Governor Kidero, slapping a Member of the Senate, the county representative, Rachael Shebesh, just because she had gone with workers who had been laid off. He slapped her with impunity; because he is a man, he slapped her and moved on.  That means that some countries can move forward, but without the political will many of the African countries have not embraced the idea of women empowerment. So, we want to thank you very much. 

I call upon you, Members, in whatever you do in this House, in the constituencies and elsewhere, know that there are many people we inspire even without knowing it. So, continue supporting our women down at the grassroots. Many MPs here, both male and female, support women at different levels. We are making progress but our women leaders in the district and sub county councils need our support in order for them to play the role they are supposed to play. 

Thank you very much.

4.42
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and congratulate you on behalf of the people of Kanungu and Kigezi sub region. 

I have just been looking up the name Kadaga and it could as well be taken as an abbreviation of somebody who is kind, able, dependable, active, generous and articulate. (Laughter) If you add Rebecca, you get words like “reliable” and many other adjectives which can describe you. So, we want to congratulate you upon this elevation to a new position. 

When news of your election came in, I was in Kanungu. One elderly gentleman came to my home and his worry was that he had heard on radio that you were elected and he thought you would leave and go to South Africaand leave Parliament of Uganda. So, he was worried that they would chase me from Parliament together with Niwagaba if the Speaker leaves. (Laughter) The issue of Members of Parliament being expelled is quite topical in Kigezi, especially where hon. Niwagaba comes from. 

I assured the old man that the Rt Hon. Speaker Kadaga will remain the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda up to the end of this Parliament. That tells you how Ugandans feel about your leadership. 

Madam Speaker, some of us work very closely with you as commissioners and we know your style of leadership. We know how passionate you are in defending the interests and rights of the Members, and sometimes you risk being misunderstood by some leaders in this country. However, we want to assure you that the whole country is behind you and is with you.  (Applause)

Your election and style of leadership as a woman leader is a serious commentary on the topic of women in politics.You have provided lots of lessons, even to men, that we need to trust and workwith women leaders and promote women empowerment. We need to putgender on the agenda, not only in Uganda but also in the continent. 

We hope that your position will be used to emancipate the rural woman where most of the problems and challenges are still being faced by the local women –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for the commissioner to finish.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I was saying that we do hope that your position will help us emancipate the rural woman, not only in Uganda but in the Commonwealth countries. There are concerns being raised by the Members to the Commission on how we can continue the debate. I think after this, we shall consult amongst each other and do the needful and inform you accordingly. (Applause)

4.46
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to congratulate you and indeed, the movers of this motion. 

Honourable members, I have been privileged for the last 22 years to know the Rt Hon. Kadaga. I think if there was anybody who was wellqualified to introduce the hon. Kadaga to that conference, it should have been me. (Laughter)

Twenty-two years ago, I did leave the office of the then Member of Parliament – he is now deceased – the honourable James Mwandha. At that time, I was a young man looking for a job. He picked his writing pad and gave me a note to meet a woman I had never met in my life. I walked from Luwum Street to Kitgum House and I gave the Rt Hon. Kadaga the note, introducing me to her. My life has never been the same. (Laughter) I do owe everything I have achieved both in my professional career and political career to the Rt Hon. Speaker. (Applause)

If you are looking for a very honest, intelligent and courageous person, just look to my right. (Laughter) It is no mistake, in my view, that she has managed to rise to the level she has. That is why some of us, even with our political differences, treat her with the utmost respect she deserves. She has been fair to all of us. (Applause) The only problem is that the unfair ones look at her differently.

Madam Speaker, we pray for one thing: May the Almighty God give you long life and may all your enemies –(Laughter) I will not say a bad prayer in Parliament. Thank you. (Laughter)

4.48
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you all, Members, for all the good words you have spoken. I will begin echoing my observations from what people were saying. 

It is really not good to talk about the value of a person when that person is gone and is not listening to what you are saying. So, Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Iganga District and on behalf of the people of Uganda, I take the pleasure to congratulate you upon accelerating to that level. That acceleration is a sign of encouragement to the younger women. It is a sign of hope to the rural women because whenever you have time, you do go to the rural women. We believe that through you attaining that position, the rural women will be empowered, the girl-child will also be empowered and services will be delivered.

Honourable members, I also thank the Ninth Parliament for entrusting Rt Hon. Kadaga to be the Speaker because you must have the basics to rise to a certain level. I do not think that when the Speaker was contesting in South Africa – I was watching on television – everyone was a contestant, but it was because of the Ninth Parliament and the work she has been doing that enabled her reach that level.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I thank you for your hard work and I think the Bible says that through hard work, people are paid. (Member timed out.)

4.51
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of West Nile and Terego in particular, I want to take this opportunity to convey our heartfelt congratulatory messages to you upon this achievement. 

Personally, a few colleagues and I were in Arusha when we received this news from other African delegates that Uganda, again, had done it. Then I posed the question,“What is it?” They said, “You have been made proud.” No wonder, in my mind, I was very clear; before the team went, I told a few members of the delegation that was going to South Africa that, “Go with the Northcote Hall principle – ‘we either win or they lose’.” Indeed, when we heard the news, we were not surprised because that was the commitment with which the delegation from Kampala went.

Madam Speaker, I want to be liturgical in my presentation. I refer you to the second book of St Paul to the Corinthians where he clearly states that a servant who has done his or her good work must be paid the wages appropriately and promptly. It was not a surprise that the whole world turned and looked at you and bestowed on you that position. It is out of the good foundation that you have had, the type of stand you have taken here in Uganda, and the manner in which you have worked here that has been able to convince the whole world that you can be a worthy person to be entrusted with this leadership.

It is from here that you have exhibited leadership of frankness, justice, fairness. You have done this not only according to your professional ethics – that you give justice to all mankind without fear or favour - but more importantly, you have made it known to us that you are the Speaker of a multipartydispensation Parliament. You are the Speaker of all the sides of this House.That, to us and to the whole world, has raised your profile. 

Even when you go further, to my colleagues who are here and those who are outside, I again want to be liturgical in giving this information. Once it was said that a prophet will never be honoured in his or her own home. I want to drive this point home. We belong to different political parties. I know that the Rt Hon. Kadaga is not a member of the Opposition; she has her own party. Those of you who subscribe to the same party, please give her the opportunity to offer leadership –(Applause)– not only in Parliament but even in the country. (Laughter) (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will add you half a minute.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to complete the sentence I wanted to mention. Please, powers that be on the other side, give the Opposition the chance to rally behind and support the person who is steering this institution of Parliament.

If it were not because of you, Madam Speaker, I can assure you, my three colleagues would not be seated in this place. (Applause) It is because of your professionalism and your respect for the rule of law that has allowed my colleagues to be here right now. They should actually praise you as their god, let alone –(Laughter)– Yes, we have got to say this.

If it was not because of the stand you took, my colleagues would not be in this House. If you were a weak leader who towed political party lines and did not have respect for what is provided for in the laws of this country, my colleagues would not be here. For that reason, we really raise you high. May the Almighty Lord give you abundant life and may we continue to see you as a star not only from Busoga but a star of Africa. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.55
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will begin where my colleague, PastorWadri, has ended. Allow me, on behalf of the Muslim community in this House, to extend our innermost congratulations to you for that achievement.

Much has been said about you and we shall continue to discuss your achievements in various circles. All the achievements that you have had are not because you are the only one but it is because of God’s will. I know that all this would not have happened if the Almighty God had not accepted whatever is going on. So, we are very grateful to the Creator for having enabled you to come this far and to achieve whatever you have achieved, and at the end of the day it becomes the country’s achievement. We are very grateful to the Creator.

The onus is on us to pray to the Almighty God to enable you to execute all the duties that have been given to you by the entire world. Our prayers will guide you to what is right because I know that as we are happy and as we are congratulating you, there are those who are very sad about all the achievements you have attained. They are there and that is a fact.Due to their sadness, and because of the way you are climbing ladders, I think it will only be our prayers that will ensure that whatever they do is trashed by the Almighty God and you move forward.

I know you are not very comfortable as we congratulate you and we are constrained by time because of the budget process, but I think we should have dedicated a whole day to congratulate you for all these achievements because you deserve it. We can even suspend the budget process for today and talk so that every person can contribute, because you have made us proud and indeed, you deserve a full day –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, hon. Sebaggala, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I have also got a chance of slotting in my simple words. 

The information I want to give is that Kalungu has to watch this eventtaking place.When some of us want to talk about important people, I know your value the way I know the value of the rosary around my neck. That is how I can state it. In the Bible it says, “They have eyes but they do not see”. Do we see your value? Do we respect it? Do we know it?

When hon. Sebaggala says we should have this debate for the whole day, it is very prudent. Kalungu wants to hear me talk about you, a former student of Shimoni Demonstration School where I taught and here you are seated in front of us with all that value. You see, we can have our wine here - (Laughter)– Bravo! That is the information I wanted to give. (Laughter)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, hon. Ssewungu. Madam Speaker, the only gift that I can give you, as LatifSsebaggala, for what you have done is to produce another child and name that child Kadaga. (Laughter)I was going to wind up, but I just want to say that I am going to produce another child and name her Kadaga. Thank you very much.May God bless you.

5.00
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that if you want to go ahead to the budget process, after that process we may have to come back and revisit this motion. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to congratulate you for this big achievement. I also want to congratulate my colleagues for this huge achievement today from the Supreme Court. It has demonstrated that hon. Nyombihas not read the law very well and it is you who knows the law. I think that is what happened.

Madam Speaker, hon. Katuntu says he has known you for 22 years. At least I have known you for slightly more years - 23 years. I met you when I was in Government, in the Ministry of Finance. I recall that after a few years, in 1993/1994, anybody who stood for CA could not stand without my signature; I had to clear you to go to the Electoral Commission. If you never had my signature, you would not be there and everybody must know that. Yes, it is a true story. Anybody who stood for CA had to get my signature and whoever has been thinking that I am a small man – (Laughter)

At that time, Madam Speaker, you recall there were issues, which had been raised because of politics.One person in Government had wanted to slap you with a huge tax bill for your practising firm so that you are not cleared. When these people were following this, I asked one minister, “Are you a professional?”I said, “You are dealing with a professional; what you are talking about is not right. This firm has no tax liabilities as far as the records are concerned. Go and look for another idea to stop her but as Nandala, a professional, here is my signature, go.”

That reminds me about something. You know, sometimes I preach. If you read Psalms 35, it says “God protect me from my enemies” and Psalms 55 says, “God will always fight my wars.” Do not get worried; God is on your side and He will protect you. Whoever believes in the Bible will always be there.

Madam Speaker, you have really practised multi-partyism and you are really a Speaker of multiparty politics. In 2005, when President Museveni campaigned, I remember I was with my brother Kiwanda here and by then he was a very good boy until he got spoilt. I recall the President was saying - (Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order but also to congratulate you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) I want to keep the record very clear in the Hansard. The RtHon. Leader of the Opposition has said I am a spoilt boy now. I want him to clarify how bad I am. How have I been spoilt? Is it by my political party? Is it by behaviour? 

Madam Speaker, this is on record and I also want to say that I am the chairman of a very powerful caucus in this House. Is the honourable Leader of the Opposition in order to insinuate that I am a very spoilt boy in this House? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I do not know. Hon. Nandala, can you substantiate why you think a powerful chairman has become bad?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the founders of PAFO are hon. Kiwanda, - he is there - hon. Dombowho was our president, hon. Wadri, Nandalawho is here, hon. Adolf Mwesige, hon. GumaGumisiriza - I can mention other names. Hon. Kiwanda said,“We shall never allow anybody to stop us, the young ones, from taking power.” He said, “We shall not accept this issue of lifting the term limits”; he was the first one to lift the term limits. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, this is a small addition –(Interjections) – let me give you this information. We went to hon. Kiwanda’s constituency - he was called TaataSuubi. Now, there was one professor called Prof. Kiwanuka who attacked TaataSuubiand the whole Parliament was saying, “We must carry Prof. Kiwanuka through there up to outside because he had assaulted our man, TaataSuubi. “We had agreed and TaataSuubi had given us authority. He then goes out, talks to Prof. Kiwanuka and comes back and turns against us and we could not do what we were supposed to do. That is why he is spoilt. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, let me conclude. In 2005, the President went and campaigned and said, “Tubagyeko”- let us remove them. He wanted to remove some people. So, he created a multiparty system because he wanted to remove some people. 

Whereas “multiparty” means there will be a ruling party and there will be the Opposition, I want those who are near the President to tell him that “multiparty” means there is the ruling party and the Opposition and they are equal, and other many parties. The President has gone further to demonstrate that there are no parties. He is not practising multiparty politics. I will give examples. 

I want to use this opportunity to tell the whole country and the world that when the President is making appointments –(Interjections)-Yes, because that is when we see that our Speaker is good. When we are talking about a multiparty system in Uganda, it means every Ugandan is entitled to an equal share in Uganda, whatever divide they come from. Now, you put into place the Uganda Land Commission and the Equal Opportunities Commission, for example, and you put only the MPs who lost in the NRM on the committee yet also in the Opposition there were MPs who lost. The Constitution of Uganda says all of us are equal –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. The information I want to give is similar to what you are saying. In 1962, when Obote took power under UPC, he elected Mubiru, who was from DP, as Governor of Bank of Uganda. In 1972, when Amin took power, he gave Ben Kiwanuka of the Democratic Party the position of Chief Justice of Uganda. Let us keep other factors constant. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, that is why we would need time to discuss and teach President Museveni about multiparty politics. These commissions are not formed for NRM. They are formed for the people of Uganda. The moment you practice such a principle, you are bringing disunity in the country. You cannot bring unity. 

Madam Speaker, you are the only person I see from the NRM who is trying to bring unity. That is very good for us and that is what we are trying to say.

I want to tell you, Members who are not aware, that a few days before the Speaker went to South Africa - I was around- there was a deliberate effort to delay you not to go there to campaign. People, you do not know these things but we must tell you. They wanted you to stay around so that you go late and lose the election. However, I told you about Psalms 35 - God was protecting you. They made sure the Deputy Speaker disappears –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. The information I want to give you is that for those of you who are on Facebook, if you saw the de-campaigning process which was going on on Facebook, engineered by none other than hon. Kiyingi, you would shudder at whether he was a Ugandan or not. (Interjections) 

It was a shame to this country and moreover from a brother who comes from the same place. It was very disappointing and very embarrassing that one of our own can go on Facebook, and a minister at that, to de-campaign the Rt Hon. Speaker. Shame upon him!

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you can see. We are giving these examples because,as I have said, I have been around and I have known you for 23 years. I contested against you for the position of Speaker but you have never come to me to say,“Nandala, you fought me”. That shows what type of person you are. I am raising all this so that people who know multiparty politics come up. 

Recently, I went for a burial. Madam Speaker, that is again when I confirmed that you were really for multiparty politics. We had gone to bury our colleague, hon. Joy Kariisa, and the only thing they had wanted me to do was to welcome the President and keep quiet until I left Buhweju. Madam Speaker, you looked at the programme and said, “No, but the Leader of the Opposition is here.” 

There had been efforts by my colleagues - Dr Bayigga, hon. Mugume and hon. Ssewungu - to put the Leader of the Opposition on the programme. They said, “No, when the President is around, the Leader of the Opposition, you know…” They do not know multiparty politics. The Leader of the Opposition is a constitutional office. Nandala is here now but tomorrow there might be another person that office. So, Madam Speaker, again you demonstrated that multiparty politics is your game. 

We passed a law here, Madam Speaker. This is an opportunity for you people who are in Government, including hon. Rose Namayanja whom we fought with in the struggle; we must fund political parties. From 2005 up to now, we are not funding political parties but you will hear that the NRM Chairman has donated Shs 350 million from the NRM as equity in Fort Portal for buying shares in a company. Now he has donated 20 tractors; if you multiply 20 by Shs 250 million,that is Shs 5 billion. I do not know where that comes from. The law said we must fund political parties; why did we allow the parties when we were not ready?

I want to conclude this issue. From now onwards, you colleagues of mine in the NRM, you should know that today you might be there but tomorrow you might be on this side. In 1980, for those who were 18 years and above you voted. At least I never voted then. You never voted. There were only three parties; there was UPC, DP and CP. They were only three. There was no NRM, so who tells you 1980 – 

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that we must thank you very much for promoting - We are saying that you are a Speaker for all of us because you are for the Opposition and the ruling party. So, you know multiparty politics. 

God has blessed you. You should use those blessings from God to move Uganda to higher levels, and we want to use you as our tourist attraction. Whenever we travel, we will say that in Uganda, we have people who are intelligent, who are principled, who are consistent, who have integrity, who will keep their word and will never betray you at any cost; that is the Speaker of Parliament, hon. Kadaga. I thank you and I congratulate you. 

5.16
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to say a word on this historical debate. 

I speak as a chairperson of the Forum for Chairpersons and Clerks and Deputy Chairpersons. I also speak as the chairperson of the committee that oversees the activities of the Parliamentary Commission, Madam Speaker, which you chair. I also speak as the Chairperson of the Forum of Parliamentarians for Global Action, to which you are a member. 

I was not in South Africa to follow the debate and the reasons given for bringing you in that position, but when I heard about your election, I was not surprised. Having worked with you for a long time as Deputy Speaker but also as Speaker of Parliament, I would suppose that a few things that some of us have witnessed and seen even in your office may have been considered and influenced the election to that important position. 

One of the renowned attributes that you have is being attentive, being patient and studying carefully. Those of us that have had an opportunity to travel with you on delegations at times find you a problem because once you go to a meeting you will sit in that meeting until it closes. You will come at 8.00 O’clock and stay for as long as that meeting lasts and some of us do not have that patience. It is very difficult to run out of a meeting when the Speaker is actually sitting. 

Madam Speaker, I just want to say that maybe this is just the beginning.For what you are doing and for the work you are doing, maybe we should even expect more tributes and more honours to you and as a country. I thank you very much for this opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have spent a bit of time on this motion. I want to put the question that this House do pay tribute as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014 

5.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms FlaviaKabahenda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. 

In accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 177(a) and (d) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the sectoral committee is mandated to examine and comment on the policy matters affecting ministries and departments under their jurisdiction and also examine critically Government recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House. 

The scope includes vote 015, Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives; vote 110, the Uganda Industrial Research Institute; vote 154, the Uganda National Bureau of Standards; vote 022, Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities; vote 117, Uganda Tourism Board and the different agencies as hereunder mentioned.

This report covers the following aspects:
    • Sector mandates;
    • Budget performance in the financial year 2012/2013; 
    • Sector achievements in the financial year 2012/2013; 
    • Planned activities and programmes for the financial year 2013/2014; 
    • The funds requested for to implement the planned activities; 
    • The committee’s observations and recommendations. 

Our methodology involved receiving and examining the policy statements of the two ministries. We also reviewed the progress of its recommendations – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, you do not have to run through those details. Members can read. 

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Speaker, at this point I would like to lay on the Table the minutes of the proceedings of our meetings.I also would like to lay on the Table a copy of the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the ministerial policy statements and the budget estimates for the financial year 2013/2014. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, since the members have the bigger document, allow me to read the observations and the recommendations. 

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives 

I may not mention the page but I have already said that the honourable members have the bigger document, which I have condensed into a summary-(Interjections)-The copies are being circulated and I request that Members be patient; they will get the copies.Allow me to proceed. 

Observations and Recommendations 

1. Employment 

The committee observed that much as the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives has planned and budgeted for recruitment of 71 staff, only 15 positions have been declared by the Ministry of Public Service. This has hindered the ministry from operationalising the Micro,Small and Medium Enterprise Directorate, which was approved by the Ministry of Public Service. 

The committee recommends that in order to co-ordinate the activities of the various micro, small and medium enterprises in the country, there is need for Government to prioritise the creation of this directorate.Government should provide Shs 314 million as the wage bill for recruitment and Shs 800 million for development. 

2. The Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill 

The committee notes that on 9 April 2013 the Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives withdrew the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill with a view of making some amendments to it and report in three months’ time. However, the period has elapsed and the Bill has not been resubmitted. 

The committee was informed that a technical working group was formed to handle the review and this comprised of officials from Uganda National Bureau of Standards, Uganda Registration Services Bureau, Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.The committee recommends that the ministry expedites this process and presents this Bill to Parliament at least before December 2013.

3. Swapping of Foreign Service Officers 

The committee notes that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives, with a view of promoting trade and tourism in our embassies and missions, had written to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to swap Foreign Service officers with commercial and tourism attachés given their budgetary constraints. However, this proposal was not successful and the ministry was advised to have its own budget to post commercial attachés to the key missions abroad.

The issue of posting commercial attachés remains a national challenge that needs to be addressed if we are to boost our commercial diplomacy. It should be noted that this activity remains unfunded. 

The committee recommends that Government should intervene and come up with a policy on deployment of Foreign Service officers who are multi-skilled in order to solve this problem and seek funds to facilitate it. 

4. Compensation on Trade from COMESA

The committee observed that the compensation on trade from COMESA had not yet been paid. However, the committee was informed that funds totalling to about €5 million, approximately Shs 17.62 billion, have been budgeted for and approved by COMESA. These funds await release by the COMESA Council of Ministers, which is currently being chaired by our Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives, hon. Amelia Kyambadde. 

The committee recommends that the minister ensures that the COMESA Council of Ministers expedites the process of the release of these funds so that implementation of the border market in Bibia, for which the funds have been earmarked, can be implemented. 

5. Trade Negotiation and Facilitation

The committee observed that stakeholders’ involvement in trade negotiations is very minimal as compared to their East African Community counterparts like Kenya and Rwanda who usually involve stakeholders in trade negotiations. This is because stakeholders’ participation aids in better lobbying and advocacy for key sectors of interest as well as reduces blame on decisions made at such levels. 

The committee further notes that over the years, the Government has not invested enough in trade negotiations and facilitation, The Government has always left out other stakeholders such as Private Sector Foundation Uganda, Uganda Manufacturers Association and Kampala City Traders Association from very important trade negotiations in regional trade fora like the East African Community, SADC, EPAS and COMESA. 

The committee reiterates its earlierrecommendations that in order to achieve strong negotiation positions, Government should:
a) 	Set aside some funds to facilitate the trade negotiation matters; for example, in this financial year, no funds have been provided for trade negotiations output 060402.In the last financial year, only Shs 50.7 million was provided for such an enormous activity. 
b) 	Involve stakeholders in all trade negotiations.
c) 	Invest in training of trade negotiations experts.
d) 	Parliament should select a group of members to consistently represent Parliament on the negotiating team, to follow up on the issue of trade negotiations.The team should comprise of both technical staff and Members. 

6. Pre-export Verification of Conformity (PVoC)

The committee notes that there is lack of information and public awareness especially among traders regarding the Pre-export verification on conformity exercise. This is because the programme was rolled out without thorough sensitisation. The committee further observes that the traders were complaining about the capacity of international organisations that have been contracted to handle the exercise. 

The committee recommends that:
a) 	The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives should carryout massive sensitisation in the countryside and set up a desk to handle issues related to PVoC and its benefits.

b) 	The minister evaluates the capacity of the service providers especially in China which has long distances between the ports and the inland cities where the goods are procured. 

7. Locally Produced Goods

The committee also notes that much as emphasis is being put on pre-export verification of imported goods, attention should equally be placed on the local manufacturers who produce sub-standard goods that are flooding the local market especially food and foodstuffs, juices and water, sachetwaragi among others. 

The committee recommends that:
a) 	Standards of locally made products be emphasised since some of the substandard goods are produced within the country. 

b) 	The ministry should increase its capacity on surveillance and crackdown on the manufacturers of substandard goods.

8. Duplication of Roles

The committee observed that there is duplication of roles between the various government agencies, departments and institutions and thus they are providing similar or related services; for instance, Enterprise Uganda and Management Training and Advisory Centre, and Uganda Export Promotion Board and Uganda Investment Authority. 

The committee recommends that these institutions should establish linkages to avoid duplication of duties and responsibilities, wastage of resources, and simplify certain operations.

9. The South Sudan Question

The committee observes that the environment in the Republic of South Sudan is not friendly to Ugandans doing business there. Ugandans continue to be harassed and mistreated by the South Sudanese Government and local officials. Last week, for example, Uganda boda boda riders operating in the Republic of SouthSudan were all expelled from Juba. 

Although the Republic of South Sudan is one of Uganda’s biggest trade partners, the insecurity in Africa’s youngest country is affecting trade between the two nations. The committee further notes that the Ugandan traders that have been cheated by their business counterparts in South Sudan have not been compensated. 

The committee recommends that:
a) 	Government should ensure that Southern Sudan is peaceful so that trade between the two neighbours can flourish. 

b) 	Government should compensate the traders who lost their property as diplomatic measures are being taken to settle the traders’ claims. 

10. Co-operatives Development

According to the analysis and review of the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2013/2014, the cooperatives vote function 0602 performed so poorly at 49.5 percent. This was largely on account of its funds being used for the hosting of the COMESA Policy Organs Meeting and Heads of States Summit that was held in Uganda in November 2012. 

It should also be noted that the trade development function 0604 budget is expected to drop from Shs 9.743 billion to Shs 5.52 billion, representing 40.7 percent reduction.This is associated with the closure of the EU funded project on Economic Partnership Agreement Related Trade and Private Sector Support Programme (EPATAPSS). 

The overview of the first outturn is as per table 1(a) for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives. 

Observation and the Recommendations

The committee notes with concern that much as co-operatives development is envisaged as the cornerstone for the revival of the co-operatives movement in the National Development Plan and the NRM manifesto, its budget has kept on declining over the years. The reduction in the budget is attributed to the budget reduction on consumptive expenditure such as travel inland, and workshops and seminars.

However, when you critically analyse the nature of the work involved in reviving co-operatives, it rotates around consumptive expenditure.This leaves the ministry in a dilemma on how to proceed with the implementation of this activity. 

The committee recommends that:
a) 	The co-operatives development should be treated differently from other sectors when implementing policies like consumptive expenditure on travel inland, workshops and seminars if Government is to achieve its objective on reviving co-operatives. 

b) 	Government should prioritise, enhance and adequately finance the co-operative development. 

Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry

The Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry was formed in 1933 and became formally registered in 1978 as a company limited by guarantee without share capital. Allow me to go to the observation and the recommendation because Members can read the background for themselves. 

1. 	Revival of the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry and District Chamber of Commerce and Industry 

The committee observes that worldwide, chambers of commerce play a great role in mobilising traders and have diverse membership. 

In Uganda, the chamber of commerce and industry has a nationwide membership, with ten regional and over 80 district branches that are not very vibrant.They need to be revived to champion the aspirations of the traders as an engine of development, employment of youth, mobilisation of micro, small and medium enterprises and a forum through which to communicate government policies in the country. 

The committee further observed that due to lack of such a forum, it has led to manipulation and misinformation of traders on government policies. During the recent strike held by traders in Kampala, for example, on the re-introduction of PVoC, there was no clear platform for negotiations with traders especially the ones in the countryside.

The committee recommends that Government supports the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry through a public-private partnership to revive the chamber of commerce countrywide.

The proposed budget allocation for vote 015 is presented in that table.

Vote 110- Uganda Industrial Research Institute 

Madam Speaker, I request that the Members read the background on that agency. Allow me to go the observations and recommendations.

Uganda Industrial Research Institute

The committee notes that the explanation given by Uganda Industrial Research Institute on overexpenditure of the budget and staff establishment is not convincing. This is because they admit that the figures indicated included quarter two transactions as at December 2012 and yet they only presented a list of 45 staff who have been recruited as compared to the 52 reported in the ministerial policy statement. The staff establishment list presented to the committee has only 227 employees and not 241 as earlier reported in the ministerial policy statement.

The committee further notes that the following positions, which are very critical in the management of finances in the institution, are vacant and these include the positions of Director Finance and Administration, Management Accountant and Senior Accountant.

It was also observed that the Executive Director of the institute is not on the ground and is busy in the Petroleum Institute in Kigumba.He has left the running of the institute in the hands of the administrator.

The committee recommends that for smooth running of the institution:
a) 	The minister should ensure that the vacant positions in the institution are filled.
b) 	The minister ensures that the institution is properly run.

The proposed budget allocations for vote 110 for the financial year 2013/2014 are presented in the table thereunder.

Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS)

Madam Speaker, Members will read the background and I will go straight to the observations and recommendations.

1. Recruitment

The committee notes that much as there has been a ban on recruitment of employees in government ministries, departments and agencies, this ban has been implemented discriminately with other government agencies being allowed to recruit and others such as UNBS not allowed. This discrimination has led to shortage of manpower in UNBS and lack of staff to oversee its operations at all the 54 border points, with only 18 border points having UNBS presence. 

The committee recommends that the ban on recruitment at UNBS be lifted to enable it recruit staff and improve manpower to implement its mandate at all the border points, especially the PVoC and the single customs territory.

2. Single Customs Territory

The Single Customs Territory (SCT) is an arrangement to clear and pay taxes of imported goods at the point of first entry. It was reached at by the heads of state in a tri-partite meeting held in accordance with the East African Common Protocol between the Republic of Rwanda, Kenya and Uganda to help reduce non-tariff barriers. 

The implementation of this programme is scheduled to start on 12 September 2013, that is, tomorrow. The introduction of the SCThas come with extra costs that were not envisaged during the budget process and thus has over stretched the UNBS capacity to handle inspections at the point of entry in Mombasa.

The committee recommends that Government looks for additional funds to cater for this unplanned activity in the budget, especially funds for posting UNBS staff to Mombasa to implement the Single Customs Territory that is starting on 12 September 2013.

3. Additional Budget

The committee has received a request for additional funding for relocation, accommodation and office equipment to Mombasa.The budget is projected to cost Shs 3.74 billion. 

The committee notes that for UNBS to implement its mandate of import inspection and verification to ensure that goods entering the country conform to the national standards so as to protect consumers’ safety and health; and also the presidential directive that prohibits verifying goods at Malaba and Busia, leaves the committee with no option but to support UNBS in its request for funding.

The committee, therefore, recommends that instead of Government bringing a supplementary budget for this item, it is paramount that additional funds are sought to relocate the staff of UNBS to Mombasa. 

4. Completion of UNBS Home

The committee notes that Government is providing Shs 2 billion annually towards the construction of the UNBS home that started in April 2012. The first phase is almost ready and has so far cost the bureau Shs 4.3 billion and still requires more funding. Refer to page 235 of the ministerial policy statement for the picture of the project.

The committee recommends that:
a) 	Government should either frontload Shs 12 billion for the completion of the UNBS home and thus the bureau will save Shs 600 million per annum in rent and related costs; or
b) 	Government supports UNBS to borrow these funds at a low interest rate payable over a period of time.

5. Construction of Laboratories to Support SMEs

The committee further notes that the bureau seeks to construct an initial two laboratories for food and engineering in order to facilitate certification of SMEs and local manufacturers meeting the products standards and quality required to access regional and international markets. This will also enable locally manufactured products to compete favourably with high quality imported products on the domestic market.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Government supports UNBS to borrow these funds at a low interest rate payable over a period of time.

The proposed budget for vote 154 for the financial year 2013/2014 is presented in the table.

Vote 022 - Ministry Of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities 

Observations and Recommendations

1. Office Space

The committee notes that Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has secured a space to rent as offices at Rwenzori Towers at Shs 1.402 billion per annum and has entered into a three-year tenancy agreement. However, the committee’s concern is that the ministry has got land where they can construct their own home and, therefore, wonders why Government does not budget some funds for the ministry to construct a home. 

The committee recommends that Government frontloads the funds that would be used for renting these premises for the ministry to construct their own home.

2. Pending Laws

The committee notes that there are no laws establishing the following institutions: Hotel and Tourism Training Institute, Uganda Wildlife Education Centre and the Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute. However, the committee was informed that the Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Bill was approved by Cabinet in May 2013 and the ones for Uganda Wildlife Education Centre and the Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute were approved in June 2013. The Bills are now at the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation for gazzettement.

The committee recommends that since the Bills are at the tailend of production, the ministry should expedite the process so that the Bills are produced before Parliament.

3. Human-Animal Wildlife Conflict

The committee observed that there is a project in the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities on mitigation of human-wildlife conflict. This project started in the financial year 2011/2012 with a budgetary allocation of Shs 659,788, which has been increased to Shs 1,204,505 for financial year 2012/2013 and the same this financial year. 

It should be noted that funds allocated for this project are too meagre to have any impact on the rampant destruction caused by wild animals in the affected areas.

The committee further notes that there is no policy on compensation for loss of lives and destruction of people’s crops and property around wildlife protected areas, thus causing tension within the community. However, on humanitarian grounds, UWA provides modest fees for medication and burial expenses although this is provided selectively.

The committee recommends that:
a) 	Government should come up with a policy on human-animal conflict or a policy on the compensation of loss of lives and destruction of property.
b) 	Appropriate measures or barriers are put in place to bar wild animals from destroying human lives and property such as digging trenches and cages for crocodiles.
c) 	The ministry also needs to sensitise the communities living around the national parks of the benefits of conservation of tourism and its products.

4. Border Conflicts

The committee observes that there has been rampant encroachment of national parks’ land by communities living near the parks. Thisis due to the increased population growth, which has forced communities to look for land for cultivation and settlement. In other areas, there have been complaints from the communities about encroachment on communities’ land by the Uganda Wildlife Authority, which even led to acrimony between the communities and the Uganda Wildlife Authority.

The committee recommends that:
a) 	The ministry ascertains and distinctively marks the boundaries of national parks to avoid border conflict with communities.
b) 	Uganda Wildlife Authority sensitises their communities, especially those living near the national parks, to appreciate the benefits of conservation and its effects if mismanaged.
c) 	The process should involve the district leadership, Uganda Wildlife Authority and the affected communities and their leaders.

5. Compensation of Land Owners with Land Titles in the Protected Areas

The committee notes that the ministry has budgeted Shs 1 billion for compensation to communities and landowners with titles in protected areas. The committee also notes that the funds provided for this activity are inadequate. 

The committee further notes that at the time of gazetting the different wildlife protected areas, some people had land titles that were never compensated by Government. This has remained an issue for decades for people in the districts of Kabarole, Kyegegwa, Masindi, Arua, Kasese, Kisoro and Kanungu.

The committee recommends that:
a) 	Government should handle this issue expeditiously to prevent people from encroaching and curving out more land for themselves; and
b) 	Develop a detailed and compressive compensation plan within three months that should give a true picture of how to settle the compensations.

6. Arrears to the United Nations World Tourism Association (UNWTO) and Lusaka Agreement.

The committee observes that due to non-payment of subscriptions to the different international bodies such as UNWTO and Lusaka Agreement, the country is usually embarrassed in these meetings and conferences and ends up as listening posts without voting rights. The committee further observes that the ministry has arrears to UNWTO of 800,000 euros and arrears to Lusaka Agreement of US$ 1.2 million.

The committee recommends that Government, as a matter of urgency, ensures that these arrears are settled.

7. VAT on Tourism

The committee notes that the reinstatement of Value Added Tax (VAT) came after tourists had already made bookings with tour operators. Its implementation will therefore affect the tourism industry as tourists will opt to visit the neighbouring countries, thus affecting revenue collection and the Gross Domestic Product (GDP).

The committee recommends that the collection of VAT on already booked transactions be halted for a period of six months. Other EAC countries such as Rwanda, Kenya and Tanzania have halted it for a period of one year.

The proposed budget allocations for vote 022 for the financial year 2013/2014 are presented in the table below. 

Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board. 

Observations and Recommendations

1. Marketing of Tourism

The committee observed that whereas the National Development Plan identifies tourism as one of the highest foreign exchange earners, little attention is given to its budget as the budgetary allocations do not reflect its contributions to the national treasury. 

The budget has continued reducing over the last three years from Shs 2.05 billion in the financial year 2011/2012 to Shs 1.91 billion in the financial year 2012/2013 to Shs 1.40 billion in the financial year 2013/2014. This is compared to other EAC countries that contribute as follows to the promotion and marketing of tourism: Kenya spends US$ 17 million on tourism, Tanzania US$ 10 million and Rwanda US$ 5 million respectively. Uganda only spends US$ 330,000.

The committee recommends that:
a) Government should make a deliberate effort to enhance the level of marketing Uganda internationally by, among others:
    • Reviving Uganda Airlines as the national carrier because in the EAC, it is only Uganda that does not have a national carrier;
    • Branding missions abroad and having attachés assigned to each of them;
    • Securing airtime and space on national and international media;
    • Developing sports to compete internationally; and
    • The minister should ensure that UTB is supported to co-ordinate the promotion and marketing of tourism.
b) 	The budget of the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities be increased to two per cent of the total national budget.

c) 	We improve the visibility and promotion of tourism by putting signage on the road sides.
d) 	We encourage domestic tourism in schools by reviving school clubs such as conservation clubs, wildlife clubs, among others.
e) 	Members of Parliament should develop a culture of promoting domestic tourism even in their constituencies.

2. Tourism Levy

The committee observed that the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is carrying out a study on the implementation of the tourism levy. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in her response to the recommendations of Parliament to the President in the National Budget Framework Paper, said that once the study is done and a mechanism proposed, it will be reviewed and appropriate approval given in accordance with the law.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should implement the provisions as given in the Tourism Act, 2008 other than carrying out studies on its implementation.

The proposed budget for vote 117, Uganda Tourism Board, for financial year 2013/2014 is hereunder presented in the committee report.

Uganda Wildlife Authority 

Observations and Recommendations

1. Revenue Sharing

The committee notes that Uganda Wildlife Authority has been sharing two per cent of the gate collection with the communities bordering the national park. However, communities have complained that they do not benefit from this revenue sharing since the funds are sent to the local governments and they are the ones who decide how the funds are used. It has also been observed by the committee that Uganda Wildlife Authority has not set up wildlife committees as provided in the law.

The committee recommends that:
a) 	Uganda Wildlife Authority comes up with regulations and guidelines on sharing and utilisation of the revenue with local governments bordering the national park.
b) 	Uganda Wildlife Authority sets up the wildlife committees as provided for in the Tourism Act, 2008.
c) 	Government considers reviewing the current law in order to suit the changing trends in the tourism sector.

2. Support to Uganda Tourism Board (UTB)

The committee notes that due to the perennial underfunding of the Uganda Tourism Board, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, through the minister, wrote to Uganda Wildlife Authority to support UTB activities in promotion and marketing.They thus contributed Shs1 billion in financial year 2012/2013 for the International Tourism Fair in Berlin and Spain.

The committee recommends that instead of Uganda Wildlife Authority supporting UTB in that way, the ministry should come up with modalities and a framework on how UWA and other stakeholders, such as Civil Aviation Authority, can pool resources for UTB to carry out the promotion and marketing since their work is complementary.

3. The Nyakagezi Gorilla Family 

The committee notes that the gorillas in Mghahinga National Park are shared with the neighbouring countries such as Rwanda and the DRC since they usually migrate along the border. The Nyakagezi family, for example, which was habituated in Uganda and migrated to Rwanda is now back in the country and is fully booked. These animals have unique features on their nose for which they are easily identified.This, therefore, allays fears that Rwanda was providing these gorillas with special feeds and that was keeping them in Rwanda. 

4. Lusaka Agreement on Endangered Wildlife Species

The committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has arrears to international bodies such as the Lusaka Agreement, to the tune of US$1.2 million, which has been accumulated over a period of time. 

The committee recommends that in order for Uganda Wildlife Authority and Government in particular to benefit from crossborder wildlife enforcement co-operation in attempting to combat international wildlife smuggling syndicates and poaching especially in ivory and rhino horns and other fauna and flora, funds be sought to settle these arrears. 

In conclusion, subject to the observations and recommendations mentioned in this report, the committee recommends the approval of the budget of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives and its associated institutions; and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and its associated institutions for the financial year 2013/2014 as presented in the committee report.

Vote 015, Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives, the recurrent expenditure is Shs6,268,719,000 and the development expenditure is Shs11,040,468,000; the total is Shs17,308,287,000. 

Vote 110, Uganda Industrial Research Institute, the recurrent expenditure is Shs5,689,016,000 and the development expenditure is Shs9,522,620,000. The total is Shs15,211,636,000.

Vote 154, Uganda National Bureau of Standards, the recurrent expenditure is Shs12,906,446,000
and the development expenditure is Shs 4,262,748,000. The total is Shs17,169,194,000.The grand total for that sector is Shs49,689,117,000.

Vote 022, Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, the recurrent expenditure is Shs 
9,038,148,000 and the development expenditure is Shs4,074,247,000. The total is Shs13,112,396,000.

Vote 117, Uganda Tourism Board, the recurrent expenditure is Shs1,310,155,000 and the development expenditure is Shs93,303,000. The total is Shs1,403,457,000. The grand total is Shs14,515,853,000. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and your committee. Where is the shadow minister for tourism? You have five minutes to give highlights. 

I direct that the text of the report of the committee be reflected on the Hansard. Yours will also be five minutes and it can also be reflected.

(The full report to appear in the monthly Bound Volume of September 2013.)

6.01
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I shadow two ministries and so I made two responses which are separate. 

Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage 
Madam Speaker, you know that this House should be told that the strategic importance of travel and tourism as a tool for economic development and job creation cannot be challenged. This industry contributes over 10 percent of all new jobs created. That was in 2012. 

It has also been said that Uganda was described by Sir Churchill in 1908 as being the Pearl of Africa. Tourism contributed Shs2,132,000,000, that is, 3.7 percent of the total GDP in 2012.However, the sector has an enormous potential of projection of growth of 2.8 percent in 2013. The tourism industry has a potential of earning over US$1 billion annually, which would contribute 22 percent of Uganda’s current expenditure budget.

Madam Speaker, there is need to brand Uganda but according to the FutureBrand Index, Uganda lies in the last quartile of the global 2012/2013 Country Brand Index (CBI).Uganda it is No. 97, Tanzania is 68, Kenya is 74 whereas Rwanda is 112. 

The ministry seems to be preoccupied with finding a home in a separate building to house its operations away from the Ministry of Trade and Industry. We question what comes first, the sector master plan or putting up a magnificent building, and yet Uganda’s resources are very constrained. This is very unfortunate indeed. We question the judgement of the Government in this case.

Madam Speaker, there is confusion in marketing tourism in Uganda. There is confusion over the Pearl of Africa versus Gifted by Nature campaigns. We do not know which one is which;the Pearl of Africa was developed about 100 years ago and Gifted by Nature was just a CNN campaign in 2005. 

We are gifted with a lot of things like gorillas and nice wildlife in Uganda, thanks to the gorilla tracking which is earning us major foreign exchange. However, tourists are increasingly looking beyond gorilla tourism to other experiences. Even commonsense would dictate that very few people would travel all the way to spend money just to watch gorillas. This would not be sustainable to Uganda. 

I would recommend a long term impact on the tourism sector to drive its competiveness globally. The sector’s failure points to lack of capacity, a policy framework, leadership, co-ordination and limited funding.

The ministry is requesting for the unfunded gap of Shs 18.4 billion in the financial year 2013/2014, and the money would go to the ministry and the Uganda Tourism Board. They, however, do not demonstrate how they are going to utilise these resources.

The ministry has not provided concrete strategies on how exactly to transform this sector to position it as a hub for economic development in Uganda. We, therefore, present recommendations that are practical and fit in with the limited resource envelop we have:
We need to develop a master plan for the sector. There must be a blue print developed in the tourism sector for expanding and strengthening the Uganda tourism industry as an instrument of economic and social development in a manner that benefits all Ugandans in this country; 

    • facilitate sustainable growth and high level investment in the industry;
    • increase employment opportunities and gainful community participation in the tourism industry;
    • developand maintainsupporting infrastructure required for the growth of the tourism industry;
    • ensure environmental sustainability in the development and operation of tourism; and 
    • strive for global Excellency in environmentally responsible tourism.

We already talked about retrieving Uganda Airlines for easy access to the national parks as a national carrier. That would also act as an adverting tool for us. It would also provide direct flights, which are convenient at affordable fairs and prestigious for source markets. 

We looked at connectivity to tourism spots. We should find it easy to access Uganda’s national parks through Rwanda. Tourists are looking at accessing our national parks through the Rwandan capital, Kigali, owing to the poor state of roads in Uganda, such as the Hoima to Kyenjojo and Ishaka to Kanungu roads. Those roads are very impassable.

The other issue is about development of the tourism product and positioning of the brand Uganda. Country branding is a very real requirement for the 21st Century. The Government should develop and redevelop competitive products in partnership with the private sector and brand Uganda by positioning core messages. This is because of the rapid changing of the nature of tourism.

A classic example of product and brand positioning is Dubai in the United Arab Emirates. Dubai is positioning itself as a holiday and luxurious destination. We need to develop country brand ambassadors like commercial attachés.Countries like Kenya have long distance runners to do that. Thank God that our Kiprotich went to the Olympics and brought us a gold medal; he is also branding Uganda very well. Madam Speaker, you are also one of them who has branded Uganda.  You also contributed during the IPU and you brought gorillas here to Parliament. You are one of the people who are branding Uganda very well.

In conclusion, travel and tourism is one the latest growing industries in Uganda. It has grown over the years to become a major source of revenue. It has potential to even become the economy’s backbone within the next few years.

However, despite the enormous potential, the industry has not been performing well compared to other sub-Saharan tourist giants like Kenya and South Africa. It is because of lack of Government commitment towards travel and tourism development, as it has often kept the industry behind in the budgeting process.You saw in the report how Uganda is only providing Shs 330 million when other countries are putting in US$ 17 million. This has kept our industry behind.

It is therefore imperative that we redevelop tourism by developing a master plan, enhancing our tourism products,and increasing connectivity to and within Uganda to serve the main tourist attractions.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Taaka, you are supposed to just highlight the proposals; what would you want the Government to do.

MS TAAKA: Madam Speaker, that is what I was doing. I will go to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.The ministry aims to improve business in Uganda and grow the private sector. However, the hardships we have under the trade subsector are that doing business and private sector development in Uganda is very expensive. 

We looked at the World Bank’s Doing Business report of 2013 and it said Uganda is in the 120th position having been 119 in 2011. So it has moved one place behind, which is terrible. 

Licensing costs have also been increased; it takes 33 days to start doing business in Uganda whereas in some countries in the region like Rwanda, it takes only three days. So this also increases on the costs of doing business in Uganda.

Uganda is deteriorating in most of its business transactions, for example the balance of trade; it is always in a deficit. Those who are interested will look at my report. 

We need to harmonise the bilateral exports to South Sudan, although our people are being mistreated. I would also like to urge the ministers of security and internal affairs to see to it that our people are okay because this cross-border trade is bringing a lot of money to our coffers;there have been numerous killings and harassment of Ugandans in South Sudan.

On the regional market, we need to bring in a new type of exporters, especially small scale exporters. We would earn a lot of revenue from exports if we started training our people in small scale industry.

There was a problem with PVoC. It was hurriedly done and there was no sensitisation done for the traders.This caused us to lose a lot of money because traders went on strike. We need Government to go and sensitise these people. 

Government has really lagged behind on the Soroti fruit factory. It has taken too long to take off despite the Korean International Co-operation Agency wanting to come and invest in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the co-operatives subsector had been killed but they are trying to revive it; so, that is good. Government should come in and boost the co-operatives because it brings in some businessand it also increases on incomes and trade. They should support co-operative societies with machinery and equipment to boost local manufacturing.We project about 100,000 jobs from this intervention. That is what the Government proposed but up to now, there is nothing which has been done.

Government also proposed to construct silos of 100,000 metric tonnes but nothing has been done at all.That would also help us with food security but Government is not doing anything. Government also proposed the One Village One Product Programme. 

Up to now, these policies are just put on the shelves and they accumulate dust and nothing happens.Even in the report, we talked about the delayed Bills. There is also the National Accreditation Policy, the Cooperative Societies Act and regulations; nothing has been done – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Taaka, you are supposed to be giving alternatives and not just reviewing. Please, conclude.

MS TAAKA: Madam Speaker, a crucial component of the sector is industry and manufacturing, which is a subsector that drives job creation. It is very clear that the subsector has stagnated and therefore a reality check of the broader ministry and economy is needed. It is clear from various independent findings that the business environment in Uganda and the cost of doing business is the highest in the East African Community. 

The economic projections ahead yet again spell more doom for the economy,based on the government failure to deliver results. This is a major concern.The Government should desist from mere policy pronouncements and concentrate on sustainable positive outcomes. 

It is evident that the Government of Uganda has several policy programmes and strategies running, but several of them are hounded by lack of co-ordination and implementation failure. This was admitted by the minister in her 2012/2013 ministerial statement: “Madam Speaker, complimentary implementation of government programmes in the sector is still a major challenge with no synergies between MDAs...” – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is contained in the statement. You are reading from the statement, which they all have. We want to hear your alternatives; what are your proposals? What would you want to be done better?

MS TAAKA: Madam Speaker, that is what I wanted to say.  Finally, Government’s intervention in the efficiency with which the resources are utilised - I remind the minister that 27 years of the NRM Government, which excuses to Ugandans do not hold the modern times; we need action taken tomorrow. I beg to move. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you. The full reports will be reflected on the Hansard.

6.20
MR BENJAMIN CADET (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.Because we have two minutes, I will just dwell on tourism. 

We are dealing with a sector that last year gave us Shs1.1 trillion and then here we are looking at giving it a budget of just Shs14 billion. I think here we are just joking, Madam Speaker.We have been talking about salaries of teachers and salaries of doctors but how will the money come? The money will come from productive sectors like tourism. 

When you look at Rwanda allocating to tourism US$5 million and we are giving just US$330,000, are we running a small CBO or is this a full ministry that is supposed to be the bread earner of Government? We should be serious and give the tourism sector money. This business of the Ministry of Finance cutting money which they have not worked for - the money Ministry of Finance is allocating is from tourism, and then it gives it Shs14 billion and yet they need money. 

Madam Speaker, I come from a community that relies heavily on tourism but the people there are poor. They are poor not because they cannot work but because we have refused to allocate money to fence off the national park. Actually, people live in abject poverty. However much I talk here, their cries are louder than what I am saying. 

We have failed to allocate money to save the communities that surround national parks, and these are communities that have over 12 million people because we have got more than six national parks. There is no money to fence off the national parks. When they got the money, they only fenced off Lake Mburo to prevent Zebras from grazing with cattle,and yet for us who are cultivators the situation is terrible.

Madam Speaker, as has been said that female prisoners have a right to pads, the communities neighbouring national parks have a right to end poverty and food insecurity. I want to urge Members of Parliament here that this is the time we should give this ministry the money it gets. From the Shs1.1 trillion, let us allocate at least Shs30 billion to fence off the national parks. 

Madam Speaker, I think we even need money to train our people in hotels. It is only in Uganda where you go to a hotel and a waitress keeps laughing and looking at the TV as if you have no seat in your home. These people should be trained in customer care.

The VAT should be removed because when we travel abroad, on return they give us our money back; but we get tourists here and we tell them to come to our hotels and we make them pay this money. That is irregular.The tax on hotels should be removed so that we get more tourists and they spend more. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

6.24
MR MARTIN MUGARRA (NRM, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for according me this opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the wonderful report that they have given. 

I only have three issues to raise. The first issue is from page 39; when it comes to these students who go through the Hotel Tourism and Training Institute, what is the criteria they use to have those students acquire that training? Do you identify them? Do they get free education? How is it done?

I think it would be better if these students were picked from those areas surrounding the game parks because they would appreciate better the importance of this wild life.They would also probably transfer this knowledge to communities so that it can be easier for them to live together. So, what is the criteria that is used? 

Secondly, on page 64, amongst the challenges you highlighted was the challenge of oil and gas exploration in these game parks and game reserves, but you left it hanging; what plans do you have to address this challenge? Is it going to remain a challenge and we keep lamenting about it, or you have a solution planned to address this challenge?

On page 65, when it comes to sharing revenue with the communities, you only allocate two percent of the collection to the community. I think two percent is too little; at least give them ten or five percent. Two per cent cannot help in any way. I, therefore, request you to increase the percentage allocated to the community so that the community too can benefit and take more care of wildlife.

Finally, I cannot get off this microphone without saying something about the issue of Ntoroko. We have made too much noise about lack of burial land in Ntoroko. I was there with the previous Minister of Lands and we were going to bury a child who fell in a latrine. Luckily, the President recently allocated us some land. I think it was a directive through the minister. We were allocated ten acres of land where our people can bury and stop throwing dead bodies in the lake. 

I want to say this through the chairperson because we have to go through the Parliament to de-gazette; we are entirely surrounded by water and the game park. If you cannot provide land, at least allocate us some money to acquire land for these people; otherwise, the situation is terrible. Thank you so much.

6.27
MR ROBERT SSEKITOLEKO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I commend the committee for a report well prepared, presented and laid on the Table. 

My comments are in regard to vote 110 on page 21, that is, Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI).Their mandate is to promote the social and economic transformation of Uganda through the use of simple but appropriate technology not only for income generation but also for the betterment of the lives of Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, UIRI has been around for some time, but not so many people know what is taking place at UIRI. There is a lot to be learnt and to benefit from this institute. This is exactly the purpose for which it was made. However, the people who are supposed to benefit from it have no idea what is taking place in that place. 

I presume a number of Members have not visited UIRI. We, the leaders, are supposed to be leaders of change and transformation.Therefore, I expect the committee to strongly recommend that Government carries out deliberate mass sensitisation for the people – for the youth, both in school and out of schools, the literate, semi-illiterate and those who are completely illiterate. They should be able to find out what is happening in UIRI. Those who pick up interest in particular technologies should be facilitated to begin production. This is the only way we can facilitate our youth to begin production. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.29
MRS SANTA ALUM OGWANG (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to go straight to page 46 where the committee reports on human–animal conflict. 

I presented an issue from my district on the conflict between my people and the animals on the Floor of this Parliament. Up to now, I have not got any response. I can see the committee is giving a good recommendation that Government should come up with a policy. I would like to ask the minister when this policy is coming.

Right now, the buffalos and crocodiles are eating my people day and night. I remember presenting a case on this Floor where a buffalo killed a woman who was taking her twins to hospital. Elephants are moving about eating up plants, up to Atapara Hospital which is about 20 kilometres from the park on Lira Road. So, I am wondering what the ministry is doing about this. 

We know that tourism has potential to save this country. We are busy looking for money, but this sector can boost our economy and take us miles ahead.I went to Cuba and they do not have as much as we do but they have worked hard on their tourism sector and they are reaping amazingly. I wish the minister could visit Cuba and learn some lessons. 

I want to comment briefly on the issue of co-operatives. Co-operatives must start from the grassroots. Farmers must be –(Member timed out_)

6.32
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for writing this report, but I have one problem with this report. Maybe you would have proposed - You need more money for tourism. There are so many tourism centres in Uganda which are not known and they are very useful. In my constituency, for example, we have the first brick house in Uganda – (Interjections) – those are antiquities. The first black priests in Africa were buried in my constituency, in Villa Maria. All these are supposed to be marketed. 

When it comes to tourism, we are only handling elephants. In Uganda, if you drive from Kampala to Masaka, you will not find a single signpost on tourism. It is only when you reach Lake Mburo National Park that you see a sign of a tourist attraction. 

For you people who travel, go to Arusha and see what is happening there. We are not going to get tourists without developing our airfields; tourists what to fly into Entebbe and then fly out to Gulu and other places because we have poor roads. Why don’t you make for us elephants and we see them along the road and at roundabouts. You have instead put Warid and other things which expired.

Madam Speaker, we should market tourism starting from schools; these things are not there. Recently, I went with the children of Kabojja Junior School to Arusha. When we were landing in Arusha, they were talking about an airfield in Kajjansi; the children do not have any such experience in Uganda.

We should find ways of marketing our tourism in Uganda. It is not just about putting them on the website; discover other sites. Every district in Uganda has something that can help us boost tourism. 

Furthermore, what are you doing for our districts, more especially the new ones like Kalungu and others? What are the district headquarters doing about the tourist attractions; are they conserving them? All this requires money, but we are not seeing this being done. 

You may focus on Sheraton and such hotels, but tourists are not looking for places like that because that is the way they live in Europe –(Member timed out_)

6.35
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 16, regarding the South Sudan question, the committee has come up with the recommendation that Government should ensure that South Sudan is peaceful. I would like to find out from the committee how the government of Uganda is going to ensure that there is peace in South Sudan.

Madam Speaker, if you look at our country, there are very many South Sudanese nationals enjoying peace but when it comes to Ugandans in South Sudan, you will see a number of problems they face. I want to find out what the committee meant with this recommendation – whether there are agreements signed between the Government of Uganda and that of South Sudan that have been breached.

Turning to page 19, I also want to find out from the committee whether we have a national policy on public-private partnerships that has been approved. This is because many people are hiding behind public-private partnerships to do their own things. As far as I am concerned, I have not seen a policy on public-private partnerships anywhere, much as it is being talked about. So I want to find out from the minister whether we have a policy –(Member timed out_)

6.37
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will pick up from where hon. Namayanja left. 

South Sudan has despised and disrespected this country to the maximum. Uganda went and helped South Sudan and after we killed the animal, the carcass is now being devoured by other countries. The Government of Kenya is reaping to the maximum; they have invested in banks, hotels, professionals and they are making a kill in South Sudan. What is Uganda investing in? Boda bodas, tomato sellers, sex workers et cetera. That is the investment that the Ugandan Government has in South Sudan; very unserious!

Madam Speaker, there is no further disrespect a country can show to another like killing its citizens. They have imprisoned very many Ugandans on flimsy reasons and they have no access to justice and the Government of Uganda is keeping quiet. They have even sent back the bodabodas; 4,000 of them have come back to Uganda. 

The Government of Uganda should be serious and take seriously the investment they made in South Sudan. There must be tangible interests in South Sudan, which the Government of Uganda must lead and hand over to the private sector after that investment is done. This is the way serious governments act, and this is the way Kenya has acted.Nobody is going to compete against them since it is the wise way to do things.

Look at the way our so-called traders are being organised; they go as individuals. Government is here looking on instead of going there in an organised manner. The ministry should be in position to organise these traders and go there in an organised manner. That is the way Ugandans can even be protected. (Member timed out_)

6.40
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee members for having done some good work. A lot more could have been done but maybe next time it will be accomplished. 

It is very disappointing to see that when you go outside Uganda, you will find that non-Ugandans know more about Uganda than we do; and then you come here and talk about tourism. 

I went on holiday to Brussels and I visited one of the museums. When they realised that I was from Uganda, they told me that it was here that the binary system started from, around Lake Albert. I was amused to note that we in Uganda even do not know that counting started around Lake Albert. It is in their museum.Here in Uganda, all we are talking about is marketing mountain gorillas, forests and lakes; we do not know that we have a very rich history and good geography and scenery. 

When you write half history in Uganda, it means people will doubt you. Who knows that Amin was a president here? I was in China and I visited the Great Wall, but many of these Members of Parliament have not been even to Kasubi Tombs. I went and saw the Mao Tse-tung Mausoleum.

It would be very interesting if we saw Amin’s Cape Town Villas developed as a tourist site. When you talk about Amin ruling Uganda for nine years, you go outside the country and they also write it in this book, the Lonely Planet, but a Ugandan does not want to know that Amin ruled Uganda, but that is what will bring tourists here.  If you go to Nkrumah’s place or Hitler’s Germany, even in Rwanda – when you visit Rwanda, you must go to the genocide site and you must pay. But here in Uganda, when you talk of tourism, people begin fighting for gorillas. I think that is not really fair. 

Another thing is our tourism access roads. I come from Kigezi subregion where we have three national parks, but most of the tourists who come from Europe land in Kigali because the roads are good up to Kisoro –(Member timed out_)

6.42
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for its report. 

On page 51, the committee rightly points out that you and the leadership from Busoga, under the Busoga Parliamentary Forum, have tried their best to promote tourism through the Busoga Tourism Expo. However, my prayer is that the minister in charge of tourism does not simply put it on paper. They should go ahead to champion and promote these tourist sites. 

There are a number of tourist sites in Busoga; apart from the Kagulu Hill, we have the Gorofa Hills in Bukooli Islands, we have the MatiaMulumba shrines in Mayuge and other places. These places can bring in a lot of money to help the economy.

Secondly, I would like to echo what my colleague from Oyam stated; crocodiles are finishing our people. I thank the committee for having pointed out that there is need for UWA to put up cages that will protect our people. Within a spell of one year, about 20 people have been killed by crocodiles. As my colleague pointed out, there is basically no compensation and in some cases, as Members of Parliament we are asked what we are doing to save our people. 
It is actually my humble prayer that the ministry comes out to see how best to compensate our people. 

I also thank the committee for having come out boldly to say that there is no need for the ministry to rent offices.We should move out and have ministries construct offices – (Interjection) – Okay, I will take it.

MR MILTON MUWUMA: Thank you, hon. Okeyoh, for yielding the Floor. Honourable members, I would like to inform you that two years ago we raised a red flag, saying that the Ministry of Agriculture should not shift and rent the so-called Legacy Towers. They went ahead and rented and it is of recent that they are again waking up to say they should go back to Entebbe, after losing a lot of money.

So, I want to inform you, honourable member, that we should stand firm and say the Ministry of Tourism should remain where it is and use this money to construct their offices.

MR OKEYOH: Finally, Madam Speaker, regarding the issue of gorillas that have moved to Rwanda, the committee did not actually bring out this issue – (Member timed out_)

6.46
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.Allow me to also thank the committee for the report. 

I stand to support the recommendation on the establishment of a policy on compensation of lives and destruction of property. My contribution is premised on the fact that I live in an area that borders Mburo National Park in Kiruhura District. Actually, Bakooki are very hard working people with very fertile soils but their efforts have been brought down by the hippos that destroy their food.

I would like to report to this House that 10 people have been killed by hippos within a distance of three kilometres from the lake. A number of farmlands have also been destroyed, including 10 acres of pineapples that I own. So my dear colleagues, the proposal to have a compensation policy is not enough. Although it is good, we should- (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give the House is that we are losing both wildlife and even animal husbandry. Most people who keep animals like Friesian cows graze them with wildlife. What has killed these animals is East Coast Fever caused by ticks. 

The diary industry has been picking up this disease at a high rate.This Government has been getting a lot of money but most people have lost their Friesian cows because they are contaminated by these wild animals.

I remember in the Eighth Parliament, around 2008, we confronted the minister for wildlife - I think it was the honourable minister Otafiire then – with this issue. We said, “let us give you money to fence off these national parks; start one by one so that it is very effective”, but you can imagine that none of the parks are fenced. 

People who are investing in the animal industry are losing and people are dying. What should we do? What did that money do? I think we need to get interested and know what we want and concentrate on it. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, hon. Mandera.

MR MANDERA: To add to that, there are some animals that have been killed as these hippos try to move in herds to access places where they can lick salt. Kiruhura benefits from Mburo National Park in terms of some revenue. It gets income from the park, but the benefits are nothing. Can we have a policy to perhaps gazette these areas to be considered as special areas- (Member timed out­_)

6.49
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, for the opportunity. I also want to thank the committee for the report presented. 

I will start right away and state my reservations. I want to comment on compensation of landowners within the protected areas, especially those with land titles. Kiryandongo District borders Murchison Falls and Karuma Game Reserve, among others. In my district, there were people who were evicted from Karuma Game Reserve. They used to live there and they held land titles but to date, they have never been compensated. 

The Government had promised to resettle them in government ranches within the district but up to now, these people have never been resettled and they have never been given any money. I requestthe ministry to take this recommendation of the committee and compensate those people or resettle them.

Madam Speaker, I also want to agree with the committee report on revenue sharing, which they point out on page 65 of the report.They state that the communities bordering the parks or those forestry reserves have continued to be very poor despite the very big natural resourcesnext to them. These local governments have either failed to manage these resources or they have failed to identify the viable enterprise that can actually increase on household incomes for the communities. The Government should,therefore, come out with guideline in order for these communities to benefit. 

These communities have only suffered loss of lives and are also losing their crops to these wild animals. An elephant can clear an acre of crops, which takes one month to plough, within a minute. (Member timed out_)

6.51
MRS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this very good report. I stand to support this committee because I believe that the tourism sector, which I want to make reference to, is one of those very important sectors following the agriculture sector, which is really very important.

This sector could give us an impetus as a country. However,I am concerned with the level of laxity in this ministry. I do not see the strength and the push with which they are moving, in terms of fronting their issues as a ministry, given the fact that it is a very important ministry that can help us realise the dream that we have as a country to move towards being a middle income economy.

I want to relate to one important aspect, which is the development or revamping of the Hotel Tourism and Training Institute. I think that many of us in this Parliament travel and sometimes we are shocked at the level of development and focus that other countries give to the tourism sector wherever we visit. When you come back home, however, you are welcomed with such disappointment when you go to our hotels and hospitality centres in this country.

Madam Speaker, that is why this institute is very important and today, I am just standing here to give support to this committee. I would love to see this institute become a reality, even tomorrow. They have here a budget of Shs 35 billion and I think if Government invested in this institute, we would be able to revamp the entire sector and the economy and create the jobs that we are talking about, together with the other sectors.

Madam Speaker, I would like to speak to the Government. We are focusing on infrastructure development in terms of roads and all the productive sectors that we are relating to. For me, this is a sector that can multiply its income more than what we can imagine. So, I would like to support this committee in that line- (Member timed out­_)

6.54
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. Before I came to Parliament, I used to teach and present papers and I want to talk about the London Eye and the Eiffel Tower. 

The London Eye fetches money for London; for some of you who have gone to London, you see that everyday people pay money. Why don’t we have a Kampala eye? We need it because when people come to Kampala, they should see Kampala. We can put a Kampala eye at that tower there so that one can rotate and see the whole of Kampala and you pay money per entry.

My second point, Madam Speaker, is that I was at the Eiffel Tower in Paris with hon. Jessica Alupo; the two of us. (Laughter) We paid 25 euros per person before we entered! I was told that the money that comes from the Eiffel Tower can run Uganda’s economy for a month or two. Why don’t we have at least one tower here where people can go in the evening?

Point No. 3, I was in Mbabane and I travelled on land from Mozambique up to Mbabane – (Interjection) – With my wife.(Laughter)I travelled on land from Maputo up to Mbabane via Lomasha and Manzini. The national park that is actually after Lomasha before you reach Manzini has got a variety of elephants but people are planting sugarcane there because the chief export of Swaziland is sugar. The national park is fenced. Why are we leaving people of Bunyaruguru in Lake Mburo to suffer with no food when elephants are eating our things and we cannot fence? Why don’t we fence it? 

Madam Speaker, let me go to Kuber. The other time I talked about Kuber, that our children are eating and it is coming into Uganda and the Uganda National Bureau of Standards is just there listening. I am very glad that my most treasured minister has come today, Madam Amelia Kyambadde. I am happy that I have seen you here today. 

Madam Speaker, I want the Minister for Trade and Industry to at least tell me how far they have gone with Kuber because today somebody came to tell me that they have been packing Kuber in Nakumatt here in boxes with some going to Busoga, Gulu and Western Uganda. Our children are getting finished because of –(Mrs Alum rose_) - I can allow. (Laughter)

MRS ALUM: Thank you so much, my colleague, for giving way and thank you, Rt. Hon. Speaker.The information I want to give is that with the Uganda National Bureau of Standards not working well, we have a serious problem in this country as far as health, fire and burning houses is concerned. 

The information that I would like to give is that a few days ago, I read that milk is being preserved with the preservative used for preserving dead bodies. This is not only done with milk but it is even going far beyond to sugar. In my constituency sometime back, they were even telling us that there were some very dirty things being added in sugar. 

Madam Speaker, these are very serious issues that the minister must tell us her next move as far this issue is concerned. I thank you, colleague.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, colleague, for that information. This is very wonderful information. I am telling you, for somebody to use formaldehyde that is used to preserve dead bodies in milk and milk is consumed by our own children, because it is only children who are taking this milk, there is a problem in this country.

Lastly but not least, let me go to tourism –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that these two sectors are very important but we have two other reports. I have seen the   people who want to speak but they will speak on education and the East African Community.

I now want now to invite the minister to respond. Do we start with trade or tourism?

6.58
THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, I would like to thank the chairperson of the sectoral Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry for presenting their report on the trade, industry and co-operatives ministerial policy statement for 2013/2014.  

I also wish to thank the committee and plenary for the opportunity to share in detail my ministry and its affiliate agencies’ progress in the last financial year, challenges encountered and the proposals to address these challenges.

I do acknowledge all the observations and recommendations on the various key issues identified in the report and pledge that necessary measures, where possible, will be made to incorporate them in government policy. I will comment on the few issues that have been raised by the members.

Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, allow me to comment on the following specific observations:

Someone talked about Public-Private Partnerships (PPP). This is a policy that was presented to the Ministry of Finance and it was presented to Cabinet.However, the chairperson requested the minister to amend some issues and so I think they will soon present it again. I cannot speak for it – (Ms Florence Namayanja rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, minister.

MRS KYAMBADDE: On Pre-export Verification of Conformity (PVoC) and public sensitisation, in the financial year 2013/2014, Government through UNBS participated in 30 radio talkshows and other TV shows but still that was not enough, I must admit.All these interventions were made but we need to make more serious interventions as far as PVoC is concerned in the media, both electronic and print.  

On the Anti-Counterfeit Bill, there is work in progress at the moment with the Ministry of Justice. The technical team have finalised their submission and we will present it to Parliament. We regret the fact that it has delayed.

On standards of quality of locally produced goods, let me start with the milk. We got information that there was formalin in the milk but apparently, it was in the milk that was being vended - what they call lose and raw milk. So, the Ministry of Agriculture would be in a better position to speak for that because they have taken measures, and I think they have controlled some of the vendors.

On the issue of One Village, One Product (OVOP), I would like to inform this august House that this project is there and we have covered 19 districts. I will mention a few of them because I have visited some of them. 

In Serere, there is a maize mill and I have been there myself. In Kamwenge, there is a beehive processing project. In Bukomansimbi, there is a maize mill. In Kalungu, there is a maizemill and I have been there. In Mpigi, there is a coffee huller. In Bushenyi, there is a beehive processor. In Nebbi and other areas - I would suggest that you deal with your district commercial officers because they are conversant with this programme and they are affiliated to our ministry. They will give you all the details. In fact, when I went to Serere, I found that the RDC – (Interruption).

MS AURU: Thank you for giving way. I rise on a procedural issue.We have been debating issues raised by the report of the committee and Members have raised issues and several questions. Now the honourable minister is giving us her own ministerial statement again. 

Is it in order for her to give us information, which we have not really asked for, instead of continuing to respond to questions that have been raised on the Floor of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please respond to issues raised.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Rt Hon. Speaker, I am actually responding to the issues that have been raised by Members. For example, PVoC and milk were raised by Madam Speaker. So, I am responding to the issues – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I thank the minister for giving way and, Madam Minister, you know that I respect you so much. Now you have talked about a maize mill or milk plant in Kalungu but I don’t know whether you are talking about Kalungu as a district or just Kalungu West as a constituency? I am saying this because the only one I know – let me even take the example of Kalungu West, which is my constituency, there is no maize mill there. It has only been proposed to be constructed in one of the parishes called Busoga. It is not there; maybe we go there tomorrow.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Thank you very much. Can you ask the District Commercial Officer of Masaka –(Interjections)– I have been there myself and I saw the village and the project was under JICA –(Interjections)– okay, I stand to be corrected – 

THE SPEAKER: What is the problem, honourable members? Okay, hon. Minister, Members are wondering how you got their issues and wrote them down before coming.

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to make a clarification on why we made a statement. Issues were raised in the report and as you saw there were recommendations that were made by the committee. So, we thought we should give a formal statement on those issues relating to the recommendations by the committee.

Now, of course, in the course of the discussion, fresh issues have been raised. I want to say that we have taken note of them. That is why the minister is responding to those specific ones. Otherwise, when you look at the statement, you realise that it is talking about issues that were raised in the report. The others that have come up, for example, the formal statement covers milk and others are being addressed in their own right. So, the statement is not irrelevant. The minister is not getting anything out of the blue; it emerges from the report. It was done for members to have a clear record. That is why issues like PVoC, which is very keen is being addressed in here; it is for members to have more information.

THE SPEAKER: You know, hon. Dr Mutende, it appears you had access to this report before it was presented.

DR MUTENDE: Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, a week ago, these reports were given to us. I also recall that the chairperson of the committee had started to read it only to realise the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry had not been represented on the frontbench on that day. Otherwise, the chairperson had presented almost half of the report.

The minister just took advantage of that. It is because the report had been given to us in the House officially and that is why he is making that statement. It is not that it was made out of the blue because the chairperson had already read part of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable minister, I think you just respond to the issues that were raised here in the plenary. You leave that one; they can keep it.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, it is Kalungu East – that is not your constituency. That is a constituency of hon. Vincent Ssempijja Bamulangaki.

THE SPEAKER: Please, don’t have a dialogue with the minister.

MRS KYAMBADDE: The other issue raised is related to cooperatives –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. You talked about district commercial officers. So, I would like to seek some clarification on whether there is a district commercial officer in every district. I am not aware of such an officer in Mitooma District. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please respond to the issues that were raised during the debate.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, we have district commercial officers in every district. Some are silent; some are non-performers –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the minister, on the district commercial officers, she is very right. Every district has a commercial officer. The responsibility of recruiting a district commercial officer lies with the district service commission. So, the problem of lack of a district commercial officer in Mitooma District should be with the chairperson otherwise, on that one, hon. Minister, you are right. (Laughter)

MRS KYAMBADDE: Another issue you talked about was cooperatives. Yes, we must admit that we have registered 800 cooperatives this year so far with most of them being multi-purpose and dealing in agriculture and other areas like animal husbandry.

Among other issues that were raised was the Soroti Fruit Factory –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Speaker, thank you and I am very sorry to have kept on begging for space. I would like to react to the information from the minister that 800 cooperatives have been registered in the year. I would like the minister to also inform us how many cooperatives have closed during the same period. 

I am raising this matter, Madam Speaker, because, for example, SACCOs are cooperatives and many SACCOOs have been formed in the last few years, but can the minister inform us how many of them are still functioning? But also, would the minister inform us the time when she will bring a law relating to SACCOs and the old law on poverty levels that has been on the table for more than 10 years now?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am rising on procedural issues though one of them has been mentioned by my colleague. We have cooperatives that were formed as far back as 1954/55 and there are those that you helped to form in 2013 yet the original ones are being killed like the Banyankolekweterana, Teso Cooperatives, Busoga Growers, North Bukedi, South Bukedi, Wamala, West Mengo, East Mengo, Akokoro - mention them, even those in Masaka where the  Vice President comes from.

So, Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is, will the cooperative people sit down and agree to form one for an activity; for example, in Bugisu, it will be an activity relating to coffee. But Government resolved that they wanted to form cooperatives starting from the top instead of the bottom. Those cooperatives collapsed. So, the procedural issue is: Is Government really competent to say they are interested in cooperatives yet - a live example I am going to give is the Bugisu Cooperative Union. We got it – it was under Government. They had killed it; we raised it from nothing in two years; we raised over Shs 2.5 billion. We paid debts. The farmers’ prices of coffee increased and the farmers were reactivated. Then Government came and took it over. When Government took it over it is now heavily indebted. The factory has collapsed. The farmers are suffering.

Now, Madam Minister, is it procedurally right that you are saying Government has an interest in cooperatives yet you are killing the existing ones?

MRS KYAMBADDE: Hon. Nandala, I would like to correct you in one way. I want you to think back: you are saying Government killed cooperatives but remember cooperatives had died and Government injected in Shs 3.5 billion. I was working in that office and I am fully aware about that- (Interjections)- yes. Bugisu Cooperative Union; Government injected in money some years ago - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want us to make the record clear. I grew up in cooperatives and that is why I am so passionate about them. Some of you have not known them - because that is how people survived. It is the only engine which will remove poverty in Uganda and that is why I am serious about it. - not these banks of yours, the microfinance and whatever or the SACCOS. They will not. Every cooperative society had a saving and credit. Every primary school in the village -So, Madam Speaker, Bugisu Cooperative Union, Government came in and took land - (Interjections) - 618 acres! Whoever has been to Mbale, as you are entering Mbale, at the railway line, on this side, you go slightly a bit - it is called Doko; each acre was taken for Shs 5 million and at that time they had bought land in Temangalo from the Prime Minister at Shs 25 million per acre and that came to Shs 3.15 billion. That is the money.

So, is the minister in order to come and say they gave Bugisu Cooperative Union money when they came to cheat them on their land in exchange for the money they paid at a lower price? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not have the facts about those occurrences, so I really cannot rule on that point of order. I do not have the facts of who had land and what was sold and so forth.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I beg to be given ample time to present a report to this august House on this CU and its activities for the last few years. I am not in a position today to debate on this CU because I am not equipped with that information.

On the issue of Soroti Fruit Processing Plant, UDC has already started working on this. There is water on the site; there is electricity. They are working on the road. They have been training farmers on the type of oranges they should grow because the types of oranges that are grown in Soroti are not fit for processing. The Koreans advised that we should grow another type so we are working with the Ministry of Agriculture on that and training is going on. We have had several sessions with the farmers. 

Another point that was raised here was about the silos: where are the silos? It all goes back to the budget. Madam Speaker, I am glad to note that we are all privy to the budget. We applied for Shs 2 billion for the silos but it was slashed. They told us there was no money for that although we had identified land for the silos. So, at the moment we are trying to see if people can go in under a private arrangement but we are waiting for permission from the Ministry of Finance because the private sector was saying that they could build under DOT or a PPP, and they hand over but that one we are waiting for Ministry of Finance –(Interruption) 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for yielding the Floor. Madam Speaker, two years ago, the Minister of Trade, then, came to this House. They were seeking clearance and permission of this Parliament to get money to put up regional silos, which permission was granted. They went ahead and advertised. They were to start with Iganga, Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Gulu and Mityana. This list was given and we approved it; even the advertisements were made. Were you advertising without money or what were you up to? So, can you put the request here hon. Minister because- 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know, maybe it is not your fault but what happened to the silos in Kyazanga? I think as a Government we built silos in Kyazanga; we had silos in Jinja. All these were Government silos. 

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, unfortunately all those silos were privatised and they are under the Ministry of Finance. They are more conversant with that matter. Maybe they will be in a better position to explain that matter. But they are no longer in the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

The other issue is South Sudan –(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for letting me seek this clarification. Hon. Minister you did say that work has begun at the Soroti Fruit Factory; and to the best of my recollection the money which we had voted for the factory was actually part of the money, which was moved in a supplementary. The last time I heard about money for Soroti Fruit Factory was another attempt to get back that money and put it to UDC. Now you are telling this House, hon. Minister, that electricity has been moved there. 

The last time I visited that site it had only a sign post and the sign post was of the other financial year where Shs10 billion had been voted and had been diverted. Is it that I do not know my geography so well? (Laughter) I really need you, hon. Minister, to help me. How did you even get this money because the last supplementary was just two or three months ago and that was the time you were seeking to replace this money?

Secondly, this is information I want to volunteer to you, owing to what I have seen in the committee report- the inability of our officers to negotiate. A week ago, I was in Arusha and ESAMI is running a very powerful programme under something called TRAPCA. They are training officers and it is something that has been recognised all over Africa that we are losing lots of money because of our inability to negotiate trade contracts and agreements. They have this running for the entire region- training officers, politicians, policy makers on trade negotiations. You might want, for the good of this country, to explore what ESAMI is doing under this TRAPCA programme.

Madam Speaker, they have written to us and I will be presenting this paper to you. They have written a concept paper if they could train our parliamentarians on this matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I met them sometime back and I also accepted to design various programmes not just for trade but to tailor-make some things for us.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I want to confirm that I was in Soroti two and a half weeks ago and I was with hon. Christine Aporu; we visited the site together with the RDC, chairman and all those leaders and we took photographs which I will be able to show you. There is water and I saw it; I saw the roads, I saw the electricity line but the transformer is being kept elsewhere because they thought it would be stolen and when I came back, I said that they should put up a sign post because there was no sign post.

I would like to continue onto another point. On the issue of South Sudan, the hon. Member intimated that why doesn’t Uganda go in South Sudan and establish bigger projects. Remember, our policy is privatisation 100 percent and when you look at Kenya some of these projects belong to Government. For example, like Kenya Commercial Bank, so Government goes in as Government but here most of the projects are private owned so that is why you find that private companies have not gone in a bigger capacity because they are capital intensive so that is the difference.

Another issue about South Sudan is about the mistreatment of Ugandans; fortunately, the Minister of Foreign Affairs was here yesterday to talk about it but as far as trade is concerned, we have drawn out an inventory on a list of people who had not been paid by the Government; at least we can handle that.

We went to South Sudan met the minister and the minister told us that they are also going to compile their list and form a committee. They have never formed that committee so what we were suggesting is that Government at least could issue loans to the Ugandan investors in South Sudan. But when we presented it to Finance, we have not got any clearance for them. We cannot submit the paper to cabinet because we have not had financial clearance from Finance, we are stuck. But as far as diplomatic issues are concerned, the minister explained and the minister of Internal Affairs has also got involved through the IGP on some of these issues.

Another point UIRI, the issue was how come UIRI is not informing the public about their activities. I must admit that that UIRI has not come out aggressively to inform the public about their activities but apparently they are doing a lot of things, they have a number of projects which I also know about. There is a project in Lira of Shea butter, there is a project in Nabusanke of fruit processing, they have invested in various projects but they need to give out information and I will ensure that they do that.

Another issue was COMESA; it was in the report about the money, when are we getting that amount of money which we are supposed to get. Still there is a process Ministry of Finance is waiting for confirmation from the East African Council of Ministers, it has gazetted this FTA arrangement so we are waiting for that.

Another point was –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, try to wind up.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Yes, there was an issue on the capacity of UNBS and recruitment. We had factored in their budget in the recent budget but it was also slashed so they cannot recruit because their budget was slashed by Shs 300 million. 

Basically those were the main issues.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I am just wondering whether it would be possible for you to meet as the Executive and identify the strategic areas that can get money for this economy. We are sleeping on tourism, we are sleeping on what - there are areas that can make money for us; I do not know.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much for that question and I want to seek further guidance. Given the importance of the Ministry of Trade and Industry and also that of tourism, and the revelations made by the minister in response about the limitation of funds but even most importantly on the policy that because we privatised, because we liberalised, our hands are tied. There are areas you cannot intervene. I would like to seek guidance from the Leader of Government Business if it is not possible at this point in time to bring us strategic policy review more so in the areas of liberalisation, the role of the state and privatisation.

I have been listening to all ministerial policy statements and reports from committees. In infrastructure committee, two weeks  we were dealing with a case where Uganda Railways is being revamp back to Pakwach and Kasese but the same people are sending off so when we revamp we have to go back to the private owners to buy the Government premises. So there is a disconnect, whereas some years ago privatisation and liberalisation was gospel truth - we are aware even America has reviewed.

Even on the issue of the Sudan intervention, Kenya is intervening as Government; KCB is a Government Bank but for us in Uganda UCB is no more so there is a very big area of policy review; we may be pushing ministers but as long as the policy is not corrected, I do not see us going very far.

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, I wanted to seek clarification from the minister who I respect highly. I find the argument that this important ministry is making here very unfulfilling, for me they are not convincing. I want to ask the minister whether she filed a policy of 100 percent liberalisation like she says. I am glad the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy read it. For me as a Member of Parliament, I would really like to hear those strategic interventions that the Ministry of Trade is doing to be able to nurture our local investors; to be able to change and create income for this country. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to add value to what the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy said that we be given an opportunity, as Parliament, to guide this ministry on what we feel is very strategic at this point in time because we feel this ministry is not delivering to Ugandans in terms of creating the necessary income that we need for the economy. That is what I wanted to raise. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think there was a final issue from Kyazanga. 

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the hon. Minister is that we talked about the silos - I come from Lwengo District where Kyazanga is located. Kyazanga has one of the best silos in this country catering for the entire south western region. Today, it is being operated by an individual. We would like to know from the minister - and it had been paid for by the taxpayer but there is an individual running it - whether it was sold and if it was sold, how much did the state realise or does it still belong to Government? 

THE SPEAKER: The point of oranges in Soroti?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I heard the minister state that the oranges grown in Teso are not the right type but I want clarification. I speak with some bit of authority because I am one of the citrus fruits growers in Teso and I have over 60,000 trees and people come from Kenya to buy from me. We have American Tangerine, Amulin, Washington and Valencia. These are four types. So, which one is the right type? We grow all these breeds of oranges. So, which one is the right type or are all the four which we grow in Teso the wrong type? I need clarification.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has failed to articulate the serious challenge of the ministry. This is a ministry which should generate revenue for this country through trade and industry but she is being defensive. Instead of lobbying Parliament and opening the eyes of Parliament to know where the gaps are, where we can re-inject resources and we can get output. So, he is really failing to give us the right information. 

Madam Speaker, the minister should have told us that over the years, it is through tourism that this country is getting a lot of foreign exchange. She should be able to tell us that she is convinced that actually through that sector, we can improve on the economy. We want to know whether when we killed the cooperative unions and the cooperative bank - how can we revamp that spirit of the farmers gathering together through an interest and giving a boost to the economy? Can the minister really come up with a convincing statement and not just try to defend where you feel you are being criticised?

The Parliament has a right to criticise the ministry where you have failed the country but we want you to tell us and convince us how we can help you because this is a productive sector. Instead of us spending money on State House or what not, we want to spend our money on tourism and industry. This is a business that we may want from you; we want to stop spending money on expenditure ministries and start spending money on your sector. So, please convince us and not just try to be defensive. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a point of great importance. Uganda is focusing towards the East African Community leave alone the East African Federation. How can we loom large without a policy to invest in the promotion of tourism, without an airline? Today, we hear Air Uganda, is it a private company? If it is not, does the Uganda Government have shares in that company? Secondly, the name, Air Uganda, is so painful in the minds of Ugandans and Africa as a continent that no private person can endeavour to own it. You tell us the truth. This is a serious point. 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. As we all know, the heart is actually the engine of the body. When it fails to pump blood to the rest of the body, automatically the body dies. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is actually the heartbeat of the economy especially for Uganda as we stand today and if we cannot revamp and make use of this ministry to create industries, to create jobs to develop this economy, then the economy automatically will die. 

What am I saying? I was itching to get up all this out because of the utterances the minister made to the effect that even silos had been privatised. Madam Speaker, that irked me. We are misusing the issue of privatisation. I think the architects of the policy of privatisation had good intentions for the country but unfortunately, we have selfish, greedy and corrupt individuals within the economy who are actually misusing this economy and slowly leading to its death. 

Madam Speaker, I beg the minister whom I love so much - I know she is a hardworking lady and she has always been transparent - to try and supervise these, I do not want to use the word, “crooks” but these elusive human beings within the economy who are actually robbing our economy of this development. [Hon. Member: “Vampires.”] Madam speaker, he reminded me of the word “vampires.” I actually pray that we limit the issue of this privatisation. If possible, we meet to look into issue of privatisation afresh such that we review it such that we only have certain specific sectors that we can privatise and not everything including silos, including our markets, including the robes, toilets; everything is being privatised. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Olivia Kwagala comes, hon. Minister, you know this is a very painful situation. Is it too late to get back what belongs to the people of Uganda? We have been compensating other people for some things. Can we pay them and get back our silos? I am just thinking aloud. 

MS OLIVIA KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am grateful that I have been given the honour to talk about trade because anyone who is compliant with their economics must look at trade. The minister I think should be given time to come and tell us our situation regarding the terms of trade and our balance of payment because that is what steers an economy. Trade is the backbone of an economy.

In line with that, the ministry of trade should tell us their focus regarding the investment policy. When I go to sugarcane licencing in Busoga Region, there is a conflict. We do not know whether the ministry is part of that problem or not. Many people have come in to set up industries and all claim to be licenced. So, we would like to know whether your ministry is in charge of promoting these mushrooming sugarcane industries –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: honourable members, we are now opening up new debate. We are going to tourism; hon. Minister, please conclude and we go to tourism. 

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. I will just comment on some of the issues you have raised, for example, the type of oranges; that is for the Ministry of Agriculture. They are the ones who have been carrying out joint training with Ministry of Trade. So they know the types. 

THE SPEAKER: honourable minister, when you were responding, you said that the oranges in Teso are not the right type. So they want to know the right type, which can be used for the purpose you said? That is the problem they are having.

MRS KYAMBADDE: I will ask my colleague to find out about that matter. The other issue is sugarcanes. This matter is being handled by the committee. That matter of the policy, whereby there was a provision that no project should be established within the radius of 25kms from one another. 

But apparently, a number of people have contested that because some of these projects were started before the policy was out. So it is still a very contentious issue, although we have received a directive that all these projects should be halted. It is now with the committee for review.

On the issue of cooperatives, on record, besides the new ones that have been established – and they have not been established by us, they are established by the people; for us we just issue licences. But in the past, there were about 12,000 cooperatives; and when we carried out a survey, we realised that only 7,000 were functional; and that is over a span of over 25 years or more. So they have been deteriorating with time due to poor management, interference by politicians – (Interjections) – whatever but those are some of the reasons why they were collapsing. By that time, we had about 7,000 that were fully functional; but now we have another 800 which we have registered. 

I want to clarify the issue of silos for Kyazanga; we have a privatisation unit under Ministry of Finance and I suggest the Ministry of Finance comes here and explain the silos: how they were privatised and who is managing them now – we have the Minister of Finance here, he will explain that. 

I want to explain the issue of privatisation. One honourable Member of Parliament asked why Uganda does not go into South Sudan as Government. I explained that Kenya goes there because it has got its own companies as a Government whereas here our policy is privatisation. But at the same time, I think our people are benefiting from that.  

On the issue of Kuber; my ministry and UNBS have been made aware of Kuber and I would like to inform the House that it is a scientific fact that Kuber falls under the category of drugs. And being a drug, therefore, it falls under the mandate of National Drug Authority. That is the organ that regulates its importation and consumption in the country.

Madam Speaker, I managed to get some information; could you let me read it out – 

THE SPEAKER: On Kuber; I think we had asked Government to come back to us on that thing which the children are drinking in schools.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I am the one who raised the issue of Kuber here. National Drug Authority has the mandate to scrutinise and test the drugs that come into the country. I told this Parliament that Kuber is a combination of Tobacco, which has got extensive amounts of nicotine that causes cancer of the lungs. 

Point two, it also contains Cannabidiol and delta Cannabidiol - which is marijuana! So there is no way National Drug Authority can start importing marijuana. This is under Ministry of Trade. The person who is trading in this substance is actually called Big Boss. Big Boss is a trading company here; not a pharmacy or drug shop, but a trading company which got a licence to trade. 

So, I want the Ministry of Trade to take it upon themselves and make it clear whether they want to accept marijuana to come into Uganda via Big Boss. 

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, as I had said, I carried out a bit of research on it, but I could ask the august House to prepare a paper on it and bring it to Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Didn’t we ask three ministries to work on that thing: the Ministry of Trade, Internal Affairs and Health. So Government Chief Whip, we are still expecting that report. We asked three ministries to look into that matter.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I would request this august House to support us as my honourable colleague – (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I want the Minister of Trade to wind up.

MRS KYAMBADDE: That our ministry is the cradle of our economy – so that you support us and we are facilitated because although we attempt in some activities like UDC, you find that most of them are underfunded. So I do welcome this august House to approve the budget for the Ministry and the affiliated agencies and also re-echo my commitment, as the minister, to utilise the available resources.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the Minister of Tourism. (Interjection) Honourable member, the matter you raised is not in her sector; you will ask the Minister of Works about Air Uganda. 

7.57
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Members for their concerns and points of interests. But before I proceed, Madam Speaker, I would like to apologise for not being in the House two weeks ago when the report was presented. I was in Zimbabwe and Zambia for the general meeting of the United Nations World Tourism Organisations – I think you have seen that one. And I had hoped that the minister of state would be around but unfortunately, as you all know now, that was the same day that her late sister fell very sick and she was unable to come. And you know what has happened – and we had to say farewell to the late this morning. 

Having said that, I thank you, Madam Speaker, and the honourable members of Parliament, especially the Chairperson of the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for presenting the report on the ministerial policy statement of 2013/2014 and the budget estimate for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. I wish to express my sincere appreciation to the entire committee for the useful engagement with us in addressing various issues raised during the ministry policy statement 2013/2014 discussion.

The committee has, rightly highlighted key achievement made by the Ministry during the financial year 2012/2013. I also want to concur with the observations – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the Members want you to address the issues raised in the plenary.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: That is what I am going to do – this is just a simple remark. Now, Madam Speaker, I want to make some few comments on the specific recommendations. 

One, on human and wildlife conflict – the Ministry has formulated a draft wildlife policy and it is now before cabinet for consideration and approval to effectively mitigate the human-wildlife conflict through a number of strategies, including: (1) Establishing and maintaining barriers along the wildlife protected areas. (2) Boundaries to protect the stray animals –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, when we were still in primary one, they would say “one times one” and you answer “one.” We do not look there. I imagine these ministers have their facts on their fingertips. But the minister is now coming here to read things, instead of telling us this and that. Do they have competences to lead these ministries? And are we procedurally right to proceed with ministers who cannot talk about their sectors without reading?

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister had written some notes; that is what she is looking at.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Interruption)

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Owing to the fact that Members have raised some concern on the question that the minister is just reading a statement, I have realised that – because I read through a statement and I have realised that the issues pertaining to tourism and those pertaining to settlement of the people of Benet in Kween District, have not been addressed. And that is why – 

THE SPEAKER: So what is the point of order? 

MR CHEMASWET: This is my point of order: Having realised that the minister is reading a statement which is not going to address the issues of the people of Kween, is she in order to proceed with such a statement? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, you are offending the rule against anticipation; you are not supposed to anticipate. So let her proceed.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not know that in Parliament, people can pirate on documents because these are my notes. However, if you do not want me to respond to this, I will circulate it and make sure that you get the points I wanted to raise on this one.

Now, I will go to the points that have been raised here in the plenary – because these are points raised in the report. But since Members do not want to hear them, I will respond to the points raised on the Floor.

One of the points that had been raised is that by hon. Kwizera - the rich cultures and history of Uganda that have not been exploited. Indeed, we must admit that we have not done much for a long time in the tourism sector but thank God it was made a full ministry. Now focus is more targeted and now we are looking at clusters in various regions, with support from some Members of Parliament, including the Speaker – the Busoga Initiative Cluster, the Kigezi Cluster, the Mountain of the Moon Cluster, the Bugisu Cluster, the Buganda Cluster and all that. We are now looking at the West Nile Cluster. So we are going to develop these clusters and I call upon every Member of Parliament – and it is a recommendation in the report that every Member of Parliament should encourage cultural tourism and school tourism so that we can get to know what is going on. (Laughter)

There was also a concern about the Amin mausoleum; indeed Amin was with us about 30 years ago and we had not taken advantage of that. And yet we go to Germany and visit the Hitler’s mausoleum. In Uganda, we are now going to start documenting the Amin trail. I have already written to the Minister of Security because the areas concerned in most cases are security areas. So, we have already communicated and we are waiting for the date when we shall move together to see, which particular places can be documented and put to the public use. And when I am ready, I will definitely come back to Parliament and invite you, especially the committee, to walk with us the journey of tourism.

There was a question from an honourable member from Busoga whose name I did not get, who talked about the sites in Busoga. I want to say that as of now, with the help of, Madam Speaker, so far 31 sites have been identified and of those I have personally visited 16. We are putting in our plan at least three sites including Kagulu, Source of the Nile and Bukaleeba forest reserve. So we are working on that, but we have also identified Bishop Hannington. I told you I have been to the ancestral home of the Rt Hon. Speaker and I have been to Mpumudde where the King of Bunyoro died. So all these sites are there and we intend to work on them.

There was a question from hon. Kahunde of Kiryadongo about compensation of people evicted from parks and also the narrow base of resources given to the neighbouring districts. If I may start with that, I think there was a mistake in the report where they quoted two percent. 

I want to assure Parliament, and you can cross check this, that we are giving 20 percent to the neighbouring community. Of course, this money goes to the district and it is the district that has been deciding how to use that money. At times the communities are not consulted but we are changing the rules and we believe that in our new guidelines, we should be able to guide the local communities on how to utilise that money.

On evicted people, we are looking at availability of resources. I am happy that hon. Members here have advocated and supported the need to finance the tourism sector by at least two percent. As I speak, it is 0.1 percent of the budget.

Hon. Amoding talked about fronting the ministry. We could not front the ministry because we did not have a master plan. The master plan expired about five years ago but I want to assure this House that we already have a draft master plan and I believe that before the end of this year, I should come back to this House so that we all share it and work together towards promoting and rejuvenating tourism.

There was concern about the Hotel Tourism and Training Institute in Jinja. Definitely a year ago, when I joined this ministry, I found it the way it is now but we have managed to work around with our development partners and with the Ministry of Finance and we believe that when we come to you here with a request to borrow money to make that place viable, I believe we are going to get overwhelming support.

Hon. Bitekyerezo talked about investment opportunities like the Kampala eye and Mbarara eye. In fact, there are so many opportunities in tourism and there are so many investors who want to come and invest in tourism but we are waiting for Parliament to give us the PPP policy because we do not have any other arrangement. Once that policy comes out, there are so many investors who are willing to come on board –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened to hon. Amelia when she was referring to a policy. I have also heard hon. Maria Mutagamba trying to insinuate that it is Parliament to make a policy for Government. Is she in order to create an extra responsibility on Parliament, which responsibility largely relies on Cabinet?

THE SPEAKER: I think what is here is the Bill but not the policy. The policy is yours, the Bill is ours.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much. Actually, it is a Bill and I think Cabinet has already passed the policy, so we are looking at the Bill and we believe that this Bill will definitely come here and Parliament will have to pass it. Once it is passed, it will become law and we shall know how to operate with the various investors. There are so many out there just waiting for the guidance of that law.

Regarding other areas that were raised, both in the statement and in your comments, I think they will come in a statement that I am about to give out. But there was a question from Ntoroko about a community that needed burial grounds. I want to say that in 2002, four square kilometres were given to the communities in Ntoroko as burial grounds and this land is gazetted for that purpose. That land is still there and if there is extra need then the communities, through the Member, can come to us and we look at the extra need but as of now, we have that land provided for.

Concerning crocodiles, they are eating people and as a ministry together with UWA, we have been capturing those that we have received information on, but at the moment, what we are planning, and we have started doing it in Kasese, is to create hedges so that people cannot be accessed by these crocodiles. Of course, it requires money if we are going to respond to all the areas concerned.

There was a comment from hon. Amoding about the need to front - as a minister, the best I can do is to present my request through a policy statement and to request Parliament to study it and make recommendations otherwise, collective responsibility requires that I conform to what is given.

I want to request Members of Parliament that we may provide money and we can even say 10 percent of the budget but if that money is given and we are not guided in the way we make statements, we are still going to lose out. Today there is a statement that came here and I am sure the people of the media are going to quote it. Maybe it was in the media before, regarding the use of that chemical. 

We may say it in passing maybe without even having done- If we get that kind of information and flash it on the internet, people will just cancel. This is a sensitive industry and we have got to guard the way we present ourselves. So if there is anything that is suspicious or worrying, let us know and let us find a way of managing the crisis rather than blowing it up and scaring off those who would be our tourists. Otherwise, there are people out there who are willing to take those who turn away from us. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank the ministers and the committee. I want to put the question that save for recurrent and development expenditure under Vote 015, Ministry of Trade and Industry; other than the recurrent and development expenditure Vote 110, Uganda Industrial Research Institute; other than recurrent and development expenditure under Vote 154, Uganda National Bureau of Standards; other than recurrent and development expenditure Vote 022, Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities; other than recurrent and development expenditure Vote 117, Uganda Tourism Board, I put the question that the rest of the report be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014 

8.14
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the need to proceed but this is a long report and education is a very important sector. I would appeal for your indulgence that we present the report tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you can summarise.

MR OPOLOT: It is true, Madam Speaker, that I could summarise but to be fair to the sector, I kindly beg that you allow us to present tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let East African Community present its report. Chairperson or vice chairperson, but they have a vice-chair. Are they not here?  

HON. MEMBERS: They have gone.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a Member on the Committee of East African Community Affairs and the chairperson has been here waiting to present after the report of Committee on Education and as I checked out, I realised she is not within the House and therefore we are also unable to present. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay honourable members, it seems – oh yes, there is something we wanted hon. Baba to tell us today.  

8.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Chair, you yesterday directed that I go back and look into our books to see if we can find some allocation for the female prison inmates. 

I did check with our technical team and the under-secretary for Vote 144 did confirm that actually in our ministry policy statement on page 158, there was a provision for sanitary towels for women prisoners but the money was not enough. 

I did communicate that Parliament has asked us to find more allocation and indeed they have managed to find some money for the 1,500 inmates – the average number of women inmates is about 1,500 yearly. So they multiply that by the requirements per year and some money to that equivalent of Shs 94 million has now been re-allocated to provide for that – (Applause) - and the accounting officer for Vote 144 has written formerly to the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs communicating this particular position. 

I have also shared this with the chairperson and I thought she would be around to confirm this but this is the position.  Yes, we have found some money in this budget equivalent to Shs 94 million to cater for 1,500 women inmates. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Chair on Human Rights and then commissioner.  

8.19
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the good report that he has been able to find some money. But I would like to find out from the minister whether this money is specifically for sanitary towels or whether it includes other toiletries because recently the committee visited Mbale and we found a woman, for example, who had no relative and was out of soap. She had no soap for about a month and it was the committee members who tried to raise money for soap for her. So is it possible that along with the sanitary towels, these ladies can get these basic necessities like soap? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, one minute, hon. Fox and then close.

8.20
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, mine is not related to the issue the minister has stated – 

THE SPEAKER: I think let us close it. Members are you okay? 

8.20
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): It is hon. Boona –

MR YAGUMA: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Boona.

MR YAGUMA: I wanted to thank –

MS BOONA: Hon. Boona is the woman behind you, hon. Yaguma. (Laughter)

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for what he has presented to us but I remember there was a concern about the babies of the women prisoners. I visited our prison in Mbarara and discovered that there was no special diet for these babies. It is not a fault of the baby that the mother is in prison but when the mother can no longer breast feed the baby, the baby is fed on posho and beans. 

May I request that, because it is not the fault of the baby that the mother is in prison, there should also be a provision for the diet of the babies who are in prison just by accident? I would like to bring this to the attention of the minister that the babies should be fed otherwise they suffer from malnutrition when they are in prisons. Thank you very much.  

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Members, it seems that we are happy that – hon. Baba Diri are you on the same issue?

MRS BABA DIRI:  clarification for one minute. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really thank the minister for that response and we are very happy. 

I would like to find out whether they involve women in these calculations because if you say towels for women, in a month, how many does she need and how long does it take? An average woman needs about five days. Are you sure that at the end of the day, they will not get finished before the year ends? Did you use some women MPS to make those calculations? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I think on this one we have made some progress as there was no provision and we now have a provision. We now task our committee to monitor and see whether it is effective and they can report to us in the next financial year to see whether it is working, because we need to have a beginning. For me, I am happy that money has been found and that the women can sleep and walk in dignity even if they are in prison. 

Now honourable members – okay hon. Okupa and hon. Odoi Oywelowo and we close.  

8.23
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did raise a question here about the citrus farmers in Teso and the minister failed to answer. I want you, Madam Speaker, to direct the Minister for Agriculture to come here and tell the people of Uganda and Teso the correct type of citrus fruit seedlings they should plant because there are those who can afford to buy theirs before the ministry supplies for free. 

We have been deceived several times on the same argument that we are growing a different type of citrus fruits. I have given here the four types of citrus oranges we grow but the minister has failed to identify or tell us the right one. So, please, let the Government tell the people of Teso the correct fruit, and if not - because we have been hearing that it is Britannia that is manipulating the Government to deny the people of Teso to continue bringing concentrates in this country.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately the Minister of State for Agriculture is here, she has heard. Please come back and tell us what are the right crops for the market, the right type of oranges for the market. Please come back to us and tell us what to do. 

The last one is hon. Odoi Oywelowo.

8.24
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine was sanitary towels. Every Ugandan has a constitutional right not to be subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment. Being in prison is in itself degrading enough. Now, if you subject a woman in prison to doing without sanitary towels, there is no quantum of torture that can be equated to that. I just wanted to underscore that this mistake must never again be repeated, and the government at times knows that we have female inmates and their needs must be catered for. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the last one – hon. Stephen Mukitale, you had a request for the wildlife.

8.25
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me raise this important concern to the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry. Members of Parliament including myself in the last financial year raised issues relating to the killing of our people by the rangers. In Buliisa, I have registered 12 deaths. I also heard other Members say that they have registered similar deaths on this Floor.

Mr Minister, your rangers and park wardens are making our work, as people who support tourism, very difficult when our people are killed while they go to searching for herbal medicine, Angara Fish and other small things.

We would want to hear from you because I have followed up this matter and I was told that as a ministry, you have no policy of shoot to kill. So, can we get the assurance from the minister that this is going to be communicated to your field rangers that our people are not going to be killed in the guise of fighting poachers? The people who are being killed by the crocodiles – 

THE SPEAKER: But now you are making – I thought you were just asking the minister to do something – a submission.

MR MUKITALE: Yes, my request is, can we get assurance from the minister that this inhuman-archaic policy of shoot to kill by rangers, 50 years of independence, will be stopped by the ministry. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I want to thank you for the work done. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock but I am also giving you notice that we shall sit the whole of Friday.

(The House rose at 8.27 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12 September at 10.00a.m.)
