Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Thursday, 12 September 2019

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Thank you for the work you have been doing in the last one week.

I would like to report that the arrangements for the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference are going on very well. We have a record registration so far and we look forward to receiving our guests starting 22 September. In order to bring the House on board, we have requested the chairperson of the organising committee, hon. Jalia Bintu, to bring a motion next Tuesday that we can discuss, so that it is owned by the House.

Secondly, I would like to alter the Order Paper to insert two items. One is a motion by hon. Mwesigye and the second is a petition by hon. Tom Aza. We shall create time for them; they will be called up at the appropriate time. 

In the public gallery, we have students and teachers of Kitgum P.7 School in Kitgum Municipality. They are represented by hon. Beatrice Anywar and hon. Margaret Lamwaka. They are welcome. I know that they are looking very smart up there. Welcome, young people. (Applause)

We also have students and teachers of Dr Ambrosoli Memorial Primary School, Agago North County, Agago. They are represented by the honourable Prof. Ogenga Latigo and hon. Akello Judith Franca. You are welcome. They look very smart in that colour. (Applause)

Honourable members, there are just a few other issues to communicate. The first is that there are Members who do not attend the House. There is a Member who attended poorly in the second and third sessions, without the leave from the Speaker, and in this session he has not come at all. Therefore, I have written to him and I would like to read that letter to you as required under rule 111 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda:

“Hon. Ishma Mafabi
Youth Representative, Eastern Region
Parliament of Uganda

Re: Warning letter for absence without leave

I have established from the records of attendance of Members of Parliament that you have not attended any sitting of the House this session. In the circumstances, I know that your continued absence from the House is in contravention of rule 111(6) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. It provides as follows: ‘Except with the permission of the Speaker, a Member shall not absent himself or herself from fifteen or more sittings of the House during any period when the House is continuously meeting.’

I am now constrained to invoke the powers of the Speaker under rule 111(7) of the Rules of Procedure. I hereby give you a warning for your continued absence from this House and accordingly require you to attend the House at the next sitting of Parliament. 

Should you fail to heed to this warning, I shall, in accordance with rule 111(8) of the Rules of Procedure, immediately refer the fact of your absence to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for consideration in accordance with the law.” 
It is signed by the Speaker.

Honourable members, there is another matter on which I would like to report. Sometime in May this year, my office received a complaint from women activists, led by hon. Anna Adeke Ebaju, the National Youth Member of Parliament. It was about allegations of sexual harassment by Ms Samantha Mwesigye, Senior State Attorney in the Directorate of Legal Advisory Services, against Mr Christopher Gashirabake, the former Director, Legal Advisory Services and now the Deputy Solicitor General. 

Upon receipt of the complaint, I held a meeting with the Prime Minister, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Attorney-General over the matter. I was informed that a committee had been set up in accordance with regulation 10 of the Employment (Sexual Harassment) Regulations, 2012 to investigate the matter. We, therefore, agreed that we wait for the committee to complete its investigations.

Accordingly, on 16 August 2019, I received a report of the committee on the investigation of the sexual harassment complaint by Ms Samantha Mwesigye against Mr Christopher Gashirabake, the Deputy Solicitor-General.

The committee carried out the investigation based on the following issues: Whether or not the respondent sexually harassed the complainant covertly or overtly in the following form: denying the complainant travel opportunities, removing the complainant from the contracts committee, sending the complainant love notes while assigning her work, ridiculing and embarrassing the complainant in the departmental meetings.

The committee, after the investigations, found that the allegation of sexual harassment had not been proved against Mr Gashirabake and, therefore, recommended that their findings be communicated to the parties involved. As a result of that, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has now established the following:

    1. Designated Ms Harriet Lwabi, Director of First Parliamentary Council, as the person in charge of sexual harassment complaints;

    2. The ministry has a standing sexual harassment committee established in accordance with regulation 10 of the Employment (Sexual Harassment) Regulations, 2012;
    3. This should be communicated to all members of staff in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; 

    4. The ministry should spread opportunities for travel abroad and membership on contracts committee, among others.

The long and short of it is that the complainant declined to appear before the committee and so, her side could not be heard. 

That is the position and I would like to ask commissioner – where are my commissioners? Commissioner Bahati, I would like you to lay this report from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs on the Table so that Members can access it and read it.

2.53
The minister of state for finance, planning and economic development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table a report on the investigation of sexual harassment complaints by Ms Samantha Mwesigye against Mr Christopher Gashirabake, the Solicitor-General, for the record of Parliament. I beg to lay.

The Speaker: There is another matter, which I would like to talk about. This is a petition from members of the Rice Business Sector Association Ltd who are complaining about discriminatory tax practices by Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). They told me that in 2014, when we amended the Value Addition Tax (VAT) Act, white milled rice imported to Uganda would attract VAT of 18 per cent effective 1 July 2019. A number of those importers took URA to court protesting the imposition of that tax under Civil Suit No. 88 of 2014 in the Commercial Court.

The companies are the following:

    1. Jan Muhammad Investment Limited;
    2. Jascom Trading Limited;
    3. Yosan General Trading Limited;
    4. SWT Tanners Limited;
    5. Sonex Impex Limited;
    6. Sunad Limited;
    7. Ama Trading Company Limited;
    8. General Agencies (U) Limited;
    9. Glory International Limited;
10. 	Williex Commodities Limited;
    11.  World Food Programme; and 
    12.  Zen Trading Limited.

Honourable members, these 14 companies are exempted from VAT. Anyone who is not exempted has to pay. They are enjoying an unfair advantage over other business people. What bothers me is this: I am told after they lost the case and they went on to appeal, they applied for a temporary injunction issued in 2014; this is now 2019, it is still temporary and it is still running. 

I want to ask the Attorney-General to examine that case and then come and tell us why a temporary injunction has lasted for almost six years. Because it is there, these people continue enjoying an advantage and other Ugandans have been thrown out of business because their products are more expensive than those who do not pay tax. Therefore, I would like to ask the Attorney-General to come to us on this issue. 

I have also asked one of the Members of Parliament to bring a formal motion here so that we can send the matter to the finance committee to examine and report to this House. Thank you. 

2.55
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On Tuesday at midnight, shops at Mutukula border caught fire –unfortunately, on the Ugandan side – but the nine districts of Masaka region do not have a firefighting truck. My people - the traders in Mutukula - were assisted by a firefighting truck from Bukoba, Tanzania, which is 80 kilometres away. It is very sad that people lost their property. In addition, there is no police patrol vehicle at the border town, which has over 20,000 people.

My prayers are that the Ministry of Internal Affairs and police should provide a patrol car at the border and a firefighting truck at least for the region. Unfortunately, there is also a parking yard for trucks at the border and there are more than 200 trucks stationed there. If this fire had reached those trucks, it would have been a very big tragedy at the border.

I appeal to the Ministry of Works and Transport to construct a yard for these trucks. When you go to Tanzania, their parking yard is deep inside their territory; they do not park near these houses. However, our trucks park around the border point and it is very congested. We are sitting on a time bomb. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe we had a debate on the issue of firefighting equipment in the country and we resolved to ask Government to address it. However, can I ask the Minister of Works and Transport and the Minister of Internal Affairs – They are not here. What do you say, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

2.58
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have taken note of that. I will communicate to the Leader of Government Business to make sure that we provide for a fire station in that region and a patrol vehicle to avoid further incidences.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Works and Transport come and explain to us what happened to the proposal to move the yard inland?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: The Minister of Works and Transport is attending the National Budget Conference; I will communicate. However, I think we have to sensitise the traders on insuring their businesses. Whenever, I hear of such incidences and people are crying, I think about insurance. As Government, we have a lot to do in sensitising business people to always make sure that they insure their businesses so that they can be compensated.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We shall expect a response from the Prime Minister on the provision of those services and then the Minister of Works and Transport on how to reorganise the park yard, if there are any plans. We give them a fortnight to respond.

2.59
MR ALI OGAMA (NRM, Lower Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance concerning the bad road networks in Madi-Okollo District. 

Madi-Okollo, particularly Rhino Camp Refugee Settlement, is home to 120,000 refugees, mostly from South Sudan. Currently, the number has increased by about 11,000. The major problem we are experiencing as the community is the pressure exerted on the road networks. 

The roads linking refugee camps to the various centres within the settlement areas were initially maintained under the district’s road fund. However, with the influx of refugees, most of these roads have not been able to contain the pressure exerted on them by the increase in traffic flow. As I speak, three subcounties have been disconnected from the main centres - Rigbo, Ewanga and Rhino Camp subcounties. 

There is a road linking Rigbo Subcounty to Rhino Camp Subcounty Health Centre IV, covering a distance of about 19 kilometres, but it has been completely washed away at Oyu Swamp. The link between Rhino Camp Health Centre IV and Arua District Regional Referral Hospital has also been completely destroyed. People are finding it hard to access medical facilities and this has equally affected the business community. As I speak, in the last two weeks we have lost six lives. A public transport vehicle attempted to cross the swamp area and it was swept away by the river. As it stands now, the three subcounties do not have access to either Arua Regional Referral Hospital or Rhino Camp sub district’s health centre IV.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Ministry of Works and Transport should listen and go back to my earlier plea. I had already pleaded with them to improve the box culverts within that very swamp area, which have now eventually been washed away.

Secondly, I request the Office of the Prime Minister to reconsider adding more funds to this area, especially those allocated to the refugee hosting communities, to help in the maintenance of the road stretching a distance of about 19 kilometres, with better box culverts.

The area stretching from Jonam in the south, Obongi in the north and Mt Wati in the west covers Lower Madi, Terego West, Terego East and Obongi constituencies. These are areas with refugee settlements and these places have become prone to flooding because there has been extensive deforestation due to the population pressure from the settlement of the refugees. 

We request the Office of the Prime Minister to reconsider adding more funds to the areas that have been affected, particularly the three subcounties I have mentioned. 

Lastly, we request the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), under the Ministry of Works and Transport, to consider taking up the maintenance of Oyu Swamp, stretching a distance of about two kilometres, since the district funds cannot maintain it. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I just have two things to comment on. First, the destruction of those roads has caused a violation of the economic and social rights of the people of that area. They cannot move, trade and go to health centres. It is a violation of their social and economic rights. Therefore, the Ministry of Works and Transport is directed to address the situation in lower Madi very quickly and report to this House next week on Thursday. 

As Government, I think we should stop pussyfooting. The United Nations (UN) should pay for the roads. They should give us additional money because we do not make the roads to carry those things. They give us food but the food has to pass somewhere. 

When we had the solidarity summit, this is one of the things I discussed with the Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) representative. I told them that they have to provide money to reforest and also make sure that we get extra money in those areas for the roads. These roads were not meant for those trucks. Therefore, I hope that the Government can take the courage to put pressure - We are nice but when we are very nice, we suffer. 

Honourable members, before hon. Ameede takes the Floor, join me in welcoming 30 delegates from the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). They are in the public gallery. They participated in the East African Community Military Games in Nairobi last August and they emerged winners. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. You are welcome. (Applause) They came with their medals and cups. Thank you for keeping our flag high. 

3.06
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Yesterday, I read with dismay in the media that Government is disassociating itself from a high-level inaugural public-private partnership conference, which is meant to address challenges in Africa. This conference is being organised by one Beatrice Florence Ikilai, who is a Ugandan known to Government because she was an official in Government. She is organising this conference under the auspices of the UN Economic Commission, where she is the current holder of the office covering the African region. She also holds this office as the first African. 

It is disappointing that whereas this conference’s advertisements have been going on for a long time and the conference is now due, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wrote to the President disassociating himself from this conference. 

The would-be benefits of this conference far much outweigh the negative publicity. My prayers are that:

1. 	Government should give maximum support to this individual to organise the conference. 

2. 	Another media publication should remove the negative publicity that was given to this conference, which is to be conducted.

3. 	Government should review its communication strategy with the public. Sometimes, we see public officers contradicting themselves and going as far as quarrelling in the media, which is uncalled for. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is important. I was invited to go and speak at that meeting but when I read this article, I asked myself whether the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda should go to that meeting. I do not know whether it is a fake or real meeting. I am now in quandary. I do not know whether I should go or not. 

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, it is true that the public-private partnership conference under the UN Economic Commission has been organised by this Ugandan. There were some issues at the beginning of the preparations but we have harmonised them. We are now moving together to give them the support that we can give. 

A few days ago, I personally signed some letters inviting a number of key players in the private sector to attend the conference. I think at this stage, Government is giving all the support that we can give, apart from financial support. 

Nevertheless, we will be attending the conference and interacting with the private sector. The importance of the private sector in developing our country is very crucial and where we get any support, whether private or Government, to develop our economy, we should welcome it. 

Madam Speaker, sometimes, the media reports in a number of ways. I did not read that article, so I do not know whether it is within the context in which we wrote the letter to the President. However, I can now encourage the private sector to attend and participate in this conference. Probably, with your permission, I will have a follow-up courtesy meeting with you, to brief you further about your participation in this conference. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you now confirm that the President of Uganda will attend that meeting? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, what I can confirm is that His Excellency the President of Uganda was invited to attend this conference. He even wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting us to give support to the organisation of this conference. Whether he will physically be there is something that I cannot confirm, but he is expected to be there. 

3.12
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance regarding the appointment of the Deputy Executive Secretary for Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation. 

This matter has come to this Parliament before, but I would like to give a background to it. This position was advertised, interviews were conducted and one lady called Mrs Nyeko emerged the winner. The minister even confirmed it in this House that this was the candidate who emerged the winner in the process. 

Along the way, there was certain influence peddling that took place. One of the candidates that came last in that interview, who happens to be a relative to one of the junior ministers in this House, ended up now, through certain manipulation – We brought this matter to the House here and the minister accepted and assured the House that this lady was going to be appointed to that position. 

When the House directed the minister to come and report here, the minister instead went ahead and appointed and appointed the man who came last. Madam Speaker, this kind of behaviour is unacceptable in a democratic society. First, it took a struggle for women in this country to realise gains but this takes such gains backward. If a lady beats men in an interview, it becomes very unfortunate for a minister to abuse his position and reverse the process when he actually assured this House – (Interjections) - I am talking about the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. He is the one responsible – (Interjections) - There is only one Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in this country.

Madam Speaker, I am in possession of the Hansard where the minister clearly confirmed that Ms Nyeko had come out the best candidate and the preferred choice for Uganda. We explained the circumstances.  The convention requires that where there is no consensus, then a majority decision can be used to arrive at a decision. In this case, Tanzania okayed the appointment of Ms Nyeko. It is only Kenya, for some reasons that are not clear, which did not. When you look at the letter which the Minister of Agriculture wrote to the secretary of that organisation, it is very clear that there were some discussions going on between the person in Kenya and Uganda, purposely trying to block the appointment of this lady to that position.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has defied all the logic in this country. He has defied the logic in the process and this very Parliament. He has also defied the very convention he purported to use to fill the position of the deputy secretary. Now, my prayer - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to state your prayers.   

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, my prayers are:
1. 	A relevant committee of this House inquiries into the activities or the conduct of the minister in the process of filling the position of Deputy Executive Secretary, Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation;

2. 	The appointment of Dr Anthony Taabu Munyaho, who came last in the interview process, be stayed until the committee reports to Parliament on their findings;

3. 	I pray that the minister shows cause as to why he should not be sent to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for contempt of Parliament. I so pray, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I will read the Hansard and those letters before I give my ruling on the way forward on Tuesday. Otherwise, in this country, it is very interesting; even people who do not attend interviews get appointed and the ones who passed are left out. It is very interesting. 

Honourable members, today is a very happy day for Uganda. We have just received a delegation of representatives of the Uganda secondary schools team. They have just come from Arusha victorious. They won the East African secondary schools sports games. Can you stand up. Congratulations! (Applause)  

Honourable members, in view of the happiness that we have, I am instructing that we should have two motions, one to celebrate the achievements of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and the other to celebrate the success of our children. We can debate them next week. Thank you and welcome back. (Applause)  

3.19
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a very important matter. 

Last week, a storm destroyed a school called Orisai Primary School. It is a Government-aided school in Kapir Subcounty. Last year, again, one of the classrooms and the church were broken down. I raised that matter with the Office of the Prime Minister. Unfortunately, nothing was done. That storm has now destroyed another building, making it two to date. Secondly, about 40 huts were actually brought down and six people were injured and they are admitted in Ongino Hospital in Kumi District. 

My prayers are: One, I appeal to the Office of the Prime Minister to come to the aid of our people; and two, I appeal to the Government to always be proactive when such matters come up. 

Secondly, yesterday night, one Samuel Opio was killed by unknown people. He was from Agirigiroi Subcounty in Ngora District. He was 23 years old. He was found dead this morning and we do not know why he was killed, but he was killed using a panga. My – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude. I wish you could go straight to the point. State the issue and prayers.

MR ABALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My prayer is that the Ministry of Internal Affairs comes and makes a statement telling us the circumstances under which Samuel Opio was killed. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Minister of Internal Affairs is required to come and explain the death of Samuel Opio. He should come back to us next Thursday. 

3.22
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Two months ago, Uganda Police Force carried out countrywide recruitment. The exercise ended very well. Each district was given a slot - a number of persons to be recruited. Mayuge District was given 62 slots. A total of 165 applicants qualified and they were listed and their names were taken by the interviewers to the headquarters. Unfortunately, when the list was released on Tuesday, we got surprised to learn that out of 62 names that came back to the district, only 24 applicants are from Mayuge District. The other 38 names are for people who we do not know. 

The requirements were that for any candidate to qualify, he or she should be recommended by the Local Council I (LC I) to LC III and the Gombolola Internal Security Officers (GISOs). When I did a background check with the GISOs, the District Internal Security Officer (DISO) and the District Police Commander (DPC), they also confessed that the 38 people are not from Mayuge. It seems what has happened in Mayuge District is happening everywhere in this country. (Applause)

These people are supposed to report tomorrow but my prayers are that the process of recruiting these officers into the Uganda Police Force should be halted. (Applause) The Minister of Internal Affairs should also come to this Parliament and explain the circumstances under which some of these individuals who do not come from those districts appear on the list for those districts. I will now take the information. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is not how we do it. You are given two minutes to raise your issue and make your prayers. 

Can I ask the Government Chief Whip to find the Minister of Internal Affairs or the minister of state to come here before we close. If they are going to start tomorrow, people who are not from those areas are going to take other people’s places. If she does not come back by the time we close, we will make a ruling on that issue. Thank you.

3.25
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a matter of urgent public importance. 

Even if Bududa is synonymous with natural calamities like landslides, this time round we have been hit hardest by hailstorms. A number of schools have been struck by these hailstorms. One of the hardest hit schools was Lunganga Primary School. All the roofs of the classrooms were blown off. It had a big store of books and they were all drenched in the heavy downpour. The destructive effects of these hailstorms did not spare farmers. They are now counting losses of crops and livestock. 

My prayer is to the line ministry, the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness. They have already received a needs-assessment report and schools are opening on Monday. We expected, among the relief items, at least some tents that would be improvised as classrooms as we wait for iron sheets and other materials to be dispatched.

The Ministry of Education and Sports set a precedent recently; they came up with an intervention in a similar disastrous incident in Wakiso. They committed some of the money in the Contingency Fund, which was allocated to the sector, to procuring some of the infrastructure that had been destroyed. This should not be selective. We expect that the same ministry should make a similar commitment in this case of Bududa where learning and teaching materials have been destroyed. 

Since schools are opening on Monday, this should be a matter that should be treated with lots of urgency.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Who do you want to intervene? The Ministry of Education and Sports or the Prime Minister?

MR NAMBESHE: Both the Office of the Prime Minister, where the line Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is, and Ministry of Education and Sports. They have some contingency funds in their allocation. These are used to intervene in such emergency cases. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Office of the Prime Minister is directed to urgently proceed to Bududa to arrest the situation there. I see the Minister of State for Education; bring the emergency money. (Laughter)

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As indeed we did for Wakiso - they reported and we sent the technical people for assessment. I expect my colleagues to give us the details so that we can urgently assess the situation and respond positively. 

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister should come and give us an update on this matter next week, taking into account the fact that schools are opening on Monday. 

3.30
MR ISAAC ETUUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Thursday, 1 August 2019, the colonial bridge at Ora, which was constructed in 1958, was swept by heavy floods. On 11 August, the district engineer for Madi-Okollo District wrote to the Ministry of Works and Transport and gave the technical report for urgent repair of the bridge. 

From the time this bridge broke down, all the service providers, particularly National Medical Stores and other service providers, could not cross. The situation worsened on 2 September when a P.2 pupil of Ocebu Primary School fell into the river as he was being rolled on a beam to be taken to Offaka Health Centre III. This made the situation very tense. The LC III Chairperson and district councillor were about to be lynched by the rowdy crowd. People attacked their homes and up to now, the situation is not good.

Since the situation was not good, I personally met the Minister of State for Works to explain to him the circumstances under which the bridge cannot be crossed. Since then, despite all the submissions, there has been no response from the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

On 3 September 2019, the home of the LC V Councillor for Offaka sub county was attacked by the rowdy crowd because of the death of the pupil. This made me write again to the works ministry and to the Office of the President to draw their attention to this situation. 

I pray that the Ministry of Works and Transport urgently carries out emergency repair of the bridge. This will cost about Shs 12 million. The district engineer has already given submissions to the Ministry of Works and Transport. I pray that the timber deck bridge is urgently repaired. 

I beg to lay on Table the photographs of the bridge and also a copy of the letter which I copied to the Ministry of Works and Transport. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Works and Transport is directed to address the issue of the two broken bridges in Upper Madi Constituency and report to this House next Thursday. 

Honourable members, on 29 August 2019, the Ministry of Education and Sports was supposed to come here and update us on the issue of the schools in Otuke. I think that is what the honourable member wanted to raise.

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was talking to my colleague and telling him that I am the one who came to this House and gave an answer. He was not around but I promise to give him a copy of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Give him a copy so that he knows what you said on that day. Thank you very much.

LAYING OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE VISIT TO ARUSHA FOR THE 18TH EDITION OF THE FEDERATION OF EAST AFRICA SECONDARY SCHOOLS SPORTS ASSOCIATIONS (FEASSSA) GAMES

3.34
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not the chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports but I was the chairperson of the delegation and I have been given the opportunity.

I beg to lay on the Table the report of a delegation to Arusha for the 18th edition of the Federation of the East Africa Secondary Schools Sports Associations Games under rule 33 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

With your permission, I would like to highlight a few areas. As a committee, we have been trying to review and revamp the sports subsector. The committee had started interactions with the relevant stakeholders and further engagements are still ongoing to consolidate athletics training programmes and the different sports disciplines in the education system. 

The sports subsector has prominently featured in the work of the committee. It is of great interest, given Uganda’s current participation in international sports tournaments at higher levels. As a committee –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: I thought you are supposed to give just the highlights of the meeting.

MS CHEKWEL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A delegation of the committee was constituted and it includes:

1. Hon. Lydia Chekwel – Leader of delegation 
2. Hon. Moses Kasibante – Member 
3. Hon. Joseph Sewungu – Member 
4. Hon. Robert Musoke – Member 
5. Hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho – Member 
6. Hon. Stephen Kisa – Member 
7. Emmanuel Opio – Secretary to the delegation

The committee was in Arusha from the 16th to the 24th of August, 2019, which was the period of the games. We had a total of 36 secondary schools from Uganda, both Government and private aided schools. The schools constituted 67 teams in the disciplines of soccer, basketball, volleyball, handball, netball, rugby, hockey, badminton, table tennis, athletics and swimming.

Madam Speaker, we reviewed the sports subsector and we recognise that schools are critical sports agents, therefore they need to be managed well to nurture talent in sports. Furthermore, studies have proved that quality physical education can positively contribute to cognitive thought processes and concentration levels, leading to improved academic achievement. 

School administrators must be encouraged to incorporate effective health-related physical education programmes in their timetables. The committee deems it necessary to establish an organic sports mechanism right from nursery up to university level, to embed sports at all levels of education.

The committee recommends that the laws and policies governing the sports subsector, schools education curriculum and early childhood development policies should be reviewed.

Madam Speaker, we looked at funding and the committee realised that there is inadequate support from the Ministry of Education and Sports. The committee recommends that the budgetary allocations for sports at various levels should be streamlined and restricted to address the various sports needs to avoid disadvantaging some sports disciplines. That came about because, as you will remember, last year we instructed Government to fund our football team, the Uganda Cranes, and Shs 10 billion was given directly to them. We are saying that as we give them money, we also need to look at all the other associations.

Madam Speaker, another important observation and recommendation of the committee was that National Council of Sports should be granted a vote status. We have talked about this but the implementation has delayed –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I understand that what you are reading is also in the motion which is going to be moved today. There is a motion and I am told what you are reading is what is also here and you are the mover of that motion. Just lay the report on the Table and you give us more details when moving the motion.

MS CHEKWEL: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. Since I am coming back for the motion, we shall discuss all the other recommendations. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We welcome the delegation of the Committee on Education and Sports back from the visit. 

Honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils and staff of King’s Kids Primary School in Soroti County. They are represented by hon. Esiangu and hon. Osegge. You are welcome. (Applause)

RESPONSE TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. ROBERT NTENDE ON THE STATUS OF PLEDGES BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF INDIA, H.E NARENDRA MODI, DURING HIS ADDRESS TO THE HOUSE ON 25 JULY 2018, NOTABLY BUILDING A CONFERENCE CENTRE IN JINJA IN MEMORY OF MAHATMA GANDHI AND CREDIT EXTENSION TO UGANDA TO ESTABLISH COTTAGE INDUSTRIES

THE SPEAKER: The minister is absent.

RESPONSE TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. FRANCA AKELLO ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF ROADS IN AGAGO DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is absent.

RESPONSE TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. HENRY MAKUMBI ON THE LOW PERFORMANCE OF LOANS FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK, EXIM BANK OF CHINA AND THE WORLD BANK

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, this very question appeared on the Order Paper a few weeks ago and I requested that it should be debated concurrently with the report on the performance of loans. We debated and adopted the report.

THE SPEAKER: Was the matter debated during the debate on the report?

MR BAHATI: Yes, it was debated. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it now coming again in this session?

MR BAHATI: Yes. Otherwise, it was part of the performance of the loans. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we have discussed a matter in a session, do not bring it back. Otherwise, we shall debate and say the same things. 

RESPONSE TO THE ISSUE RAISED ON THE FATE OF TEACHERS MISSING OUT ON SALARY DUE TO LACK OF NATIONAL IDENTITY CARDS

THE SPEAKER: Ministry of Public Service is absent.  

RESPONSE TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. SANTA ALUM ON THE INCURSION OF ELEPHANTS INTO OYAM DISTRICT AND THE SUBSEQUENT DISRUPTION OF LIVELIHOODS, DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY AND LOSS OF LIVES

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is absent.  

Honourable members, I had earlier ruled that we have the debate on our successes next week. However, since we have space on the Order Paper, I would like to move item No.7 up. Can I ask the mover and the seconders of the motion to organize themselves; hon. Chekwel, organize to move the motion on sports. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CONGRATULATE TEAM UGANDA AND MISSION UGANDA FOR THEIR OUTSTANDING PERFORMANCE DURING THE FEDERATION OF THE EAST AFRICA SECONDARY SCHOOLS SPORTS ASSOCIATIONS GAMES HELD IN ARUSHA-TANZANIA AND THE EAST AFRICA COMMUNITY MILITARY GAMES AND CULTURAL EVENTS HELD IN NAIROBI-KENYA RESPECTIVELY

3.44
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Objective XVII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, l995 mandates the State to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 8A of the Constitution provides for governance based on principles of national interest and common good in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy;

AWARE THAT in the fulfilment of the above objective, Uganda alongside five other countries including Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, Zanzibar and Malawi participated in the 18th Edition of the Federation of the East Africa Secondary Schools Sports Associations (FEASSSA) Games that took place in Arusha, Tanzania, from the 16th to the 27th of August 2019;

FURTHER AWARE THAT Uganda fielded participants in seven different sporting disciplines of football, netball, volleyball, basketball, handball, rugby and swimming;

COGNISANT OF THE FACT THAT Team Uganda, which has in the last l7 editions played second fiddle to Kenya, winning only one overall title in 2014 when the games were held in Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania, put up an outstanding performance, garnering 11 gold, nine silver and seven bronze medals, totalling to 27 medals and bringing home the overall tittle for this year’s FEASSSA Games;

NOTING THAT Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) team, codenamed ‘Mission Uganda’, participated in the East Africa Community Military Games and Cultural Events held under the theme, “One People, One Destiny Through Games and Cultural Events” that took place at Moi International Stadium in Nairobi, Kenya;

FURTHER NOTING THAT the military games that took place from the 11th to the 24th of August 2019 saw five other countries including Rwanda, Kenya, Tanzania, Burundi and South Sudan participate in different sports disciplines of basketball, netball, football, volleyball, athletics and cross country;

RECOGNIZING THE FACT THAT Mission Uganda emerged overall winners, securing two gold medals in netball and volleyball, three silver medals in basketball and athletics, and one bronze medal in athletics;

CONSIDERING THAT the outstanding performance by Team Uganda and Mission Uganda are a testimony of Uganda’s great talent coupled with relentless hard work, discipline, determination, and further serves as a motivation to many youngsters in the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that- 

1. 	Parliament of the Republic of Uganda collectively congratulates Team Uganda and Mission Uganda for the remarkable performance and achievements for Uganda in the Federation of the East Africa Secondary School Association Games in Arusha, Tanzania and the East Africa Community Military Games and Cultural Events in Nairobi, Kenya respectively.

2.	 Parliament of Uganda urges Government to increase the budgetary allocation to the sports sector and physical education under the Ministry of Education and Sports in order to boost sports in the country.

3. 	Parliament of Uganda urges Government to review laws and policies governing the sports sector, schools education curriculum and early childhood development. 

4. 	Parliament of Uganda urges Government to fast-track the completion of different sporting facilities around the country.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion Seconded)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by several Members. Can you justify.

MS CHEKWEL: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  As I mentioned, I was the leader of the delegation that went to attend the FEASSSA games. Just before the team was flagged off by His Excellency the President, while we were in Arusha the team asked us why we congratulate others and not recognise them. We told them to fight and bring us the overall trophy. When they brought the trophy, we said we could not let them down and so in that spirit, we have moved this motion.

The games are organised by a body called the Federation of the East Africa Secondary Schools Sports Associations (FEASSSA). This was the 18th edition of the games. They are held annually in August. Today, I would like to call upon Members to congratulate these teams.

Madam Speaker, I would like to pay tribute to the student teams, especially Team Uganda that represented us at the FEASSSA and Mission Uganda that represented us at the East African Community Military Games and Cultural Event. They both emerged overall title winners. We thank and congratulate you. (Applause) Continue flying our flag high. 

As I have told you, this year’s win was the second under FEASSSA sports. The other one was in 2014. However, all along, we have come second after Kenya. When we heard that this time we were No.1, we were so happy. As we were attending the FEASSSA games in Arusha, our UPDF team was in Nairobi and they gave us all those medals that I have mentioned. We have 27 medals for Team Uganda and 6 medals for Mission Uganda.

Madam Speaker, at this point, I would like to recognise the enormous contribution of Ministry of Education and Sports led by our ministers and the officials at the ministry, especially one official Madam Grace who was there with the team throughout the time. We had officials from Uganda secondary school associations with their students. We also had FEASSSA executive members, and we are delighted that the President of FEASSSA is from Uganda. We also had the school administrators. These games are co-hosted - the schools that participate also contribute a lot. I would like to thank them for the commitment and love for sports. We also had the games teachers who were not facilitated well, the coaches and all those that ensured that the competitions were successful. We thank you all. (Applause)

There is no doubt that games/sports greatly contributes to physical, social and intellectual development of youngsters as well as promote talent. It is also a tool that can be used to instil discipline and improve self-esteem among participants. We have also seen from previous victories that sports are a source of recognition to our country and bring us pride.

With all these enormous benefits, our sportsmen and sportswomen are usually faced with so many challenges. The FEASSSA games are no an exception. When you look at the budget for this financial year 2019/2020, only Shs 0.0519 billion was allocated to this activity, yet we had students together with officials - almost 1,000 people. The budget was supposed to be Shs 1.9 billion but Government gave only Shs 519 million; the difference was great. This means that Government partially supported the FEASSSA games; a lot of it was done by the participating schools.

To be more specific, Government gave $4 out of $7 required per participant per day for a period of 10 days, which was for feeding and accommodation. The participating schools catered for the balance of $3. The games teachers and coaches transported themselves to and fro. This implies that the talents of our Universal Secondary Education schools from upcountry are left out.

While there, we attended a symposium for the leadership of the participating teams to share experiences of how each country manages their activities under sports. It was alarming to note that it was only in Uganda where the schools contribute a lot. Our counterparts in Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda fully support these sports from their capitation grants. 

I urge Parliament to implore Government to fully support these games. They always take place in August. Even this little does not come in time. We were there towards the end but even the little money had not been released. It was good that the leadership of FEASSSA was from Uganda, so they covered us.
	
It was also noted that our participants exhibited signs of lack of adequate training and poor physical endurance during the games. This cannot be a surprise to us because our schools usually train when there are upcoming competitions and yet this should be a practice. The skills should be nurtured right from the time children enter school.

Further, teaching of basic sports through physical education at primary, secondary and teacher training levels, that is, the Primary Teachers Colleges (PTCs) and National Teachers Colleges (NTCs) has a budget of only Shs 102,000,000 against the required Shs 420 billion. Identification and development of talent should start at an early age - at least primary level - unfortunately, funding is minimal.
	
I urge Government to avail schools with equipment for training and sports materials such as nets and balls since physical education is one of the subjects that is taught in these schools as any other subject like maths, English, etcetera. We usually provide textbooks for those subjects; why don’t we provide the materials for sports?

The committee agreed that at least Government should fast-track the review of these laws and policies that we have talked about, like the Physical Education Act, because they would normalise certain things. We have been talking about the National Council of Sports Act which needs amendment. We have waited but we are not seeing any amendments. 

We also observed that there were a few primary schools that attended and under them, the first inaugural games for learners with disabilities were conducted. The view was that they hope to continue, but this was only for primary. When I tried to inquire with what happens with leaners living with disabilities in secondary schools, they said that because of budgetary issues and requirements, it becomes very difficult for the schools since they are funding all the preparations. So, I think as Government, we should really interest ourselves in this. After all, we are known for catering for the marginalised. 

Madam Speaker, I do not want to talk a lot since my members would also like to support the motion. In conclusion, however, “sports for all” is an ambition we pursue for the benefits it can bring in terms of national pride and inspiration. We need to develop sports and invest in sporting talents right from the grassroots, and ensure that our elite athletes and sports personalities get all the support they need to achieve success on the international stage. We, therefore, must invest more in our sporting sector.

You know I am from an area where all our runners come from. I would like to use this same opportunity to congratulate our son, Mr Joshua Cheptegei, for his recent win on 29 August 2019. He made us proud and laid a big mark stone as he prepares for the next challenge. I would like to use the same opportunity to call upon Government to fast-track the Teryet High Altitude Training Facility to facilitate these people. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I noticed that the mover has explained the matter well. Therefore, the seconders will get only three minutes each. 

Before I call up hon. Kasibante, however, there is a small matter which I had overlooked relating to the representation of the people. You may recall that a new district called Kalaki was created out of Kaberamaido. Hon. Goretti Ajilo has opted to remain in Kaberamaido. Therefore, the records of the House will continue reflecting her as a Member of Parliament. I now direct the Clerk to Parliament to notify the Electoral Commission of the vacancy in the newly created Kalaki District to facilitate general elections.

4.05
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Lydia Chekwel, for moving this timely motion to congratulate our two Ugandan teams for making us proud. As it was mentioned, I was privileged to be part of the group that went to Arusha to oversee team Uganda. Earlier, I had also been to Gulu when Uganda hosted the same tournament in 2017 and also in Rwanda when they hosted the same tournament last year in Musanze. I witnessed real talent that needs to be properly nurtured and developed for Uganda to shine even in world tournaments.

Madam Speaker, I have noticed three basic and important observations, which I think are worth noting here. First of all, in the FEASSSA games, private schools, at all times, have sent more participants than Government aided schools. Secondly, the only participating Government schools, as the centres of excellence and the typical USE schools, are almost seen nowhere in these games. Thirdly, almost in all the games, the same participating schools from Uganda represent us. 

Madam Speaker, I am mentioning this to first of all congratulate the individual participating schools from Uganda; and secondly, to give notice to Government that the fraction of the schools that participates is hardly one per cent and it is very worrying. The biggest fraction of our young learners in school is left out because of the factors I am going to briefly talk about.

Madam Speaker, we need to find an ultimate solution to developing, tapping and nurturing the talents of young learners while they are still at school. The curriculum of education in Uganda is designed with two basic components I would like to talk about. The first one is physical education and the other one is extracurricular activities. It is from these two that we must develop the talents of young learners and have healthy mature sportsmen and sportswomen that can compete favourably in various sports disciplines of the world. If we do not do that, we cannot have them. 

When you read our report, this component called physical education receives the least attention in terms of the sector’s budget. Just like Government budgets for textbooks, pencils and other instruction materials, it should as well budget for sports equipment, for example, balls, volleyball nets and et cetera. 

Just like Government tries to put up classroom blocks, it should consider putting in place sports facilities like pitches, courts, swimming pools, et cetera. These are the things that facilitate physical education and extracurricular activities in schools. 

A talent is like a seed. To grow into a good fruit, it has to be watered and fertilised. You also need some good soil for it. If it is not done, you cannot enjoy the fruit. Unless we pay the attention we need to, to develop and nurture young talent in schools, our pool of disciplined sportsmen and sportswomen in the country from where we can get people to represent us anywhere in the world will remain very limited. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to ask the Government to consider restructuring Government departments and separate education and sports, so that we are able to distinguish between physical education and extracurricular activities at schools and sports in the country. The education department should be left to cater for its component of extracurricular activities and physical education in a distinguishable manner, and the sports department should manage, develop and nurture talent and run on a specific budget.

We get confused when you ask the Minister of Education and Sports how she facilitated sports and she tells you a story of giving Shs 10 billion to the National Council of Sports that went to Uganda Cranes. Those are already developed talents. However, we have learners who we have to develop and nurture into a pool of talented sportsmen and sportswomen. If we do not this, the confusion will always remain.

I would like to conclude by specifically asking Government that the ministry of education should be separated from the ministry of sports. Facilitate sports and education without any confusion. Education caters for physical education. Physical education helps with developing talents. The extracurricular activities cater for games and sports. That is part of education and it can be catered for at that level. When you talk of sports and developing talents, we should maintain that pool from which we can always get representatives in various sports. That should be under the sports department, away from education.

I would like to conclude by congratulating the two teams. When I look at the UPDF - I never went to Nairobi, but the people who are here, please do us one good thing; while we have issues with the ranks of command of the UPDF, when you look at their representatives in sports, it is a reflection of the national character. If we borrow from sports, we can solve the issues of ranks of command in the UPDF. Thank you. I beg to second the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kasibante. I now invite hon. Stephen Kisa.

4.12
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka County South, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion to congratulate Team Uganda and Mission Uganda for the remarkable performance while in Arusha and Nairobi respectively. 

Madam Speaker, as you may have noted, I was part of the delegation on the oversight role while in Arusha. I observed so many things physically that need to be given special attention. When I looked at the young girls and boys from secondary schools participating in sports, I saw natural talents and skills that the Government of Uganda must tap into. I see Government looking for people to skill in the corridors, on the streets, etcetera, but in this case, these people have natural talents and skills. If Government invested in them very seriously, we could have people who are physically fit and a healthy nation.

Madam Speaker, there is a very serious issue. When you observe primary schools, you realise there is the element of physical education. However, it is not being taken seriously by the school administrations. In secondary schools, physical education is not there at all. Therefore, I would like to request Government, particularly the Ministry of Education and Sports, to ensure that physical education is compulsory in both primary and secondary schools, if we are to develop the sports sector.

My colleagues have talked about providing textbooks. When Government got interested in promoting science subjects in this country, they started providing science kits to all schools. I strongly support the idea that equally, Government should go ahead and provide all the necessary equipment in order to enhance physical education in our schools and the country as a whole.

Madam Speaker, while in Arusha, I noticed that special needs education is taken seriously by other countries. We had people from other countries with special needs and they participated and competed, yet Uganda did not field any. I would like to implore Government, particularly the sports sector, that this matter of including sports in the special needs education in our country’s curriculum should be taken seriously. The other schools participated and perhaps if this had been taken up and given special attention, we would have equally managed to bring another gold medal from the pupils and students with special needs.

Madam Speaker, when I look at the UPDF and their outstanding performance while in Nairobi, I feel very proud as a citizen. If they can freely interact - Kenya or Rwanda playing football together - this can help to reduce on the political and military tension in the region. The exchange of ideas through sports brings more brotherhood and concretises the thinking that it is one people, one destiny. I would like to congratulate you, the UPDF. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, when these students and other people bring gold medals to this country, it is also value-addition to our Uganda in terms of gold reserves, although the money given to the sports sector is a small drop in the ocean. It is based on this that I congratulate and thank the proprietors, head teachers and administrators of private schools in this country. (Applause) They fielded the highest number of candidates in the games compared to what Government schools fielded, meaning that Government must do a great job in enhancing and financing the sports sector in this country. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I now invite the honourable Brig. Takirwa. However, as he comes up, join me in welcoming pupils and staff from Lira Central Primary School. You are welcome. (Applause) They are represented by hon. Jimmy Akena and hon. Joy Atim Ongom. You are welcome and you look very smart.

4.18
BRIG. FRANCIS TAKIRWA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to support the motion as presented by the leader of the delegation. The issue of sports is slowly taking shape, only that the amount of support at leadership level is still slow. So, we need to promote it as leaders of this nation.

In reference to the previous speakers, we see that there is necessity to tap into the talent especially at the lower level, like what we saw with the secondary schools; it is better to start with primary level. Even in the UPDF, we can also start at the recruitment level. Due to lack of publicity, the UPDF did not have a team from Parliament to - (Laughter) – Yes, but there is hope that next time we shall have a better team.

Madam Speaker, the theme of the 12th Edition of the East African Community Military Games and Cultural Event was: “One people, one destiny through East African Community Military Games and Cultural Event.” This theme talks a lot about the togetherness that we should have as the East African Community. This because when the national anthem of Uganda was being played in Kenya, it showed that there was some victory on the part of brilliant players, same as what happened in Arusha. Therefore, I congratulate those great players who brought our country back on the map. In Nairobi, one of our sports pupils was from Kapchorwa. The President of Kenya graced the occasion and when he heard the name, he thought it was a Kenyan, only to find that it was a Ugandan who had scored.

When I talk about the conduct of the teams, Mission Uganda exhibited a high team spirit. There were cases of individual and exemplary team performance. There was total discipline and respect for the country, Uganda. 

There were some challenges as they performed because even before they started, there were some challenges related to venue.There was a shortage of space at Namboole Stadium because as the police department was practicing, there were other stakeholders.

That is a request that pushes us back to what hon. Kasibante had talked about regarding having more sports arenas so that we do not congest the main sports facility we have at national level.

Other challenges include the sports equipment and possibly sometimes the quality of the items that we have on the market is not the best. In the future, we may need to look at how the Government may interact with the manufacturers in having like a sports attire shop so that we can have the best items for our players.

In the short term, I pray that there should be an upgrade of some of the sports facilities that we have around, especially in my constituency; if we can have the upgrade of Bombo sports facility. 

We request that the Ministry of Education and Sports also considers players of Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) whenever there is any allocation of ministry sporting items so that they can also benefit from the service.

In conclusion, I support this motion for the resolution of Parliament to recognise and congratulate our gallant players from Team Uganda and Mission Uganda. May God bless you. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know this is a motion of happiness. I do not expect anybody to oppose so I will only allow four more contributions.

Let me invite the Shadow Minister of Education and Sports, the captain of the Parliamentary Football Team, Captain of the netball team and the runner, hon. Acon. Three minutes.

4.25
The Shadow Minister of Education and Sports (Mr Allan Ssewanyana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion by congratulating Team Uganda and Mission Uganda upon the various successes that they did get from the various tournaments they participated in around East Africa.

As we have been saying, sports are a very good engineer in promoting the name “Uganda” worldwide. This time around, we have been promoted around East Africa by the various successes got by the two teams that represented us.

We must not forget to thank the few people who have contributed so much in the development of sports through schools in this country. There are so many schools as mentioned by hon. Kasibante but there are few that have maintained success over the last few years on behalf of this country. 

He has mentioned that the same schools that succeeded in Gulu did so even in Rwanda and Arusha. There must be some commitment, which has been done by the various proprietors of some schools. They have invested so much in terms of finances and even commitment into these games to see to it that the country gains most with the talent.

After these people investing money, we do gain as a country. When you look at the lot of the Uganda Cranes that participated in the African Cup of Nations, 90 per cent of the talent comes from these schools. When you look at the netball team that participated in the World Cup, 90 per cent of the participants and the players have come from these various schools. When you look at the athletics team, almost 80 per cent have been nurtured and supported by the various schools that we are mentioning here.

Therefore, allow me to thank:
    1. the Director of St Mary’s Kitende, Dr Lawrence Mulindwa;
    2. the Director of Standard High School Zzana, Mr Justus Mugisha;
    3. Mr Muwonge, the proprietor of Buddo Secondary School; and
    4. Madam Nyago, the Director of Jinja Secondary School for promoting talents in this country especially from teen age to where they are now. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I will thank the minister later. There has been minimum participation by the Minister of Education and Sports in terms of support for these schools. That is why you find that most schools that have participated and succeeded in these games are private because the Government has not bothered to support their own schools in terms of development of sports and physical education. 

They take less time, commitment and financing so there is no way I can thank the minister for his – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude.

Mr ssewanyana: Okay, I am concluding. Madam Speaker, as an idea to the Minister of Education and Sports, I know that there are physical education teachers in most schools in Uganda but the way they are selected and their qualifications are lacking. We need professional people to teach sports in the Government schools. 

When you look at the technical teams that have been managing those schools we have mentioned, that participated very well, they are qualified coaches around this country. 

Therefore, the Government should adopt the same structure to see to it that we participate and win more and more medals and even give equal opportunity to the other Government schools.

Lastly, allow me to thank the military for their various contributions towards sports and inform you that the forces have been a formidable pillar in development of sports. When you look at the netball league, there is Police Netball Team and Maroons. In the national league, there is Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF), Simba and Maroons so that is a very good contribution.  Thank you, UPDF. (Applause)

4.31
Mr denis obua (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I rise to salute both Team Uganda and Mission Uganda for the triumphant victories both in Arusha and Nairobi for and on behalf of the people of Uganda. We salute you all. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, there is no doubt that when we talk about sports, Uganda is blessed and has talent in all aspects from nursery to primary, secondary, universities including this Parliament - we are the champions of East Africa.

However, Madam Speaker, I would like to highlight three challenges that we must address in order for us to move beyond the East African Community and go to continental level and go to Europe like other countries are doing.

The first challenge is the law. You cannot imagine that in 2019, sports generally in Uganda is being managed by a 1964 law - Obote I law; the National Council of Sports Act, 1964! Madam Speaker, there are a lot of dynamics. Sport is dynamic but this law is obsolete and archaic. It cannot stand the test of time.

I would like to give notice, Madam Speaker, that if by the end of December 2019, the Bill to repeal the National Council of Sports Act, 1964 is not introduced in Parliament, I will come to this Parliament to seek leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill to repeal the National Council of Sports Act, 1964.

Madam Speaker, the second issue is funding. Whereas we are saluting our young boys and ladies including the UPDF for excelling, for example, look at our Netball National Team which is ranked number six in the whole world - of all the five continents, Uganda National Netball Team is ranked number six! However, when we ask ourselves in terms of funding, how much have we put there, we will all look down.

Therefore, we need to put more resources - (Member timed out)

4.34
MS SUZAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion and to congratulate Team Uganda and Mission Uganda. I would like to start from where hon. Obua has just stopped. The issue of funding of sports teams here in Uganda is wanting. 

We are fond of praising people when they have done a good job but we do not invest in those people. If we invest in a team, we should invest in the welfare of these people who are participating and making us proud. Today, we are saying “congratulation Team Uganda” for these gold medals they have brought but when it comes to providing even the uniforms - Madam Speaker, even in this Parliament, sometime we have to buy our personal uniforms to represent this Parliament.

Therefore, this one should be looked into seriously so that we can get better fruits. Just like hon. Kasibante has alluded to, that you cannot harvest good fruits if you do not plant them and take good care of them.

Madam Speaker, hon. Obua had talked about the issue of the She Cranes; I was there to watch them. We have decided to politicise everything in this country. Indeed, we are operating under technical know who not technical knowhow. Many of our best players are left outside- we are not tapping the talent of this country. We have decided to concentrate on those people who have relatives who can bring them up to here. When it comes to congratulating them, we congratulate selectively.

This time I am standing to say that we have people who are working hard for this country but there are never recognised here. We do selective recognition.

Madam Speaker, as a Parliament and a national institution, we need to go down and look out for talents from each and every region. When you look at the national team- the Cranes, you will find that many of the people who are participating are within the central region- very few come from the other regions and yet we have many players who can do better in other regions.

I think we must diversify and tap talent from every part of this country. We are all capable and we can do it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Acon, the point raised by hon. Amero is important. Many times, I receive delegations of weight lifters, boxers, swimmers who have won medals and they come here to my office to claim from the Government that they were told that “if you win a silver medal, you get five million and if you get gold you get this”- they come me to claim. Honourable minister, you better streamline that thing. Please streamline it because all these are games and our people win. The flag of Uganda is there, whether you are weight lifting or Golola.

4.37
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I would like to thank Team Uganda. We are aware that we have such big talent in Uganda. As hon. Obua said from Parliament to nursery. For example, I would be so excited one time, for a competition to start with the Speakers of the whole Africa, you would be surprised to win Madam Speaker because we have such a talent.

Before, I speak; I would like to recognise one of the best teachers who picked me in 1990 after I ran 72 kilometers - Mr Christopher Mugisha. If you are there, please, I ask you to rise for people to see you - (Applause)

Madam Speaker, in 1990, I ran 72 kilometers from Otuke to Lira and I was only 12 years old. Because I wanted to achieve education, I wanted to win a medal for Uganda. When Christopher brought me to Makerere College School in 1994, I won a medal at the age of 17 while in senior four. The reason why I am saying this, there are so many talented children at the grassroots that cannot afford school. However, if you bring them to Kampala, they would win all these races.

Madam Speaker, we talk about employment, sports is one of the major things which are highly paying. When I set the record in 1996, it lasted for 22 years, I am being paid for life $5,000 a month. (Applause)

I am saying this because these kids are struggling in the villages because they need jobs. If we bring them to compete highly, they can get free jobs for themselves. Cheptegei is getting $70,000 a year. He is self-employed. Not all children that are competing can afford schools but if we gather none school participants, these children will get free payments for a lifetime. There is money in sports but we are missing all these chances for our kids. 

I would like to thank the UPDF, I think we had Longiross Benjamin, we ran with them, he ended up joining UPDF by then and I went to school because God has given us different talents- (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would like to urge the government –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: A half a minute to conclude.

MR ACON: Honourable members, let us involve our children in sports. We do not make money here, there is money in sports. This is one testimony. In 1996, a Kenyan man who was sick of diabetes was advised to run by the doctor. He went and won Berlin Marathon and won $200,000. He settled for life. Among us here, we might look like we are big but if we are advised well, we might end up winning a lot of money and you will not come back to Parliament.

4.42
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also support the motion. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the students and directors of Buddo Senior Secondary School, Standard High School, where I am an old boy, Jinja S.S and St Mary’s Kitende, for the good things they have done for the country.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Commander-in-Chief and the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF) for the outstanding work they have done for the UPDF. 

Madam Speaker, I have a team in my constituency called Buremba Senior Secondary School. It is a school from a hard-to-reach area and it was just eliminated by Standard High School in volleyball. It is a very fantastic team but specific issues make them fail; issues of syndicate.  

Madam Speaker, we have teams in our areas which can do wonders but when they reach here and they find Kitende, Jinja, they are normally edged out because of issues of syndicate. 

Therefore, I would like to urge these best schools to always encourage these young poor schools from upcountry to join you because we are developing the nation’s talent. Do not look at the talent of St Mary’s Kitende as if Buremba does not exist. One child from Buremba can put this nation on map. 

Madam Speaker, some members said that there are no sports in this country and Government schools are not performing. I can tell you that if you go around Kampala, schools which had playgrounds are no longer anywhere. Tell me how the children of this nation, in Kampala, for example, will do extracurricular activities! So, there is a problem. 

I only request Government that much as we are looking at funding, the playgrounds for public schools – (Member timed out.) 

4.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in thanking and congratulating the two teams -Team Uganda and Mission Uganda - on their respective wins. Thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, I am rising specifically in my capacity as the Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports. We have talked here and you emphasised that this is not an issue or subject where we expect somebody to oppose and so, I cannot be here to oppose it. 

However, I keep wondering whether as we speak like this, all of us, including the key people in decision making on sports, share the same mind-set. 

I am surprised that sometimes, as Parliament, we speak but the Minister of Education and Sports remains reluctant to provide resources for activities like this. For instance, the Federation of the East Africa Secondary Schools Sports Association games (FEASSSA) are every August but when the games are going on, the ministry claims there is no money. 

Around the same period, there was a team going to Morocco. A colleague had been confronted by one of the athletes who participated in Abu Dhabi last year and claimed that he was following up his reward or prize. That colleague came to me. When I tried to consult, I ended up reaching out to the Chairman of the National Council of Sports. Instead of listening to me on the issue I had called him over, the poor man was lamenting. He had a team going to Morocco that Friday afternoon but he had no money for them. Nonetheless, they had to go. 

Madam Speaker, I am saying this because I want us to emphasise sports because of its benefits. As Parliament, we should provide and ring fence funds for some of these activities. When we speak here, we are always in a celebratory mood but when they are down there, they suffer. 

My team that went to Arusha kept calling me. I had to call the ministry and the National Council of Sports and nobody was committed on anything and it looks very funny. These are institutions supposed to promote sports. 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to make an advanced request. As we consider the budget for the sector of education and sports, we should consider providing money for FEASSSA games and these other activities and we shall need to ring-fence them so that when the time for activities comes, we do not have protest letters again coming to you. 

Madam Speaker, if you remember, you received a letter protesting against our recommendations to the Budget Committee to reallocate some monies. If I could read for you the fourth item verbatim, it says: “While we appreciate that the funds have been reallocated within the sector, the rationale used to select the areas of increment is not clear. For instance, Shs 8.0 billion out of eleven has been earmarked for National Council of Sports. Why?” 

I got disturbed when I saw that question but I still insist that even for the financial year ahead of us, we should provide this money for sports. We will come to this House and request that you join us in ring-fencing money so that these people are facilitated to raise Uganda’s flag higher than it is today. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for supporting the motion. I hope that when that time comes, we still speak the same language in support of sports. 

For UPDF, I think that there should also be deliberate provision and ample allocation to support the sports. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we spent over one and half hours on this item. We have actually gone into the Prime Minister’s Time. So, I would like to put the question that the question be put.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do adopt the motion as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I now direct the Clerk to extract the tribute and the Hansard and send one to the Chief of Defence Forces - find out the number of schools which participated, extract the Hansard and distribute to each of the participating schools. Thank you very much. 

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Prime Minister wanted to answer one of the questions, which is on the Order Paper. Hence, we shall first receive his answers before we go to the Prime Minister’s time. I hope we shall still have the 45 minutes. 

4.51
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true there are four questions that have been around for quite a bit of time. With your permission, I will quickly respond to them. 

The first question was raised by hon. George Ouma, Member of Parliament for Bukhooli Islands on 25th July. The question is on the lack of a secondary school in Lolwe Islands, Namayingo District. The answer is as follows:

Namayingo District Local Government has five subcounties without Government-aided secondary schools. They are: Bugaana, Buhemba, Lolwe, Mutumba and Namayingo Town Council. After conducting a number of regional consultative clinics in September 2018, with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the district representatives, it was agreed that the construction of seed secondary schools would be phased given the lack of resources to construct all the schools at the same time.

Namayingo District Local Government chose Mutumba Subcounty to benefit first in phase one of the Inter-governmental Fiscal Transfer Programme, which will facilitate the construction of 232 secondary schools in different subcounties across the country. The first phase of the project will commence in the Financial Year 2021/2022 and Buhemba Subcounty is earmarked to benefit in this period.

Madam Speaker, it should be noted that Government is in advanced negotiations with World Bank for a separate project to cater for the subcounties, which will not be covered under the Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Programme. Subcounties like Lolwe will, therefore, benefit under the World Bank supported Government programme.

The second question is on the closure of some police posts as a cost cutting measure, which had led to increase in incidents of criminality. This was raised by hon. Henry Kibalya on 23 June 2019.

The response is that some police posts have been closed and others merged due to shortage of police personnel. The total number of units closed to date, were nine. Out of those, eight were merged with others at the subcounty level except Namaganda Police Post. The closed units were manned by a single policeman or policewoman. Operationally, it is very risky to deploy just one policeman or policewoman.

As the police undertake recruitment and subsequent training of more personnel, those units will be considered for reopening. 

Madam Speaker, the third question is on the exclusion from promotion of 300 Special Police Constables (cadets) recruited three years ago. This was raised by hon. Gilbert Olanya on 25 July 2019. The response is that the numbers affected are 127 not 300 as reported. Corrective measures are being taken once the officers are cleared of the following two issues:

    a) A total of 107 officers are under probe by the Inspector General of Government (IGG) with regard to their recruitment into the police force. As soon as the IGG clears or completes this investigation, decision will be taken over the matter and it will be closed.
    b)  A total of 20 officers, who were at the time of submission of the confirmation lists, undergoing various disciplinary charges, their cases are still ongoing and are due to be completed any time.

Madam Speaker, the fourth and last question, is the alleged closure of Babuyirana Abattoir in Mpondwe-Lhubiriha Town Council, Kasese District. This was raised by hon. Katusabe Atkins on 23 July 2019. 

The response is that the abattoir is not closed. There have been some disputes between operators of cattle markets namely Babuyirana and Alisum over the sale of cows. The issue of management of these markets is fuelled by different political interests. 

The Director General of Internal Security Organisation (DG ISO) sent a team to investigate the matter and recommended as follows:

    1. Cattle markets, which are held on Tuesday and Friday, be managed on weekly shifts; each of the warring factions will control both markets weekly and alternately. Both groups will be therefore, operational but they will be having a week interval. 

    2. The district security committee made resolutions in support of the recommendation by DG ISO, which is now operational. It will remain operational until harmonisation of normal market operations is agreed upon by all the stakeholders involved.

My final comment is that there has been a question to be answered by the Government on the visit and pledges by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of India. The answer will be coming before or latest Thursday next week. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall have some questions time. As it is our practice, those who were able to ask questions last week, stay put. Honourable members, if you asked questions last week, please, allow other colleagues to ask.

5.01
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Government through the Prime Minister for giving the youth council a motorcycle for every district youth leader. 

I am requesting the Prime Minister to use the same modality to provide a motorcycle for all the district women leaders because both interest groups are there to do mobilisation for us so that we know the unique issues about the youth and the women. 

I am wondering why we would take care of the youth mobility and ignore the important role a woman councillor plays in the rural area. 

I am asking the Prime Minister to assure us that that provision is in the budget. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is very good that my sister, hon. Cecila Ogwal has recognised the good work being done by Government to ensure that the youth are mobile and doing their work. 

The point about women is a very legitimate one and it is going to be positively considered by Government. (Applause)

5.03
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have received complaints from people who participated in the LCI elections as part of the electoral commission – those who assisted in the process of electing the LCI. They were supposed to receive certain payments. 

Unfortunately, I have received complaints from the Lira Paluo where over 60 of them were not paid. The question I am asking you is, why were they not paid and when is Government going to pay these people? Why were they singled out? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, anybody employed by Government to perform on a clear understanding or contractual obligation that they will be paid, will be paid. There may be some delay but if there was a contract with Government, they will be paid and Government is going to follow up the matter. 

I will appreciate getting the information you have to help us with processing and investigating the matter.

5.05
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there seems to be a misunderstanding in the administration of justice in this country. In the recent past, the Chief Justice has issued a directive to the effect that suspects who have been acquitted or granted bail should not be re-arrested in the precincts of court. Unfortunately, this practice seems to be continuing. 

I would like to seek clarification from you on the position of Government with regard to the re-arrest of suspects within the precincts of court. 

Unfortunately, in the recent past, the biggest victims have been Muslims, including yesterday. This is a very serious matter. What is the position of Government? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the position of Government is respect of the rule of law. If there has been any deferring practice along those lines, Government will follow it up and take the necessary corrective measures.

5.06
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometime back, Government created new sub counties. There are five new sub counties in Amuru. The interim elections were done by the electoral commission some three to four months ago. 

However, up to now, those sub counties are not operational. When we inquire, they are telling us that there are no funds to make those sub counties operational. I would like to find out from the Prime Minister, when shall Government avail the resources for those newly created sub counties to become operational?

THE SPEAKER: Wasn’t that question answered? That question has been on this Floor many times and it has been answered. 

5.07
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2015/2016, I raised a matter pertaining Hepatitis B in Kasese; that the problem of Hepatitis B was on the rise in Kasese. Government committed itself to getting to Kasese and addressing the issue. 

Unfortunately, as I speak right now, Government has never gone there and we are losing people nearly every week due to Hepatitis B disease. 

I would like to know from the Prime Minister whether it is your intention to see the people of Kasese die and yet you have the means to prevent it. We have informed Government and this Parliament knows. What is your motive? 

Secondly, why do you allow the people of Kasese to die as you watch? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the intention, purpose and aim of Government is not to lose life of anybody but to save life. To that commitment, Government means business. 

Secondly, there is no plan in Government to discriminate the people of Kasese or anywhere else in the country for that matter. 

The Ministry of Health is carrying out a very strong programme to cover different areas of the country that are particularly hit by Hepatitis B problems. If Kasese has not been tackled, it is just a question of time. Kasese is going to be reached. 

Let me also say that because of this pointed nature of brother Nzoghu’s question, I will discuss this matter with the minister responsible and I will share my response with you so that you can go back and tell the people of Kasese that Government is not discriminating them. 

5.09
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, now and then people have been complaining about the issue of Kariba weeds on lakes and rivers; Lake Kyoga, Lake Victoria and River Nile. 

These weeds have covered the lakes and the rivers and as a result, it has suffocated fish. Fish cannot thrive and people along the rivers, especially people in Dufile and Laropi Sub Counties, in Madi Sub-Region cannot enjoy fish because of the effect of these weeds. 

When will the Government have a deliberate effort in trying to get rid of these weeds that have covered our lakes and rivers? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That matter has been on this Floor and it was answered by the agriculture ministry. Please do not repeat the same things because the answers are the same. 

5.12
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you because you give every person a chance; we should always accept your wise ruling. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, one-and-a-half years back, the President called the former MPs, I think from the Sixth Parliament downwards, awarded them medals. He also pledged to give those senior leaders at least a pay of Shs 100 million –(Interjection) - yes, it was even in New Vision newspaper. I came with the then MP for West Budama County and our MP - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Waluswaka, what you are saying is not factually correct. Actually, the President asked the Parliamentary Commission to design alternatives to present to him. So, you wait for the Parliamentary Commission to handle it. Hon. Baba Diri, you asked last week. Please, sit down.

5.13
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, in 2017 I raised a matter of national importance appreciating the Government’s efforts towards rural electrification, majorly to eastern Uganda. However, I also told the Prime Minister that during the presidential campaigns, my beloved President pledged that Umeme would put up a service centre in Busia to help the people of Busia, Namayingo and Bugiri districts due to the long distances they travel to go to Mbale and Tororo service centres. 

Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, you directed the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to direct Umeme to put up a service centre to help the people. I am happy that I received the letter that you wrote to the Minister of State for Energy, hon. Simon D’Ujanga, in 2017, directing him to direct Umeme to put up a service centre, which letter he never replied. 

In 2018, I again wrote a letter –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you take a lot of time. Just ask what you want to ask.

MR MACHO: My question is that I have received two letters in which the Prime Minister has directed the minister in charge of energy to direct Umeme to put up a service centre in Busia and the minister has not replied any though I have kept on talking about that matter on the Floor of Parliament. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I do not know whether the minister does not think that you have power and authority in this country. When should the people of Busia, Bugiri and Namayingo expect Umeme service centre to be put in place in Busia?

The last question –

THE SPEAKER: No, ask one question. Let the Prime Minister answer. Don’t smuggle. Oh, you are from the border! (Laughter)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, my question is that President Museveni and President Uhuru just signed a trade agreement recently –

THE SPEAKER: Are you smuggling another question?

MR MACHO: With you permission, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, please. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, next week I will call a meeting involving the honourable member, Ndugu D’Ujanga and myself and this matter, which has been on for the last couple of years, will be brought to an end.

5.16
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE: (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister why the dairy farmers are being harassed by the dairy processers by setting up collection centres in the rural areas while undermining the cooperatives, which the Government has put money in by supplying coolers in those areas. 

The dairy farmers are requesting Government to discourage these processers from setting up the collection centres and out-competing the cooperatives through which the farmers collect their milk and supply to processers.

THE SPEAKER: There was no question there. (Laughter) This is question time but you are submitting. 

5.18
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka County South, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Government policy is to extend electricity to all areas of Uganda and drive the economy to the middle income status.

Since February 2019, people who applied to be connected by Umeme have never been connected. In some areas, they have even gone ahead to clear people’s plantations, promising to connect them but nothing has happened up to now.

Should we take it that Umeme has failed Ugandans and cannot deliver us to the middle income status or Ugandans should concentrate on solar energy? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I definitely encourage Ugandans to take advantage of the renewable solar energy, which is ultimately cheaper. Secondly, if Umeme is not as efficient as it is expected to be, the Government is going to take up this matter and ensure that it meets its obligations to the people and consumers of Uganda.

5.20
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Marach County East, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, after 34 years Uganda Airlines is finally in the sky. I have realised that this Government is rediscovering that they need to reinstate cooperatives and reinstate Uganda Commercial Bank. 

Mr Prime Minister, the way we are going back to do the things that the previous governments had already started, don’t you think this Government owes an apology to Ugandans for having mismanaged the assets of this country? (Applause)

DR RUGUNDA: Well, my colleague is raising quite an interesting issue. It nevertheless shows that this Government is really more efficiently running things and that is why Uganda Airlines has been revived so that it can meet the challenge of today in terms of making Uganda a big hub: promoting tourism, commerce and others.

On the question of Uganda Commercial Bank –(Interjection) - and a number of other institutions, we will not go back to renegotiate but on the contrary we are moving forward. I must say a number of privatised banks have done quite well and Government has not abandoned the area. Government is there. There is Post Bank and a number of other arms like Uganda Development Bank. Let the private sector and Government compete and serve the economic and financial interest of the people of Uganda.

5.22
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kikube): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government procured tractors and His Excellency commissioned those tractors. The districts were directed to identify groups and submit lists to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, which they did in March.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have waited for those tractors. I would like to ask: Where are the tractors and when are you distributing them to farmers in Uganda?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I know that some tractors were bought by the Government and I know that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries is responsible for that. Therefore, I will ask the ministry to come and give this august House some more information on how they are being distributed and utilised.

5.24
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, cases of health complications continue to rise in this country. 

We are aware in this country, any person can walk to any drug shop and buy any kind of drug or medicine without - there are many drug shops that are being housed in structures that do not fit to be used for that purpose. I would like to ask: Is the Government concerned about this situation? Is there any plan that we have on these many cases of health complications?  Otherwise, people buy antibiotics and all sorts of drugs without prescriptions. Is the Government concerned about this situation? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter. It is true there is need for tighter control on drug outlets. Actually, National Drug Authority has already a campaign going on to ensure that those that are not licensed to be handling different types of drugs are dealt with in accordance with the law.

It is also true that antibiotics should be sold only when there is a prescription. So, tighter control is necessary and steps are being taken to ensure that, that is the case.

5.26
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, I am a son of a teacher, and I have been getting many calls from teachers in my area that there is an ongoing well intentioned programme to validate teachers across the country and the exercise is being conducted at Kyambogo University. However, there is only one office in the country handling this matter –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Pacuto asked a similar question last week. So sit. 

MR ABIGABA: Madam Speaker, there is only one office handling this matter in the whole country at Kyambogo University.

There is a lot of outcry from teachers due to congestion. Actually, I have been told that last week, there was an incident where someone collapsed and died. I am therefore, wondering whether Government can decentralise this exercise so that the teachers can get the comfort of being validated from their respective regions. That is the question I would like to ask the Prime Minister.

THE SPEAKER: I think the question should have been: Does the Government intend to decentralise?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, on that amplified question, I would like to say that the whole essence is to ensure that the teachers get services as conveniently as possible. We are going to look at this matter with a view to ensure that the service being provided at Kyambogo is convenient to the teachers.

The issue of decentralisation will be looked at. I expected it to be a short programme, which should have been handled better than it has been reported. However, let us follow it up with a view to ensure that if there are bottlenecks, they are removed.

5.28
MR HENRY MAKUMBI (NRM, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the biggest town I have in my constituency, which is the headquarters for that constituency, is Busujju Town Council.

This town council has a population of approximately 50,000 but it is being served by only one health centre II. This health centre serves even the neighbours from Wakiso, Namayumba and those from Mityana North Constituency since it is located along the Kampala-Hoima Highway.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have written several letters since last financial year to the ministry to make sure that this health centre is upgraded to health centre III to serve these Ugandans. However, nothing is forthcoming. Even this financial year, I am not certain. I have written letters but I am not yet certain whether that health centre II is going to be upgraded to a health centre III.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are the chief executor of the budget   and my great friend; why don’t you at this juncture direct the Ministry of Health to put Busujju Town Council Health Centre II on the list of those health centres that are supposed to be upgraded to health centre III this financial year? 

THE SPEAKER: The question would have been: Does the Government intend to upgrade Busujju Health Centre II to health centre III? 

MR MAKUMBI: That is true: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why don’t you answer that question? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the question has been very well understood. The Ministry of Health has criteria that it uses for upgrading heath centres. I am sure applying those criteria, Busujju Health Centre II will be accordingly considered.

5.30
MR RICHARD OTHIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Ugandans are anxious to have the oil out of the grounds. This anxiety is now spreading to the regions. May I know when the Government is doing to resolve the standoff between Tullow Oil, Total and China National Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC), which has also sucked our Uganda Revenue Authority and how Government is managing this standoff to ensure that it does not affect our excellent regional relationships? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is an important point in the public domain. Government is pursuing this matter with the companies concerned with the view of getting oil as quickly as possible without compromising the interests of this country.

5.31
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2017 and this year, in Kanungu, respectively we were seriously hit by thunderstorm and hailstorm and in the three sub counties of Rugyeyo, Rutenga and Kinaaba your office was informed, letters were written but there was no response.

In Kinaaba that thunderstorm killed four people in one family; a mother and three children of 16, 9 and 4 years.

In Rutenga Sub County it hit four people who were coming from the garden. Those respective sub counties wrote to your office but nothing has ever come out.

I do not know where it is the style in your office that some areas can be responded to immediately while they do not mind others. I would like to know because those people are not happy. They hear that you always respond very fast in other places, thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is not Government policy to discriminate the people of Kanungu. It is true that there was a time when the country had a lot of problems of this nature and the department responsible was overwhelmed without adequate resources. 

We will need to do more investigation on this particular case to see what was done or what could be done at a later stage. We will get more information from you and look at the correspondence that you sent to our office.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have used the Prime Minister’s Time and it is over-

MS BETTY AOL: I have to respond to some of the issues, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Two minutes.

5.33
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometimes issue which have been asked come back because they have not been acted upon; like what hon. Olanya and others raised here they came but we still asked the Prime Minister about them. I do not know how we are going to treat issues which keep coming. 

However, what plan does Government have for uplifting slums to much habitable levels in Kampala city and Uganda at large? 

Madam Speaker, sometimes you should also give consideration to the Leader of the Opposition. I should not be pleading but be given ample time just like the Prime Minister, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We should amend the Rules of Procedure and set your time so that it is not for debate. Take it to the rules committee. Honourable members, we have concluded that part but earlier I had amended the Order Paper to introduce two items. Let me invite hon. Aza to lay the petition. You read the subject and the prayers.

PETITION FROM MOYO DISTRICT OVER THE IRREGULARITIES AND UNDER ALLOCATION OF MOYO DISTRICT ANNUAL BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

5.35
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am here to present a petition under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

The humble petition of Moyo District Council presented on their behalf by hon. Alero Tom Aza MP West Moyo Constituency; Sweareth and states that: Your humble petitioners are members of the Moyo District Council who are dissatisfied over the budget cuts and under allocation of the Moyo District annual budget for financial year 2019/2020 by the Parliament of Uganda.

Your humble petitioners aver on the 26th June 2019 under council minute 49/2018/19 the Moyo District Council approved the district annual work plan and budget estimates to the tune of Shs 35,419,612,000. The district council followed all stages of the national budget process as mandated-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are not supposed to go into the merits of the petition. Go to the prayers.

MR ALERO: Okay. The petitioners pray that Parliament urges the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to urgently consider Moyo District Local Government for supplementary allocation for the year 2019/2020 under Article 156(2) of the Constitution; and your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever prayer and hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the petition is sent to the committee on finance for perusal and report back.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE VETERINARY DRUGS AND FEEDS BILL, 2019”

5.38
COL FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, pursuant to rules 55, 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament as attached hereto.

The motion seeks leave of Parliament to introduce a private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Veterinary Drugs and Feeds Bill” moved under rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament:

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS article 94 of the Constitution and Rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament recognise the right of a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AWARE that the state is directed under Objective XI (ii) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of the State Policy enshrined in the constitution of the Republic of Uganda, to stimulate agricultural development by adopting appropriate policies and enactment of enabling legislation;

FURTHER AWARE that the Government of Uganda through Vision2040 aspires to address the strategic bottlenecks constraining socio-economic development; particularly underdevelopment of agricultural sector by increasing agricultural productivity by ensuring the national development of agricultural inputs and implements;

ACKNOWLEDGING THAT National Drug Policy and Authority Act CAP 206 in its current form is largely focused on the regulation of human drug management and fundamentally void of veterinary aspects such as regulation of veterinary medical products, devices that management of veterinary drugs are not well articulated and catered for in the legislation.

FURTHER ACKNOWLEDGING that the placement and fusion of administration of animal drugs with human drugs under the National Drug Authority with the overseer being Ministry of Health does not only deprive the animal husbandry of the expertise and skilled personnel they required but also created gaps in the coordination with other Government ministries and agencies concerned and the general welfare of the animal husbandry and trade;

CONCERNED THAT the current veterinary drugs regulation framework in Uganda where administration of both human and animal drugs is fused together under one competent authority is not in compliance with the World Organisation for Animal Health and Food and Agricultural Organisation’s (FAO) recommendations, which emphasise that veterinary regulation and legislation should be normative and be drafted in a manner that prevents ambiguity in interpretation;

CONSCIOUS THAT according to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, livestock forms an integral part of the agricultural sector and that agricultural production is the mainstay of Uganda’s economy, contributing 49 per cent of the total export earnings, employing about 65 per cent of the total population of Uganda and contributes livelihoods of many farming households in Uganda with the livestock sector alone contributing five per cent of the National GDP and 18 per cent of the agricultural GDP;

RECOGNISING THAT although the National Medical Stores was established to procure and distribute drugs and other health logistics for Government health facilities across the country, the veterinary supplies have been left unattended to and without proper storage and distribution system, leaving the animals and poultry sub-sector under exploitation by private dealers;

CONCERNED that the lack of adequate administration, coordination and control mechanisms for animal drugs and feeds coupled with market liberalisation in Uganda have led to access into Uganda of substandard and low quality animal drugs and feeds, and that livestock and poultry farmers are getting low productivity owing to inadequate enforcement, regulation, monitoring and supervision of the manufacture, importation, sale and distribution of animal feeds and drugs;

ACKNOWLEDGING THAT this has accordingly resulted into unregulated importation and unguided distribution, sale, use and disposal of veterinary medicinal products and devices, which have accumulated into ineffective and unsafe veterinary medicinal products and devices on the market, development of tick resistance to arcaricides, development of resistance to antibiotics in animals, farmers incurring unnecessary expenses in ineffective fake veterinary medicinal products and devices and inadequate essential veterinary medicinal products and devices on the markets such as animal anaesthesia;

ACKNOWLEDGING FURTHER that poor quality and counterfeit animal feeds and drugs are highly detrimental to health condition of human, animals and the environment at large, and also threaten the competitiveness of animals and poultry products from Uganda on the international market;

CONVINCED that for effective development of the animal industry, there is need to properly organise the veterinary drug management and regulation in Uganda not only for purposes of public health but also for promoting animals production, productivity and welfare through establishment of a separate competent authority under the Directorate of Animal Resources in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;

FURTHER CONVINCED THAT in order for Uganda’s livestock and products to compete on the international market, there is need to harmonise animal feeds and drugs safety control regulations, guidelines and procedures through strengthening the role and power of Veterinary Medicine Department in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to meet international obligations;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved that: 
This House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled, “The Veterinary Drugs and Feeds Act,” a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” 

The motion is moved by Col (Rtd). Fred Mwesigye, Member of Parliament for Nyabushozi County. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by both sides of the House. What is the justification, honourable member?

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will be very brief. My justification emanates from the gaps in the existing law. The current Veterinary Drug Regulation Framework in Uganda, where the administration of both human and animal drugs is fused together under one competent authority is not in compliance with the World Health Organisation and FAO’s recommendations, which emphasise that veterinary regulation and administration, should be normative and be drafted in a manner that prevents ambiguity in interpretation.

Madam Speaker, the National Drug Authority today concentrates on human drugs and leaves out the veterinary drugs to the liberalised market, which has resulted into the untold suffering of our farmers. Their cows are dying. You have witnessed many articles in our newspapers where fake drugs are being sold in the market undetected and uncontrolled. This is a naked evidence for everybody to see. 

Therefore, that is what necessitated me to move this motion to seek the leave of Parliament to proceed with the Private Member’s Bill. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to know who your seconders are. I do not have my paper here. Who is seconding your motion?

COL (RTD). MWESIGYE: The seconders are hon. John Baptist Lokii, who is in Moroto and hon. Jackson Kafuuzi, the Member of Parliament of Kyaka County South. 

5.49
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a livestock keeper, I know first-hand the difficulty we have been having in accessing veterinary drugs. We can only get them from unofficial traders. While every month, National Medical Stores is obliged to deliver medicines to the health centres, it does not deliver any medicine for livestock to any of our centres in the cattle corridor. 

So, basically, we have been left to fend for ourselves. It is on that basis I support this motion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the issue of drug supplies, availability and quality has been on this Floor many times. So, I think we can debate the merits when the Bill comes but now, I would like to put the question that the motion be adopted so that the member can bring the Bill for the first reading. So, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the motion be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is another motion, which has been sitting on the Order Paper for sometimes. Today, the honourable member complained to me. It is very short. I would like to invite hon. Lanyero to quickly move her motion before we go back to the other items.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO EXTEND THE DISTRICT QUOTA POLICY FOR AWARD OF THE GOVERNMENT SCHOLARSHIPS TO OTHER LOWER INSTITUTIONS OF LEARNING

5.41
MS MOLLY LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to extend the district quota policy for award of Government scholarship to other lower institutions of learning moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

 “WHEREAS this august House passed a resolution for Government scholarship to universities to be awarded on the basis of the district quota system;

AND WHEREAS this policy was adopted and is currently in use for student scholarships to universities;

AWARE THAT Government scholarships extend beyond university education to other tertiary institutions including technical colleges, nurses training institutions, primary teachers’ colleges, national teachers’ colleges and agricultural training institutions among others;

FURTHER AWARE THAT Government does not apply the district quota system in allocation of places for Government scholarships in these tertiary institutions;

NOTING THAT a vast majority of needy students branch off to these institutions for lack of money to pursue higher education;

Now, therefore, be it resolved by Parliament that;

    1. The Ministry of Education and Sports and all other responsible Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies begin applying the criteria of district quota for admission on government scholarships to these tertiary institutions with effect from the- “

Madam Speaker, this motion has been overtaken by time and I beg to amend the time to be from the next academic year 2020/2021. 
“
    2. That the Ministry of Education and Sports provides updates to this House on the status of Government scholarships on an annual basis including but not limited to laying on Table, the list of students on Government scholarships in all institutions of higher learning and other tertiary institutions.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I did not read your motion before I came here but after listening to you, it may be in danger of offending Article 93 because we are calling on Government to increase the expenditure of the tertiary institutions. Unless we -

MS LANYERO: Madam speaker, it is not increasing Government expenditure but it is just the selection quota system that should be taken down to the districts such that it is not centrally done; so that the students from the upcountry benefit from the selection.

THE SPEAKER: Is it not done from the districts?

MS LANYERO: Madam Speaker, the quota system of Government sponsorship is for the universities only and not for the tertiary institutions.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is where the problem is because you are calling on Government to spend more and add more money for tertiary institutions as well.

MS LANYERO: No, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: How will you get the students?

MS LANYERO:  Madam Speaker, the money remains the same. This motion only urges Government to extend the criteria of selection not to be centralised but instead be taken down to the districts under a decentralised system. However, the budget remains the same.

THE SPEAKER:  Can I study it further because I am not sure?

MS LANYERO: Most obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us study it further. We can come back to it next week.

MS LANYERO: Most obliged.
 
THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

5.57
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Speaker, the motion was moved by Dr Chris Baryomunsi and we are ready for the report from the committee.

5.57
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Kafeero): Madam Speaker, this is a report on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018.

Madam Speaker, before I proceed, I beg to lay the original report with a minority report duly signed as required by our rules and also the minutes of the committee meetings that processes the Bill. I beg to lay on the Table.

“The Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018” was read for the first time on 5 February, 20l9 and referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for scrutiny and report back in consonance with Rule 128 of our Rules of Procedure. 

Madam Speaker, the committee considered the Bill and hereby reports. 

As the background to this Bill, currently physical planning is regulated by the Physical Planning Act of 2010 which repealed and replaced the Town and Country Planning Act Cap 246.  The Act provides for: the establishment, composition and functions of the National Physical Planning Board; establishment of the district and urban physical planning committees; to provide for the making and approval of physical development plans and for the applications for development permission; and for related matters.

Although the Physical Planning Act, 2010 is a relatively new legislation, the law has failed to meet the desired objective of ensuring orderliness and sustainable development, as many rural and urban areas continue to experience a myriad of challenges including: haphazard developments, slum settlements, congestion and overcrowding, environmental pollution, imbalanced special development countrywide and disasters such as collapsing buildings. This has necessitated the amendment of the law to strengthen the institutional and operative framework for physical planning to facilitate effective implementation and enforcement.

Madam Speaker, the objects of the Bill are provided as listed from (a)-(f) in our part iii. Part iv talks about the defects in the existing law. 

In part v, the Bill seeks to:

    a) Prescribe clear functions of the Board to address the overlaps in the current functions.
    b) Prescribe powers of the Board to enable it to enforce its decisions and ensure implementation.
    c) Establish the Secretariat of the Board.
    d) Provide for effective public participation in physical planning matters.
    e) Provide for the requirement for all local Governments to prepare and implement physical development plans; and
    f) Provide for rewards and sanctions for developers, landowners and other key players in physical planning and urban development with a view to improving physical development plan implementation.

As our methodology, the committee met with and elicited views from a number of stakeholders as listed from (i) up to (xiii). We also received written submissions from the listed stakeholders.

Part vii of our report confirms that the Bill is in compliance with human rights and Sustainable Development Goals.
Observations and Recommendations

Establishment of the National Physical Planning Board

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 4 of the principal Act to clarify on the establishment of the Board as a body corporate and specifically seeks to:

    i)  prescribe the proportion of female representation on the Board;
    ii) remove the requirement for technical specifications as criteria for appointing members of the Board;
    iii) Remove the position of the vice Chairperson of the Board and provide for remuneration of the Board members.

While the committee concurs with some of the proposals, it notes that the composition of the Board is not specified in the Bill and has accordingly been left to the determination of the minister by a statutory instrument.
 
The current composition of Board members as stipulated under Physical Planning Regulations, 2011 (Regulation 4) is inadequate since some of the key physical planning professionals such as physical planners and engineers are not represented on the Board. 

Currently, the Board is comprised as follows:

    a) the Director of Physical Planning
    b) a representative from the Ministry responsible for Local Government
    c) a representative from the Ministry responsible for Works and Transport
    d) a representative from the National Environment Management Authority
    e) two representatives from the private sector
    f) a representative from the Association of Architects
    g) a representative from the Association of Surveyors and
    h) a representative of the academia.

The committee observes that physical planning is a technical field that requires competent and qualified members of the Board. Accordingly, the membership and composition of the Board should be specified in the Bill to ensure that only qualified persons are appointed to the Board.

In addition, the Board should have representation of all the relevant professionals including engineers and physical planners to advise the Board on technical matters.

The committee further notes that the National Planning Authority (NPA) whose core function is to –

The speaker: Honourable chairperson, are you reading everything?

Mr kafeero: Madam Speaker, I would love to present an executive summary but being an amendment, it may not flow. I am, therefore, constrained to read.

The committee further notes that the National Planning Authority (NPA) whose core function is to produce comprehensive and integrated development plans for the country is not represented on the Board. This omission has culminated into uncoordinated physical and economic planning characterised by imbalanced development, proliferation of slums and informal settlements, congestion and pollution among others. 

Representation of NPA on the Board is, therefore, necessary to ensure that physical planning programmes are adequately integrated with the national development objectives for optimum resource allocation and utilisation.

The committee recommends that the NPA should be represented on the Board to ensure integrated national development planning for harmonious and sustainable development of the country.

Clause 3(6) provides that the Board may be paid remuneration or allowances approved by the minister in consultation with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Public Service. 

The committee observes that given the tall duty bestowed on the Board of coordinating all physical planning activities in the country, remuneration of Board members should be made mandatory and not left to the discretion of the minister. 

In addition, the approval process for remuneration of Board members is shrouded in unnecessary bureaucracy and is likely to cause delays in decision-making.

The committee recommends that the word “may” appearing in the clause be replaced with “shall” to ensure that Board members are remunerated for their services and further that the requirement for consultation of the Minister of Public Service in the approval of Board members’ remuneration be deleted to avoid bureaucracy in decision making.

Tenure of office of members of the Board

Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 5 of the principal Act to increase the tenure of the Board from three to four years. 

The justification for the increment is to give the Board members reasonable time to implement their programmes. However, the committee studied the tenure of Boards of other statutory bodies and noted that most of the boards have a term of three years. For example, the National Building Review Board, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) and National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) among others.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the tenure of the Board be retained at three years to standardise the same with other boards.

Functions of the Board

Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 4 of the principal Act to clarify the functions of the NPA Board in relation to physical planning. 

Accordingly, the Bill seeks to; introduce new functions, delete some of the existing functions to address overlaps and realign the functions for better clarity, ease of reference and accountability. 

The proposed amendment specifically seeks to: 

    (a) restrict the mandate of the Board in relation to preparation of development plans to allow causing the preparation of national and regional development plans;
    (b) mandate the Board to approve only urban and district physical development plans;
    (c) mandate the board to ensure the coordination of the preparation of physical development plans made by local governments; 
    (d) provide for the cabinet approval of national and regional physical development plans, on the recommendation of the Board and also to mandate the Board to supervise all physical planning committees; 
    (e) mandate the Board to sensitise the public on matters of physical planning; 
    (f) mandate the Board to renew urban areas and improve slums and other informal settlements; and 
    (g) require the Board to cooperate with other Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies having functions related to those of the Board.

The committee is generally in agreement with the proposed functions of the Board except for paragraph (r), which seeks to mandate the Board to renew urban areas and improve slums and other informal settlements. 

The committee observes that the proposal is inconsistent with the intent and purpose of physical planning, which is to ensure organised human settlements.

The committee recommends that the mandate of the Board, in this regard, should be amended to ensure gradual elimination of slums as opposed to improving them.


The committee further observes that the words "cause to prepare" appearing in paragraph (a) are likely to create an ambiguity regarding the responsibility centre for preparation of national and regional physical development plans. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the word “cause" be substituted with the word "prepare” for clarity and to ensure that the Board is accountable for preparation of the national and regional physical development plans.

Provision for powers of the Board

Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to bestow upon the National Physical Planning Board, powers to investigate physical planning matters and to order the demolition of buildings constructed in contravention of the Act. 

In principle, the committee concurs with this proposal because it will enable the Board to curb violations of physical development plans as evidenced by the rampant illegal developments especially in environmentally-sensitive areas and road reserves among others and haphazard developments in urban and rural areas in the country.

However, the committee notes the need to synchronise the powers of the Board in relation to demolition of buildings with the Building Control Act, 2013. Under Section 2 of the Act, demolition of structures is considered a building operation and falls within the purview of the National Building Review Board, building committees and the building control officers established by the Act.

The committee recommends that the word "order" be replaced with the word "cause” to avoid duplication of roles between the two institutions and the implementation challenges.

Establishment of an independent secretariat to the Board

Clauses 7, 8, 9 and 10 of the Bill seek to amend the principal Act to provide for establishment of a secretariat to the Board headed by the Executive Director.

The committee noted that whereas the Board is established as an independent legal entity under section 4 of the principal Act, its operations have been impended by the absence of a fully functional and independent secretariat.

Currently, the secretary to the Board is the head of the National Physical Planning Department who is a staff under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban development implying that the Board is constrained from exercising effective oversight of its affairs. 

In addition, the Board relies on staff seconded by the ministry to execute its mandate because it lacks the legal capacity to recruit its own staff.

The committee is cognizant of the concerns by a section of stakeholders that the establishment of an independent secretariat is unnecessary and defeats the very essence of the cabinet moratorium on creation of Government agencies, which is to rationalise public resources for effective and efficient service delivery. 

The stakeholders further indicated that the Bill is silent on the relationship between the Board and the Department of Physical Planning, an ambiguity which is likely to cause conflict of mandates and further affect the execution of the physical planning function in the country. 

The stakeholders, therefore, proposed that the Department of Physical Planning, under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban development be strengthened with the requisite human and financial resources to effectively support the Board in the execution of its mandate.

The committee, however, observes that the proposed establishment of an independent secretariat as a technical arm of the Board is timely and necessary in view of the enormous responsibilities that the Bill seeks to bestow upon the Board, including oversight and coordination of all physical planning activities in the country, preparation of national and regional physical development plans and the approval of urban or plans among others. 

The proposed amendment will improve operational efficiency and effectively delineate the ministry's supervisory and oversight role from implementation.

Under clause 8, the Bill provides that the Executive Director shall be appointed by the minister, on recommendation of the Board, on terms and conditions specified in the instrument of appointment.

The committee is, however, of the considered view that the Executive Director should be appointed by the Board to enable it exercise effective supervision of its affairs for efficiency and accountability.

In line with the need to streamline the functions of district physical planning committees, the committee notes that while the Bill seeks to clarify the functions of the National Physical Planning Board, it does not address existing gaps in the functions of district physical planning committees in relation to the preparation of district physical development plans. 

Section 10 (a) of the principal Act mandates district physical planning committees to cause the preparation of local physical development plans, yet this mandate lies with the sub-county council under section 25 of the principal Act.

The committee recommends that the functions of the District Physical Planning Committee should be clarified and synchronised with other provisions in the principal Act to avoid duplication of responsibilities and ensure effective implementation.
Clause 11 and 12 of the Bill seek to amend Sections 11 and 13 of the principal Act, respectively to ensure that urban physical planning committees and local physical planning committees are constituted with qualified members in order to be effective. Clause 11 (a) specifically seeks to amend section 11 of the principal Act by substituting “an architect” with “a public health officer” on the urban physical planning committee while clause 11 (c) seeks to remove “physical planner” in private practice appointed by the council on the advice of the town clerk from the committee.

The justification for the proposed replacement of architects with public health officers on urban physical planning committees is that a public health officer plays a more practical role in physical planning matters than architects. 

In addition, proponents of the Bill argue that the requirement of an architect on the committee has stifled the operations of physical planning committees in view of the general scarcity of registered architects in the country and further that the few available architects are not willing to serve in upcountry districts and also demand for high remuneration, which local governments cannot afford.

The committee, however, observes that architects and public health officers belong to two different professions and have different roles to play in the physical planning cycle. Architects have specialised training and knowledge in urban planning and their role is pivotal in physical planning decision making. The committee, therefore, recommends that architects be maintained on the urban physical planning committees.

Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to substitute Section 12 of the principal Act to provide for the composition of the local physical planning committees, which is lacking in the principal Act for clarity and to ensure that only qualified technical persons are appointed to the committees.

The committee concurs with this proposal as it seeks to build and consolidate local governments' technical capacity to prepare local physical development plans.

The committee, however, notes that the title “Local Physical Planning Committee” is used interchangeably with “Sub-County Physical Planning Committee” in both the Act and the Bill leaving room for unnecessary ambiguity. A case in point is clause 15 (b) of the Bill and section 25 of the principal Act.
The committee, therefore, recommends that the title “Local Physical Planning Committee” be substituted with “Sub-County Physical Planning Committee" throughout the Bill for clarity and consistency.

The committee further recommends that a district natural resources officer be included on the Local Physical Planning Committee to ensure that environmental issues are integrated in physical planning for the protection of fragile eco systems and to ensure connectivity of eco systems and their continued functionality.

Responsibility for preparation of district, urban and local physical development plans

Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to amend section 25 of the principal Act to require the district, urban and sub-county councils to prepare physical development plans or to cause the Board to prepare the relevant physical development plans.

Clause 15(a) seeks to entrust the district, urban or sub-county council with the responsibility of preparing district physical development plans and the local physical development plans respectively while clause 15 (b) provides that the District Physical Planning Committee, Urban Physical Planning Committee and Sub-County Physical Planning Committee shall cause the preparation of the physical development plans of their jurisdiction.

The committee observes that the proposed amendments do not take into consideration the hierarchy and organisational set up of local governments as stipulated in the Local Governments Act. In addition, district, urban or sub-county councils do not possess the required technical competence to prepare physical development plans but can only cause the preparation of the plans by the district, urban or sub-county physical planning committees, which are technically competent to prepare such plans.

The committee, therefore, recommends that clause 15 should be amended, accordingly, to ensure clarity.

Clause 15 (c) of the Bill seeks to permit the Board to prepare the district, urban or sub-county physical development plan at the request and cost of a local government to cater for situations where the Physical Planning Committee may not have the requisite expertise to prepare physical development plans for its jurisdiction.
 
The committee agrees with the spirit of the provision but notes the concern by a cross section of stakeholders that the proposed amendment creates room for potential conflict of interest, since one of the proposed functions of the Board, under clause 5 of the Bill, is to approve district and urban physical development plans. 

It would, therefore, be an absurdity to allow the Board to prepare physical development plans on behalf of district, urban and sub-county physical planning committees and approve the same plans.

In order to carry the spirit of the provision, the committee recommends that clause 15(c) be substituted with a provision that permits the board, district, urban or sub-county councils to engage the services of experts and consultants to assist them in the preparation of physical development plans for their jurisdiction.

Requirement of Annual Reporting

Clause 14 (d) of the Bill seeks to require the Board to submit to the minister a report on the annual activities and operations of the Board not later than three months after the end of each financial year and further requires the minister to submit the annual report to Parliament within two months after receipt of the statement.

The committee agrees with the proposal since it is aimed at ensuring transparency in the physical planning processes and enhancing oversight of physical planning decisions and implementation.

Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to amend the principal Act by inserting a new section 47 (a) and 47 (b) to provide for rewards for implementing physical development plans and to penalise local governments who fail to implement physical development plans by causing a reduction of withholding their funding until such local governments comply with the plans.

The proponents of the Bill argue that rewarding compliant local governments will motivate them to prioritise physical planning enforcement and implementation, while penalising non-compliant ones will compel them to implement such plans.

The committee, however, observes that the proposal is prone to abuse and discrimination since persons who comply with other laws such as the traffic and tax laws are not rewarded for such compliance. In addition, the provision is impracticable to implement since most local governments do not have adequate resources to prepare and implement physical development plans.

The committee recommends that local governments should be supported with adequate human, technical and financial resources to support the preparation and implementation of physical development plans instead of rewarding or penalising them for non-implementation of the plans. Accordingly, the committee is of the considered view that clause 47(a) and 47(b)(3) should be deleted.

Madam Speaker, in line with offences and penalties, clause 22 seeks to amend section 57 of the principal Act to provide for other offences and stringent penalties for contravention of the Act and the attendant regulations. The committee is generally in agreement with the spirit of the provision but notes that the penalties proposed are still not deterrent enough relative to the breaches. 

The committee further observes that the offences created under paragraph (c) are already provided for under other laws such as the Roads Act, the National Environment Act, the Local Governments Act and related laws.
The committee, therefore, recommends thatbparagraph (c) be deleted to avoid duplication of offences and further that the penalties for non-compliance be increased, from twenty-four currency points to forty-eight currency points and from one year to two years, respectively as a deterrence measure against non-compliance with the provisions of the Act. 

The committee recommends that the Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018 be passed into law subject to the following proposed amendments.

As I indicated earlier on that there is a minority report, I pray that you allow the minority report mover to make their case. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

6.34
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Aogon is saying that usually the minority report comes from the Opposition side. However, it is good precedence that even the Prime Minister is here. (Laughter)

This minority report is premised under rule 202 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament.

Points of departure

    a) The major point of departure with the majority report is the objection to the proposed establishment of a huge secretariat to the Board headed by the Executive Director as stipulated in clause 7, 8 and 8 of the Bill.

The majority report supports the establishment of a secretariat based on the need to improve operational efficiency and delineate the ministry’s supervisory and oversight role from implementation.

b) It is our opinion that the secretariat is unnecessary based on the following reasons: 

i) 	The Board will require additional funding for remuneration of the Executive Director and the many staff who will be employed at the secretariat. This has a financial implication on the already strained budget for implementation of the physical planning function in the country. In any case, the proposed creation of a secretariat of the Board headed by an Executive Director defeats the spirit of the cabinet directive to halt the creation of new Government agencies with the objective of rationalising public resources for effective and efficient service delivery. I am happy the Prime Minister is here and we should discuss this while he is around.

ii) 	The establishment of the secretariat of the Board will render the whole department of physical planning under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development redundant since most of the technical aspects of the physical planning function are to be implemented by the board. However, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development already has established structures for physical planning within itself and all over the 20 zonal offices. Every region has Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development zonal office. We are saying that instead of strengthening that, why do they want to put something in Kampala and centralise corruption? 

The board can take advantage of these structures to effectively monitor and evaluate the implementation of the local government physical, which is one of the core functions of the board. Besides, the proposed secretariat of the Board will be based in Kampala and may not be able to effectively support the Board in overseeing physical planning activities in the entire country.

There are several examples of statutory authorities and agencies, which have visibly failed to execute their mandates effectively because they are very thin on ground. Cases in point are NFA and NEMA, which have failed to curb the rampant illegal developments in wetlands and forest reserves, thereby failing on their mandate to protect the environment and the fragile ecosystems because they are in Kampala and they do not have regional offices.

iii) 	The already existing structures for physical planning at national and local government levels can adequately support the physical planning function provided that they are equipped with the requisite financial, technical and human resources.

In view of the above, we recommend that clauses 7, 8 and 9 of the Bill and the attendant consequential amendments be deleted to maintain the Head of the Department of Physical Planning under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development as the secretary to the National Physical Planning Board.

Recommendation
Madam Speaker, we recommend that the Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2Ol8 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move.

I do not know why the Clerk removed hon. Okupa; he had said he is part of this. It should be on record that he was part of this. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: I confirm. (Laughter)

MR WALUSWAKA: The chairperson of the committee had already laid the document on Table but at a later time, I can lay the calculation of the saving we shall make and the money, which will go to every district, not only Kampala. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members, for both the reports. Prime Minister, there is something that is bothering me. This issue of mergers or no mergers has never come to this House yet, now, it is being used to take positions in this House. Where are you? Are you going to merge the agencies? Are you not? When will you come here? Where do we stand? 

6.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I am glad you have raised this very important point. Government is carrying out a thorough exercise of rationalisation of parastatals with a view to significantly reduce them. That is exactly the position.

I agree there has been some bit of delay but this has been caused by Government and cabinet being as thorough as possible so that we do a perfect job. (Interjections) Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the two reports are available for debate. I do not know whether we should start debate now when it is coming to 7.00 p.m. 

Honourable members, the two positions are very divergent. I think you need to read them and be confident about what you are going to say and what decision you are going to take on this matter. In the circumstances, I defer the debate on this one till Tuesday next week. Go and read and be ready. Thank you. 

Rt hon. Prime Minister, earlier this afternoon, hon. Ntende raised an urgent matter relating to the recruitment into the police. He claimed that out of 68 recruits from Mayuge, only 24 are from there. He does not know where the others came from. He said that if no action is taken, those people who are not from Mayuge will go in Mayuge’s name tomorrow. 

We had asked the Government Chief Whip to invite the Minister of Internal Affairs so that we take a position. Do they report tomorrow or – because hon. Angura also has burning issues she – it seems no Member is satisfied with the recruitment.


6.44
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe, this could be useful to the Prime Minister. When the police advertised for the recruitment, they set the age bracket at 18-22 years. They said one must have six credits. When they went around the country, they failed to raise the number of 4000 that they wanted. 

The unfortunate part is that when they wanted to fill, they asked Ugandans to travel all the way from Kisoro or Kabale to Kibuli. People slept in Kibuli for three nights without food and at their own cost but in the end, only 10 per cent or so were taken and the rest were told to go back home. 

At that time, people decided to relocate their people to districts where less people had come from. Somebody from Kampala District was recruited under Moroto or Kotido District. 

There were those challenges, which I think the Prime Minister and the Minister for Internal Affairs need to sort out. They should have gone back if they had failed to recruit the required number because when they called them to Kibuli, they adjusted the age bracket from 22 to 27 years in order to bring more people on board. They also adjusted to only two credits in Mathematics and English. These are things that needed to have been harmonised; it inconvenienced majority of the young Ugandans.

6.46
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate you for having added time to allow us to say something. (Applause) It really shows the spirit of work that is within this House. 

There is a problem. By the time someone says the applicant must have a credit in Mathematics for them to become a policeman – for counting what? Bullets? I am really surprised. There are many students down there who would have loved to join the police but you put very tough measures, raising the bar very high just to deter people – does one need to be a qualified Mathematician to be a policeman? 

In Kumi, many people were brought from outside the district. The constituents are now crying to the Members of Parliament and we cannot help them. Corruption is now being exported from Kampala to upcountry.

Rt hon. Prime Minister, you need to note this and find a solution to it. Everything – even these scholarships for student loans – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not move away from what hon. Ntende raised. His complaint was that people who are not from Mayuge will go in Mayuge’s name tomorrow. That was his fear.

MR AOGON: Exactly, Madam Speaker. People who are not from Kumi are the ones who were recruited into the police force.
6.48
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for bringing up this cause. It is better for the Prime Minister and this House to understand what exactly happened in the recruitment of police and prisons. They happened almost at the same time.

Districts have concerns. Some districts have about 34 and others have 40 and others have only five and others 17 and there are those without; the list is there. Whatever happened – their concern was that they needed the age bracket of 18-22 years. 

In Lira, people came from all over the region. They were not really concerned about the national identity cards. They did not care whether someone came from Lira or outside. When they interviewed them, time came for them to scrutinise. By the time they were scruitinising, the people of Lira remained very few. At that time, they did not want to recruit somebody of even 22 years and two months. 

However, when it came to about night, after realising that they had less than ten applicants, they started calling people from outside to come to the recruitment centre after midnight. Even some people were arrested because they were inserting the names of their relations. Things happened. 

Some of the people that were recruited did not even do interviews. The fact that you are calling people who have already done interviews, you said that you wanted maximum 22 years and again, you call for those who are up to 25 years and the deadline was very tight. 

Madam Speaker, this is a very great concern. Lira and the whole of Lango sub region has complaints that need to be looked into.

6.50
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a serious matter. In Ngora, it was worse because the applicants who qualified were just chased away from Ngora High School, which was the recruitment centre and they brought people in two Y.Y Coach buses. We do not know where they brought those people from. All those who qualified, including those who had first grade, were denied access. 

When I got that message, I went to the police headquarters here, wanting to know what was going on. Unfortunately, they told me: “We do not know what happened.” I said: “But you are the ones in charge.” I went to the headquarters here in Kampala because I follow matters to the dot. I do not have the list but my people are crying, they are complaining and are very annoyed. 

I would like to give you the number of a lady who witnessed what was going on in Ngora. She is not from Ngora. Her telephone number is 0705612888. If you call this lady, she will tell you what happened. She was following how people were being brought from outside Ngora. They used Ngora as the recruitment centre but the people of Ngora did not benefit.

At the moment, they are talking about bringing them to Kampala here but it is only meant for some people. You gave us numbers – for example, Ngora was meant to have 22 people and I am sure nobody from Ngora is on that list unless they now manufacture them –(Member timed out.)

6.52
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very serious issue. As of yesterday, I had received many calls from applicants who were cleared on the day of recruitment. What happened in Tororo was that after the recruitment, they were separated as the team that had met the minimum requirements and they were told to wait for the day they would be called to Kampala. There was even a quarter that was allocated. 

As far as age is concerned, it disturbs but I would like to say that even between the ages of 18 to 22, we got many who were interested and they met the minimum requirements. After the list was released today, parents discovered that their children were not shortlisted. How do we answer that question? We are told that tomorrow is when they are reporting either to Kibuli or whichever training centre they will go to.
Madam Speaker, my prayer would be that let every district receive the names of the applicants who were successful at the district. Let them be registered there and confirmed to be the ones who passed interviews on the day of recruitment before they are sent to Kampala. Let our Gombolola Internal Security Officers go and verify whether these people are from our villages before they are sent to Kampala for training. We shall feel the comfort that our own are the ones who have been brought or that our own are the ones who failed. I beg to submit.

6.54
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I concur with my colleagues that the issue of recruitment in this country is becoming a very big problem. When you come to Namayingo District, it is the same thing. As my friend has suggested, let us halt this process for the names to be sent back to our districts to be verified. It is not only in police but we are getting worried even in teaching. 

In our schools, they bring people and say, “these are the people we are bringing” and our own people are left out. It is important for us to be told. Our people called us: “We are going for recruitment. MPs, can you send us money?” Where do they take the money? It means there is corruption.

The recruitment in the army is okay – you go for interviews and when you are taken, you know you are taken. Why is it that in the Police Force, we subject people to interviews and it takes a month and the list comes when the names are not there?

Government must make sure that the lists are given back to the district and we verify if these are our people. (Applause)

6.55
MR ROBERT MUSOKE (NRM, Budiope County West, Buyende): Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the submissions that have so far been made. When you listen keenly, no single leader has come out to say that from his locality, the number, which was sent was met. My question is, where are these people coming from? 

Madam Speaker, if you are not strong-hearted, you might be tempted to think that people who are being recruited into the police are not Ugandans because everybody is complaining that their people were left out. Given what is occurring in Uganda where somebody goes to police and reports that “my relative has been abducted” and the police officer remains in the chair swinging, it might tempt me to think otherwise. 

Police is not a job but a calling to protect Uganda. Somebody who has been called to protect Uganda must be fully a Ugandan and if you are a Ugandan, you cannot be told that “my relative has been abducted” and you remain swinging in the chair. It is only in Uganda where we have more police officers being arrested and I might be tempted to think that it is as a result of recruiting people whom we do not know. I Would like to reduce my submission to Buyende –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude

MR ROBERT MUSOKE: When these people came to Buyende, in fact it reflected the return of Goliath because they did not want to speak to anybody be it the Resident District Commissioner (RDC), District Internal Security Officer or politicians. At the end of the day, only 18 people went through. Where did these people come from? Are they really Ugandans?

6.58
MS RUKIA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. In my district, there are people who passed the interviews and were given the numbers but when the list came out, some of those who were given the numbers were not on the list and they are questioning why they were given numbers as successful candidates. May be, the minister will tell us what happened to those people who passed the interviews, were given the numbers and are not on the list.

6.59
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give you the case of Manafwa. When these people came for the recruitment exercise, just as the Member for Buyende has said, they did not allow anyone to talk apart from the RDC who did so occasionally.

What made me very sad was that there was a girl who was 19. She went running and succeeded. I counted that she had more than five passes on her S.4 certificate. What pained me was that up to midnight, the girl was still there. She was telling me from 10.00 a.m., she was there. She wanted me to go and witness what was going on but I was far. I was actually told that they came with other youth in the district.

Madam Speaker, our people were very observant. They said “these are not our people.” I do not know where they got the national identity cards with the registration numbers of Manafwa. 

Madam Speaker, this matter is very serious. They should show us the list with national identity cards for Manafwa so that we can prove that they took our people. We even do not know those who replaced those who were left. I think something went wrong and it must be corrected. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
7.01
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, UPDF was clear. If you do not pass, you are left there and then. However, in the Police Force –
Madam Speaker, I received calls from parents who sold goats for their children to come here. When they came here, entering the gate was a problem. I would like to, therefore, propose that, that recruitment be halted until these names are sent to the districts and a copy sent to Parliament such that Members can look through and verify and then go to the ground and ascertain the names. Otherwise, the position of Butaleja could be taken up by Kasese. Therefore, I would like to propose that recruitment be halted until the House is satisfied. That is my proposal, Madam Speaker.

7.02
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to pick from where hon. Waluswaka has stopped. Hon. Waluswaka was right to say that list has to be made public so that Members can have access to it for verification.
I would like to seek your indulgence as the Speaker of this Parliament to constitute a select committee to investigate into this circus of recruitment. I would like to also agree that the proposal by hon. Waluswaka be maintained so that these police officers do not report for training until such a time when Parliament has looked into that matter.

They would get districts where people from district X, Y and Z have similar names. So, they would import persons from district X for Y because they share names, disguising that those people are from that particular district when they are actually not from there. 

In Kasese, people have names that can be in Bushenyi, Kabarole, and Kyegegwa and so, you will not know until verification is done. My prayer is that Kasese District, which has the biggest population in this country be given a special consideration. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.04
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The recruitment of police generally this year was full of bias and technical know who. The police officers were not exercising their professional code of conduct.

In Amuru district, the applicants were not interviewed. They were called and they looked at the applicants and just tell them, “you are not qualified, go away.” Basically, all the applicants were chased away without looking at their national identity cards and not considering their documents.

Like my colleagues have proposed, the list should be halted and we should be serious. Actually, when the list came, majority of those who qualified for Amuru District were not residents of Amuru. We even do not know where they are coming from. My prayer is that the slots for Amuru District should be for the people who come from there. I beg to submit.

7.07
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are speaking on a matter, which is very close to my heart because it has a constitutional bearing.

Article 214 (b) of the Constitution is to the effect that in recruitment, Parliament shall make laws to ensure that members of the Uganda Police Force –

THE SPEAKER: Which article? 

MR MWIRU: Article 214 (b) is to the effect that Parliament shall make laws to ensure that members of the Uganda Police Force are recruited from every district of Uganda. The same is in the Article establishing the UPDF Act.

There have been complaints whenever there are recruitments. The Auditor-General has done human resource audit in the Uganda Police Force and there were complaints. This issue is actually simple. When it comes to UPDF, it is about loyalty. 

When they were recruiting people who are not Ugandans to be in the UPDF, we raised these issues because we knew at one particular point in time, there would be a question. Where does an officer pay loyalty? Is it to his country or another country where he or she came from? That is now the biggest issue in this country. That is why whenever we ask the Prime Minister on issues to do with the neighbouring countries, he is very sketchy in his answers.

Madam Speaker, it is important that this recruitment reflects these districts. What has been happening? I was called by my people who were saying the DISO wants something to help you to give recommendation. I said “Please, I do not participate in such. Let them recruit whoever they want but time will come to harvest the seed they sowed.”  (Member timed out.)

7.07
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In Busia, the recruitment was taking place in Mbale as the regional area. 

They began with Muchaka-Muchaka in Busia. They made these children to train in Muchaka-Muchaka for a full month, promising that they were going to recruit them in police, army and Local Defense Unit (LDUs). They actually selected about 100 of them from there.

When they went to Mbale, among the names they were calling, none of them was from Busia. That is why when hon. Nankabirwa came to Busia, they were very unruly and indisciplined. They could not listen to her.  

The people of Busia are very annoyed. We do not have any person from Busia who was recruited. These people came with the names already printed and they were reading the names we do not have in Busia. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Karuhanga, hon. Kumama, hon. Baba Diri, hon. Mbabazi and hon. Eragu. Okay, everyone will speak. We shall have two minutes each.

7.09
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The recruitment of police officers must be credible and transparent. For any person that is aggrieved and offended, in most cases, they run to police to report.

Should it be conceived that the recruitment of police is exceedingly cynical, not transparent and not equitable, then the spirit that you spread out there is that the force that we have is not representative of the character of Ugandans and therefore, people should not trust the police.

Madam Speaker, you can juxtapose this: to a student or primary pupil who believes that this teacher before him or her has fake academic papers, imagine when the teacher is on the blackboard teaching but these people are thinking that this teacher is fake. That is the force you want to perform the role of keeping law and order in a country. I would like to buttress the position of our colleagues that the recruitment process - (Member timed out.)

7.11
MR GEORGE WILSON KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Gauging from the mood of the House, one sees that this exercise is not worth to continue with. Every Member who rises up complains about it.

This recruitment was indeed not genuine. Either people were making money from it or some people were taking it for their own personal benefit and that is why almost every Member here is bitter about it.

Madam Speaker, I concur with our colleagues that this process of reporting tomorrow by whoever has been taken should be halted, revisited and the exercise redone to ensure every person recruited comes from their mother districts.

There was no verification and the local leaders could not have been involved. People flew from far and near to come and do the recruitment in another district, which they could have done in Kampala.

The problem is they went to places like Amuru, Kayunga and so on and recruited people who do not even come from there. Let us stop the exercise and redo it in response to Members’ concerns. 

7.13
MS MARGARET BABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This recruitment excited our young people. We mobilised them and told them this was an opportunity for them since they were doing nothing and hundreds of them went to for example, Koboko for recruitment and only about eight taken. 

Koboko is at the border. If one thought that they came from the Democratic Republic of Congo, we would have the longest list but that is not true. 
We would like these recruiters to tell us where they got those people from when we want our country to be guarded by our own people who know our problems. 

This recruitment should be halted and we scrutinise that list. If we find out that person A does not, for example, come from Koboko, we remove them from the list and have such a person replaced by a person from that district. Thank you, very much.

7.14
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the initiative from the Government. Whereas I agree that there must be standards to follow, the requirements were too strict.

Some people passed the interviews, did not have the national identity and they were left out. The problem of national identity cards is faced by even members of Parliament. 

So, a young person not being recruited into the police because of a national identity card does not arise. In Kagadi District, we got that problem and big numbers missed out. So, I pray that this exercise be put on hold. Thank you very much.

7.15
MS VERONICA ISALA BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We felt the same problem in Kaberamaido. The district got a total raw deal. The exercise was finished by 10.00 a.m. yet, on the list that came out, more than a half of the people on it are not residents of Kaberamaido. It is exactly the same as what is happening elsewhere.

I propose, just like hon. Waluswaka said, that this exercise be halted but when it halted, the verification should not be done by the same agency. We should get an independent agency or a select committee as has been suggested. Thank you.

7.16
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. According to the mood in the House and among the youth out there, this exercise was not fair. It does not only apply to police and prisons but even the loan scheme programme. 

One will be surprised to find that most of the students who are taken up are from one and a half regions, then, they pick one or two from others –(Interjections)– I only can term it like that because that is the way it is. I cannot go into detail. They just pick about one from a district; it is really not fair. I realise that what we are doing in Uganda these days is not fair to our people.
 
Therefore, may I recommend that - we represent our people from different areas because Uganda is for all of us and everybody is supposed to benefit - in the student loan scheme programme, they should give us a list so that we can see whether all the districts have benefited equally.

Secondly, it should be done in all the other areas where we always recruit from. The same thing happens in the Ministry of Public Service. We always need to be informed so that we can intervene on behalf of our people; do not forget about issues in the Ministry of Public Service. Thank you very much.

7.18	
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Parliament should take this opportunity not to allow a process that permits inequitable distribution of jobs and opportunities in this country to go on.

The process that is going on, from the comments of all members of Parliament, it is indicative clearly that it has been marred by a lot of corruption and unclear processes. Therefore, I would like to support the proposals that the process be halted and a select committee be put to verify the list. I request that at the end of the day, we must see that each and every district is allotted equal numbers of recruits.

Unless this is done - we do not what to hear that they cannot find the number from Agago District to meet this - because the qualification is the bare minimum. Therefore, this must be our standard as Parliament. Each constituency in the country must receive the same and equal numbers of recruits.

Madam Speaker, I would like to support the two proposals that we first halt the process and get a select committee to verify this. This Parliament must approve the list before it goes out. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not a – Mr Prime Minister, do you want to say something? Okay, let hon. Ogwal first speak.

7.20
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two concerns. First, recently, you raised a very serious matter concerning equitable distribution of key jobs in Uganda. I know police is one of them. 

May be, we should also ask the Government, at this point, to give us the profile of how the recruitment of people have been done and who hold the top positions in this country? Where do they come from and how are we distributed regionally? It is high time we got to know because it is important. 

Secondly, there have been rumours of mafias. If you are telling me that people are being taken to Tororo District and the people there do not know who they are, who is taking these strangers there? 

Even the Prime Minister is saying he does not believe mafias exist. Personally, I also do not want to believe mafias exist. However, who is dealing in this thing? We need to know whether there are genuine mafias or we know them but we do not want to name them. 

Madam Speaker, this is a matter of serious concern and it is important that we handle it as a matter of security because we now do not know who will be handling our police. Thank you.

7.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have had a strong case presented but it has been clearly a one-sided case. It is only right that this august House should benefit from the information from the Minister of Internal Affairs. Then, the House can take a more balanced position.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, my advice to this august House is that it should not hijack the role of recruitment of police. The role of this House is to oversee and make sure that things are going correctly – (Interruption)

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the Prime Minister that there were a lot of issues with the district quota yystem for students going to the university. The names of students in some districts were not students coming from there. We then said the members of Parliament should verify those names because they take direct accountability to the people of their districts. 

Therefore, in this one, why can’t we be involved? If you say we should not hijack the process, it means that they are going to proceed with their corrupted names and tomorrow, our people will rise up against us. 

Mr Prime Minister, I would like to inform you that we should be fair to the districts and members of Parliament. Let us have equitable distribution of jobs. The issue of jobs is a big problem in this country. All our youths need jobs and we must also take cognisant of gender equity. Both girls and boys should be recruited. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, there can never be dispute about the national character of recruitment into national institutions. This is a very well-known policy, which in my view, should be strictly adhered to. Secondly, if anyone departs from that position, then he or she should be dealt with in accordance with the regulations.

The question of training tomorrow or the day after does not, in any way, stop anybody who has erred from being dealt with- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Allow the Prime Minister to speak.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You know, earlier in the day, I answered a question about police. I said there are 127 cases that are being scrutinised because of wrong recruitments. Therefore, anybody who has been wrongly recruited in the police must get out.  

My proposal, therefore, is simple. The police recruitment must be national. Secondly, if anyone has been illegally or wrongly recruited, that person must quit. Thirdly, because of the national character of national institutions, - (Interjections) Honourable members, allow me to conclude if you do not mind –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the Prime Minister speak.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you. I would like to save the time of my colleagues by proposing that on Tuesday, the Minister of Internal Affairs comes to this House. Secondly, honourable colleagues, do not get worried about reporting. The reason is very simple. These lists are already being displayed in the districts according to the information I have. 

Also, people may be reporting - Let us focus on making sure that the exercise is correctly done, it is national and that those who are not –(Interjections)– wait, honourable members – that those who have been recruited when they should not have been recruited or they were recruited wrongly should quit. It is as simple as that.  So, let us wait.

As I conclude, on Tuesday, after listening to the Minister of Internal Affairs, this august House will make a very rational decision. Let me also say that if somebody has been wrongly recruited in the police, even if he has been there for a year, he or she should be thrown out. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order. honourable members. I just would like the Prime Minister to understand that the voices here are voices of discontent. I have not heard anyone standing up to say it was okay in my area. Everyone who has stood up has said there is a problem. 

Rt hon. Prime Minister, this employment is about equity, access to employment and it is a fact that certain parts of this country are not well represented. Therefore, we should not allow or endorse impunity. The difference between Saturday and Tuesday is very small. Let the exercise end and the minister comes here to explain to us. It should stop. When the minister comes, we shall take a decision on how to move. (Applause)

MS JOY ATIM: Madam Speaker, I am of the opinion that if the minister is reporting to us, let him give the district and sub county together with where the candidate comes from. We expect the details-

THE SPEAKER: We expect the minister to come here with the entire list and lay it on Table. House adjourned to Tuesday 2.00 o’clock.

(House rose at 7.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 September 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

