
Friday, 6 September 2013

Parliament met at 11.15 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting. We sit at this moment on a very sad note, having again lost one of our own. You are aware that the honourable member for Buhweju District has been battling with sickness for a while. The doctors have tried their best but the time has come when God has decided to take her to be with Him. 

We will use this opportunity to celebrate the life that we have had with the honourable Member for Buhweju, hon. Joy Arinaitwe Kariisa - the time she has spent with us, the people of the constituency, the District of Buhweju, the family members who have suffered this loss and this House that has been deprived of a vibrant promising young parliamentarian. All of you who heard hon. Arinaitwe speak in this House know exactly what I am talking about. This year has not been very good to this House but that is the hand of God. We can only say, “thank you, for the life you gave Joy Arinaitwe and now that she is with you, we also thank you.”

We are joined by the family members who are at the technical bench behind me and will be proceeding with this. The instruction I have is that this House will rise at 1.00 O’clock. However, there are issues in the church where the service should have taken place, so we will see if we can extend a little so that we shorten the time between the adjournment of Parliament and the time when the body gets to church. 

Honourable members, it is a sad moment. I welcome you and let us pay respect to the departed. 

(Entrance of the late hon. Joy KariisaArinaitwe)

National Anthem 

The East African Community Anthem 

Laying of wreaths

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before the motion is moved, let me make some announcements. Parliament is organising transport for Members and staff to travel to Buhweju for the burial of the late hon. Joy ArinaitweKariisa. Departure is on Sunday, 8 September 2013 at 7.00 a.m. from the North Wing parking. Those of you who would like to go, please keep time, and I urge all of you to join the people of Buhweju in this moment.

We have, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery this morning, hon. Lydia Wanyoto, former Member of the East African Legislative Assembly. We also have the current Members of the East African Legislative Assembly: the hon. Mike Kennedy Sebalu, hon. NusuraTiperu and hon. Bernard Mulengani. We also have the former Member of Parliament for Buhweju, hon. DeusdeditBikwasizehi. They have all come to pay their respects.

Honourable members, I have two sets of condolence messages, many of them addressed to the family. I am sure that at an appropriate time, the master of ceremonies or some other person will be able to address this to the mourners. Briefly, I have one from the Speaker of Parliament, RtHon. Rebecca Kadaga, addressed to engineer John BoscoKariisa. We will find an appropriate time to read this.

We have a message from hon. NusuraTiperu to the family. We have a message from the honourable Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesige to the family. We also have one from hon. Mathias Kasamba on behalf of the Parliamentarians Savings and Credit Cooperative Society Limited. We have one from hon. Lydia Wanyoto on behalf of Web Advocates and Solicitors addressed to the family, and one from hon. Ernest Kiiza, Chairman Bunyoro Parliamentary Caucus. Those are the ones, which will be dealt with at an appropriate time.

There are also those that are addressed to the Speaker of Parliament, which I will read in part. They are addressed to the Speaker, on behalf of the House, so let me go through them briefly. There is one from the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly addressed to the RtHon. Deputy Speaker: 

“Condolence message following the death of hon. Joy ArinaitweKariisa, Woman MP Buhweju
On behalf of the East African Legislative Assembly and on my own behalf, I wish to express our heartfelt condolences to you, the Parliament and the Government of Uganda, the family, relatives and friends of the hon. Arinaitwe upon her untimely death, which occurred on 5 September 2013. 

It is indeed with deep sadness that EALA has learnt of the death of one of the outstanding young women parliamentarians who was committed to development and empowerment of women in this country. In the passing of hon. Kariisa, Uganda and East Africa has lost a great young legislator with the potential to empower women in Buhweju and also to serve with boundless dedication, utmost humility and commitment. 

The Parliament of Uganda and Buhweju District shall indeed miss her noble voice. At this time of mourning, we share the grief with the people of Buhweju and we pray that the Almighty God will comfort the family and the loved ones at this hour of grief. May her soul rest in eternal peace.”

I have one from the Government Chief Whip addressed to the Speaker:
“Tribute in honour of the late hon. Joy ArinaitweKariisa, Woman Member of Parliament, Buhweju
I learnt with profound shock of the death of our colleague, hon. Arinaitwe. It was very disturbing because after the two operations in India, we thought she would recover and get back to work, which she never did. 

The late hon. Arinaitwe has been a youthful, vibrant and hardworking Member of Parliament. She was active in all the committees of Parliament, the Public Accounts Committee and the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development where I deployed her, and she was passionate about her work. 

It is unfortunate that she has passed on at a very youthful age when Parliament and the country needed her most. The gap she has left is huge and will be extremely difficult to fill. 

Eternal life grant unto her O Lord, and perpetual light shine upon her. May she rest in peace.
Justine Kasule Lumumba.”

We have one from the Chairperson of the Committee on East African Affairs, hon. Sarah Mwebaza, addressed to the Speaker:
“The Committee on East African Community Affairs has learnt with profound shock about the death of hon. Arinaitwe. The late hon. Arinaitwe has departed at a tender age when her contribution was still greatly needed by the country. She will be greatly missed by her young family and we pray that the Almighty God sustains them through this trying time. May the Lord rest her soul in eternal peace.”

The final one is from hon. Margaret Komuhangi, Chairperson, Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development:
“The Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development has learnt with shock the death of the hon. Arinaitwe, Member for Buhweju. 

The deceased has been a member of the committee, where she served diligently until she was taken ill. The committee will greatly miss her contribution and participation. May the Lord Almighty rest her soul in eternal peace.” 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. JOY ARINAITWE KARIISA, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE, BUHWEJU DISTRICT

11.45
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, this motion is for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Joy ArinaitweKariisa, moved under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the untimely demise of hon. JoyArinaitweKariisa, Member of Parliament for Buhweju District, which occurred on Wednesday, 4 September 2013 at NakaseroHospital; and

WHEREAS the late hon. Joy ArinaitweKariisa died after succumbing to a brain tumour, which she had been suffering from for quite some time, at the young age of 27 years;

NOTING THAT the late hon. Joy ArinaitweKariisa held a Bachelors’ degree in Business Administration from Makerere University Business School and a diploma in Purchasing and Supply, which she acquired from the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply;

RECOGNISING THAT the late hon. Joy ArinaitweKariisa served on the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Public Accounts Committee, which committees she served diligently and meticulously;

APPRECIATING THAT the late hon. Joy ArinaitweKariisa was a humble, hardworking and diligent young legislator with a promising political career; 

NOW THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:
1. That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends, the people of Uganda, particularly the people of Buhweju Districtthat she represented in the Ninth Parliament, upon the loss of hon. Joy ArinaitweKariisa.

2. That it takes cognizance of the services rendered and contributions made by the late hon. Joy ArinaitweKariisa to the Ninth Parliament.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:The motion is seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, the Member for Buhweju County,the Member for Mitooma District and the Member for Adjumani District. I think that is sufficient. Would you like to justify your motion?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Yes, Mr Speaker. The late hon. Joy Kariisa was born on 22 February 1986 to Mr and Mrs Kanyankole. She was just 27 years at the time of her death. The late was happily married to engineer J.B. Kariisa, Assistant Commissioner at the Ministry of Defence. She was a mother to two children – a girl, Immaculate Kariisa and a boy, Emmanuel Kariisa, who are in good health.

The late hon. Joy Kariisa had a history of severe headache and fever before she was admitted to a medical facility. While there, doctors diagnosed a medical condition that simultaneously resembled both meningitis, which is an infection or inflammation of the – please, forgive me because I am not a doctor, but that is an infection or inflammation of the brain.She registered some improvements but subsequently, became very dizzy with visual difficulties and she could not stand or walk without support. She had no history of hypertension or diabetes.

The late hon. Joy Kariisa had a bright political career, having been elected to Parliament unopposed both during the NRM Party primaries and in the general parliamentary elections. This shows that she was a person of unequalled abilities.

During her time in Parliament, the late had interests in counselling and guidance, giving motivational talks and was willing to take up challenging parliamentary tasks. She had a rare character of compassion and sympathy. In fact, many people have commented that the late was far older than her age.

The late has been serving on the Public Accounts Committee and the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. Her contribution in these two committees is wellknown because her presence was always felt. She was passionate on matters of accountability, good governance and community development.

The late hon. Joy Kariisa performed parliamentary functions with rigour.She was instrumental in passing laws for the good governance of the country. She was pivotal in scrutinising Government Bills and a number of policy matters. She was meticulous and careful in her deliberations both in speech and writings. Over and above all, she was a very patriotic Ugandan, incorruptible, dependable and uncompromising on matters of accountability. She served her country selflessly and was loyal to her party and the people she represented. We all looked at the late with hope and strong expectations but as you know, we cannot appeal God’s judgement.

To the husband and the children, I want to say, you have lost a wife and a mum but be strong and steadfast. I wish to assure you that the Almighty God will watch over you and friends will always be by your side. May the Lord grant her soul eternal rest and also sustain the bereaved. I thank you.

12.02
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I stand to second the motion as moved by the Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Joy ArinaitweKariisa.

The Bible says we should always be prepared because we do not know the day or hour when death comes; it is like a thief. Indeed, death is a thief. It has robbed us of one of our youngest colleagues. Hon. Joy Kariisa, you have gone too soon though we all know that there is a greater power who when he commands, it is done.

On behalf of the Opposition, the people of Gulu and on my own behalf, I sincerely condole with the family of the late hon. Joy Kariisa upon the untimely death of your beloved woman. A young and patriotic Ugandan, she was in her youthful years. I am sure she was dreaming about using her youthful energy to contribute towards building a better Uganda.

As we pay tribute to our fallen colleague, I wish to ask us to remind ourselves of the status in which our hospitals are. Yes, some of us can manage to go to the best hospitals; how about our people? Honourable members, it is so sad to see a mother dying because a doctor or nurse does not have gloves to attend to her.

In May this year, while the members of the Opposition were performing their duties of checking on Government programmes, we visited Kawolo Hospital. Honourable members, the situation at Kawolo Hospital is so appalling; there is no running water, buildings are collapsing and the beds have no mattresses.Kawolo Hospital is a highway hospital and every one of us is a candidate in that hospital. Why doesn’t Government pay attention to its citizens? Kawolo, Bugiri, Jinja- all these referral hospitals need immediate attention.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, recently, I visited a cancer patient in Gulu in Palenga. He is called Matthew Lacek. He had a long discussion with me, especially on the Cancer Institute. He appealed to us, leaders of this country, to wake up and seriously address the cancer scourge. He noted that the Cancer Institute in Mulago was very congested and the doctors overwhelmed. He requested Government to decongest cancer units. How can this happen? It can only happen if we decide to have these machines at regional level because having one only in Mulago means that a lot of our people die unattended to.

His concern was about the women, and today we are here contributing on one of our own. What he told me was that out of maybe five men, you get 50 to 60 women suffering from cancers of various types. It can be breast cancer, cervical cancer or a tumour like this one and others. So, this is a big concern that all of us as leaders must address.

Mr Speaker, cancer is at its highest and according to Matthew, the cancer patient I visited in Gulu, the greater percentage of cancer patients are women. Honourable members, as we pay tribute to our fallen colleague, we ask Government to pay more attention to the cancer scourge.

We, in the Opposition, shall continue to talk and engage Government until something is done for fellow Ugandans. This country is for us all. We all need water, shelter, medicine, just the basic needs. A peasant in Gulu, for example, does not want a skyscraper. He does not want to stay in Sheraton Hotel. He or she just wants the basic needs. Honourable colleagues, this country needs a revamped social service sector because today it is hon. Kariisa, tomorrow who knows.

To the husband and the children, we are standing with you. We know the pain you are going through. Joy, may your soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just got a note from the Member for Buhweju, hon. Biraaro. He says the journey to Buhweju will take about six hours. So, if we are to leave at the time I earlier announced, it will be very late by the time you arrive there. He has proposed, and I hereby announce, that the time should be changed so that you depart Parliament by 6 o’clock. That means you come to the North Wing by 5.30in the morning so that the buses can leave by 6 o’clock. You will then be there at least by 11.00a.m or so and finish the burial and see a way of coming back. That is the correction I am making based on the advice from the Member for Buhweju County.

We have, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery, the former Member of Parliament for Nakasongola District. We also have the former Member for Kioga County. Thank you.

Honourable members, the motion is that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the relatives, friends, the people of Uganda and particularly, the people of Buhweju District that she represented in the Ninth Parliament, upon the loss of hon. Joy Arinaitwe Kariisa; two, that it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late hon. Joy Arinaitwe Kariisa to the Ninth Parliament. That is the motion. I now propose the question for your debate. 

Honourable members, as I said, we will see if we can do this in one and a half hours or two hours maximum. Do we give a timeframe? Three minutes? Five minutes? [Hon. Members: “Three?”]Okay, three minutes. Honourable members, you will be contributing for three minutes each. 

12.11
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to a friend and honourable Member of Parliament, the late hon. Joy Arinaitwe Kariisa. 

I had a lot in common with Joy. On behalf of the Toro Parliamentary Group and on behalf of the people of Kyegegwa District, I would like to condole with the family of engineer Kariisa, Mr Kanyankole, the children and the Buhweju people. 

Joy and I were both pioneer MPs in new districts. We were both unopposed in the first election. I sat with Joy on the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. Joy was in my district during my victory celebration. I just came from her district two months ago.

I knew Joy for one thing; on the committee on Gender, Joy was committed to see her rural women in Buhweju emancipated. She used to tell me that her women were battling with life through petty trade and they could not access formal financing because of all the formalities that are involved in formal financing from banks and other microfinance institutions. When I was in Buhweju two months ago, the people of Buhweju were still very hopeful that one day Joy would go back and do her work because of what they expected when they elected her. 

At this moment, I would like to bring the concerns of the rural women who are suffering. Sixty percent of the traders we talk about in this country are actually women. Unfortunately, they are involved in petty trade and they cannot access financing because of all the requirements that they cannot meet. I want to appeal to Government to authorise and establish a directorate for small and medium enterprises in the Ministry of Gender, which will oversee financing which is friendly and accessible to the rural women of this country. I thank you and may God rest her soul in eternal peace. 

Engineer Kariisa, be strong, the Lord is with you, and Mr Kanyankole who comes from the Toro region. I want to condole with the family and the children. May God protect you and comfort you all. Thank you. 

12.14
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you for the opportunity you have given me to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. When you hear 27 years, the best you would wish is to say that someone has more and more years to live, but at 27 our colleague has left us. 

Joy worked with me on the Public Accounts Committee and like has already been said, she was a very committed and hardworking person. Actually, my chairperson, hon. Kassiano Wadri, was very fond of her. He used to call her “Joy, the good one”. Why? Her behaviour was in total contrast to the overzealous policeman who thought that he would modify Col Besigye’s eyes by a mere spray. Because of that difference, he used to call her the “good one” whereas the other one was the “bad one.”

For the time we have been with Joy, I think everybody in the Public Accounts Committee believed that she was very knowledgeable. She could look at every document brought and raise issues relevant to the presentation.

In terms of her behaviour, she was down to earth, simple and friendly. It is a big loss to this House and the committee particularly. Therefore, on behalf of Teso Parliamentary Group, Pallisa, and on behalf of Public Accounts Committee, I extend our deep and sincere condolences to the young family and the children of the Kariisas. May God grant you the courage to go through the hard times and may her soul rest in eternal peace.

12.14
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju):Mr Speaker, I also come from Buhweju. Buhweju is a one-constituency district, whichmeans I have been left alone. It was made a district in July 2010 and in 2011, hon. Joy Kariisaand I were elected MPs. Earlier on, we had been getting MPs when it was a countyunder Bushenyi District.

In real terms, hon. Joy Kariisa is the real first born of Buhweju as a district. We have lost her.In African families, when you lose a first born, you have lost almost all. So,Buhweju has lost to that extent.

Because of her age, hon. Joy Kariisa was not only a woman Member of Parliament but she also represented the youth and on the ground and she would mention this to them. You all know the number of youth and the concerns we have in this country.So, as a Parliament and as a country, we have not only lost a woman Member of Parliament for Buhweju but we have also lost an extra youth representative.

When Joy was living and we worked together, she had things she cherished. She loved to see the health situation of the people of Buhweju improve. She has died at a time when it has not yet improved.The late hon. Joy Kariisa wanted to see the infrastructure in Buhweju move to another level.This is why I was advising that people leave earlier to Buhweju; the roads are still very bad and she wanted them improved.

She was always concerned about the water-stressed hilly areas of Buhweju. In Buhweju, we produce water for the low lying areas and the uplands remain without water. She wanted this changed.

Hon. Joy Kariisa was committed to her constituency; even when she was in the hospital in India, she would spare time to ring some members of the constituency to ask how the constituency was.Even when she returned from India, after four months she went to the constituency to greet her people and there are some occasions that she attended. 

While here in Kampala, she would move to the Government agencies and ministries to lobby for supplies to take to Buhweju, namely coffee, tea, mosquito nets and the rest of it. So,hon. Joy Kariisa was committed to her constituency.(Member timed out.)

12.20
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI(FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on behalf of the people of Mbale to convey our sincere condolences to the parents, the husband and children, friends, the entire Parliament and the people of Uganda for losing a great legislator.

Joy was a great lady, a very good legislator and a Member of Parliament who never passed you without a greeting. She never cared whether you were from the Opposition; she we would share a moment with you. This is very rare. I worked with her on the Public Accounts Committee and she was, indeed, a great legislator.She tackled issues as they came to the committee and this is what we would want the Parliament of Uganda to be. 

Cancer is a terrible disease -I have spoken several times on this Floor of Parliament about the Cancer Institute - and we know some of the causes.Last time, when we are debating the issue of ICT, I asked on this Floor about how Government is disposing off this computer waste. I have always talked about the implication of old vehicles; they emit terrible gas in the atmosphere and these are some of the causes of cancer. 

I have requested a number of times on this Floor that please, MPs visit the Cancer Institute at Mulago Hospital. The situation is very sad.If you went to that institute and saw the patients, you would really have pity.We have lost a lot of money and the money is stolen. We can get some of this equipment to assist our people. You go to MulagoHospital and find people in the corridors. The institute is not enough to take care of our patients but us, as legislators, what have we done for our people?

It is indeed very sad to lose such a young legislator. I want to tell the husband to accept that when death comes, it comes as a great shock.(Member timed out.)

12.24
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative,Sheema):Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join Parliament to mourn our sister and friend, hon. Joy Kariisa, and I also bring condolences from the district of Sheema.

We have lost a woman as UWOPA and one who was passionate about women issues.As UWOPA, we had to organise a meeting in her district while she was away to show support because of how she has been contributing to UWOPA and the issues of women generally.

Joy, as they said, was committed to women. I remember that every time she would stand up, she would say, “my women of Buhweju”. She wanted to uplift them and really, we have missed that. You cannot separate Sheema from Buhweju. We are neighbours and, therefore, whatever was going on in Buhweju would actually happen in Sheema. So, we are going to miss Joy.

As they said, hon. Joy Kariisa was young and calculative in whatever she said and therefore she was a great thinker. I remember when we had just come, Joy would ask which about what committee we should join. When I said gender, – honourable members, this shows you what she wanted to do in Parliament and for the people of Buhweju - she said, “let us join the committee on gender because it is gender that will help us transform the women of our districts.” 

One of the issues that she actually used to talk about was maternal health. The terrain in Buhweju is difficult and their health centre IV – actually, I do not think that even right now they have a medical doctor. She would say that sometimes the women come all the way to Kabwohe in Sheema and it is difficult for someone who is pregnant to walk that distance. On this note, I want to call on Government to really support Buhweju District in terms of addressing issues of maternal health as it is a district that is difficult to reach and has a difficult terrain.

Mr Speaker, hon. Joy Kariisa, as many have said, loved her family and her constituents and she wanted to excel. When Joy had come back from India, she asked, “How do we manage the public?” I remember she wanted to go to UMI to do a course in public administration but her husband said, “Joy, you are still sick; why don’t you wait?” Joy said, “No, honourable pick my forms; I want to go and do a course in public management because that is when we shall handle and deal with public administration.” Joy did not make it. 

Joy, I know you had a lot - she had great dreams for her people especially the youth, as the honourable MP has said. I want to refer you to the book of Ecclesiastes 7:1-14; if you read it, it shows that the rich invest in life, and Joy invested in her life after falling sick. That is why towards the end, she called for a priest to come and pray for her. Several priests prayed for her and for that, she has actually made her life rich in Heaven and – (Member timed out_) 

12.28
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): I thank you, Rt. Hon. Speaker and colleagues. I want to join the rest of my colleagues to pay tribute to our dear sister. 

The late was so humble, disciplined and social. At the time we interacted with her, at least she changed many lives. You would not miss any minute without learning from her. So as a country, we miss her and as a family, I know that they miss her.

Rt. Hon. Speaker, people at her age need more role models. We have a lot of issues in our country pertaining to management of the youthful age. We shall miss her; she would have been one of our role models.

She had unique characteristics not only of a politician but also a leader. She was down to earth and very simple that any person would dare to approach. Therefore, we will miss a leader and not just a politician. May her soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you.  

12.30
MS RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to join my colleagues to pay tribute to our late sister and friend, hon. Joy Kariisa. 

I got to know about Joy Kariisa through her husband, engineer Kariisa. Engineer Kariisa and my younger brother, engineer Geoffrey Ogwang, studied together at Makerere University and they were in Mitchell Hall and I was in Complex. Those who studied from Makerere know about the Mitchelex Solidarity. So, when I would go once in a while to bench in Mitchell Hall – (Laughter) - I could not forget about my two brothers, engineers Kariisa and Geoffrey Ogwang. 

The relationship did not stop at school or at Mitchell. Engineer Kariisa visited us in our village called Atokimedi in Bala Sub-County, Kole District. We accepted him as one of the sons and he would ride on the bicycle in the village.  I did not know the intention of riding and visiting all the villages but we accepted him and he remained a child in that village.

When I came to Parliament, Joy was looking for a sister to engineer Ogwang and so she came and told me, “I am looking for my sister-in-law from Lango sub-region.” I said, “Who could that be?” She said she was from the Obia family and then I said that I was the one. So, we accepted each other and we worked together. Unfortunately, when she fell sick in March last year and she was taken to India by her husband, I also fell sick and went to India for treatment. 

I want to thank Joy so much because she was appreciative. When she returned from her first treatment in India, she came and thanked us, Members of Parliament, the Government and all those who stood with her when she was sick. I thank her for that.

When Joy was a Member of Parliament for Buhweju, she made a contribution to her district. She made it very clear that she had bad roads. My brother, hon. Biraaro, if those roads are not yet worked on, I want you to take up that project that Joy left behind unaccomplished and work towards accomplishing it.

Mr Speaker, it is true that our sister died because of a brain tumour. I am not a medical person but I was so close to Kariisa’s family. When Joy gave birth to her first son, she went through an operation but she took so long to recover and it affected her health during that time. Maybe if a medical person is to trace, they may find that the root cause of Joy’s problem in the brain could have started as maybe poor or wrong management of her delivery when she gave birth to her first son. (Member timed out.)

12.33
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): I thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kawempe North Constituency and also on behalf of the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus, allow me to extend our condolences to the bereaved family of the late hon. Joy Kariisa. 

As we pay tribute to our fallen colleague, what must ring a bell in our minds is the quality of our healthcare facilities. I know that in all our constituencies, our healthcare facilities are not that good. We have heard that the late hon. Kariisa was taken for operations in India twice, and we have testimonies of many colleagues who have gone for operations abroad. How much money do we spend on those operations abroad? What can we do as Parliament and as Government to ensure that we have the best healthcare facilities in our country? I believe that if add all the money that we spend on our medical bills abroad, we can use that money to ensure that we strengthen our health facilities. Maybe we would then be in a position to do the best. 

Mr Speaker, I believe that Government and Parliament should really look into what is hindering us from doing our best and ensuring that our health facilities are in order. I believe that the best thing that we can do as legislators, as we try to improve on the lives of the people we represent, is to ensure that healthcare facilities are really looked after. 

We all know that death is not the end of our life; it only opens doors to another life. We believe that hon. Joy Kariisa did her best. We have had testimonies about her presentations in Parliament and about her concerns – (Member timed out)

12.36
MR TOM ALERO AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Madi sub-region in general, I would like to convey our sincere condolences to the bereaved family members, relatives, friends, in-laws, the Parliament of Uganda as well as the Government of Uganda for the demise of our dear beloved hon. Kariisa. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Kariisa was voted to Parliament at a tender age simply because she could have had all the characteristics of a good leader, that is, being honest, humble, hardworking, faithful, sincere, God-loving as well as a very good mother. It is these characteristics that made it possible for her to be voted Member of Parliament at that age. Let us emulate all these good deeds of hon. Kariisa. 

Mr Speaker, her death should remind us of our obligations as human beings on earth and even as Members of Parliament. We should have routine check-ups of our bodies for pressure, cancer, diabetes and other ailments. Let us do routine check-ups so that we are not caught off guard, so that we can be able to take the right medication. 

May the soul of our dear loving mother, hon. Kariisa, rest in eternal peace. Thank you very much for giving me the opportunity.

12.38
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the chance to say a few words about the late hon. Joy Kariisa. On behalf of the people of Kajara, on behalf of the Members of Parliament and the western region parliamentary caucus, I would like to extend our sympathies and condolences to the family of the late Joy Kariisa, the people of Buhweju and also to her former colleague, hon. Biraaro, who was actually in tears yesterday on learning about the death of the late Joy Kariisa. 

Mr Speaker, I first met hon. Kariisa during their induction course as new Members of Parliament. I had the opportunity to sit on the same table for lunch with her, together with the others. It was my first time to see her and I listened to her. 

I was interested in knowing her as a new young person and also as a person from my region. I was interested in knowing about her plans for Buhweju. Of course, I know Buhweju is a very difficult area in terms of accessibility, in terms of service delivery and she was passionate about that. In that short time, she talked about women, about roads, about water and I concluded she was a woman of great potential and promise, not only to the people of Buhweju but to this country.

Mr Speaker, the late Kariisa was a very active person in the western region Members’ parliamentary caucus. She was always available and reliable and always stuck to what we agreed to in that caucus. To that extent, on behalf of our members, we would like to sympathise and condole with the family of engineer Kariisa upon the loss of your dear wife.

Lastly, I had an opportunity to lead a parliamentary delegation to India when she was sick and we located her in the place where she was receiving medication. I was struck by her strength and will to live, and the optimism to think that she was getting alright to come and join us soon.  

She asked us to do one thing - I think we were with hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo and others - that if we came back, we should record her gratitude to His Excellency the President for having accorded her the opportunity to get treatment in India after suffering that calamity at a time she was not prepared – (Member timed out­_)

12.43
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Mr Speaker and colleagues, Joy left us on Wednesday this week but we have missed her for a long time. For one year now, she endured the agony of a brain tumour, and I think today it is right and good to honour her because she was a good soul. On behalf of the people of Ndorwa West and the people of Kabale, I would like to thank engineer Kariisa and mzee Kanyankole for the support they offered to our colleague, Joy Kariisa. I send sympathies to the people of Buhweju and the people of Mitooma. 

The Bible says in Psalms 90: 12 that, “Lord, teach us how to number our days so that we can be wise.” This condition has cut short the life of Joy but Joy numbered her days. She numbered her days in the way she humbled herself before colleagues and in the way she related with her colleagues, and she numbered her days in the way she performed her job as a Member of Parliament. This lifeless body of our colleague lying here today challenges us to number our days, to do our best every single day of our lives. 

This also speaks volumes about the urgency to fix our health system. The Imam of Parliament has reminded us that it is possible that we can fix our health system and I think we should not relent. The best way we can honour our colleague, Joy Kariisa, is to fix that referral hospital in Gulu, in Mbarara and in Kabale to a level that can handle a brain tumour and give comfort to those who suffer such terminal conditions. 

She called me dad and I called her daughter because Joy shared a name with my daughter, Joy. May God bless your soul.

12.45
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, today we are here yet again to pay tribute to one of us, and I recall it is the fifth time in this Parliament that we are paying tribute to one of our members. This is just a portion of what is happening outside; at this rate, things are not very good. I think we need not only divine intervention but also strategic interventions to halt this. 

We have a challenge with our medical system, and it is a challenge that we must face together. We need to improve the medical system in the country so that we can be able to identify such incidents before they result into death. 

Today we are here celebrating the life of Joy. Joy was friendly, humble and hard working for the time she was in Parliament. This Parliament is at times full of controversies but I never heard her being involved in any controversy. During the time when she came back from India and before she fell sick again and was taken back to India, I talked to her. She showed commitment to her constituency and her service here. 

It is very unfortunate that we have lost her. However, as a Christian, I know that it is God who gives and it is God who takes away. This reminds me of a story of a garden attendant who had a flower which he loved so much. Every morning, he attended to that flower to ensure it was in good condition. One day, his master came and said he wanted that flower and he cut it and took it away. We loved Joy because she was humble, friendly and hardworking but the Lord also loved her. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

12.48
MS JALIA BINTU: (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, the late hon. Joy Kariisa. Allow me to extend our sincere condolences on behalf of the people of Masindi District and on my own behalf for the loss of a young vibrant representative of Buhweju, who went on record as a representative of a hard-to-reach area. 

We have been informed that when Joy was diagnosed and referred to India, she travelled to India on several occasions to be treated. We also know that there are many Ugandans who are being referred to those hospitals because they are suffering from tumours, kidney diseases, cancers and such other complicated cases. We know that most of these cases cannot be handled here. 

I have been reliably informed that our high commission in India contacted some of these hospitals, especially Medanta, a hospital where most Ugandans have been referred to. The proprietor accepted to come here and put up a hi-tech medical facility in Uganda because most of their clientele is from Eastern Africa. The only request they made to the Government of Uganda was to provide land. It is sad to note that four years down the road, the proprietors of Medanta Hospital have not got land to put up a magnificent hospital to handle such cases and help Ugandans. 

Mr Speaker, can we ask the Government to tell us what plans they have in putting up such hi-tech facilities so that Ugandans can be able to access treatment; even the poor ones who cannot access Nairobi Hospital can be treated. We would be happy to receive a response from Government. 

Mr Speaker, we have been informed that most of the technologies which we are using in Uganda are the main causes of cancer and other complicated diseases. I was told yesterday that phones, which do not have touch mechanisms, have side effects on the eardrum and the brain and I was so scared. 

I want to find out from the Minister of Information and Technology and the Minister of Health what safety mechanisms we have put in place to help the poor Ugandans who use these phones. These days even children are using phones – (Member timed out).

12.52
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on behalf of the people of Mitooma and on my own behalf to support the motion to pay tribute to an all-round beautiful person, an honourable MP indeed. She was beautiful both in body and soul. Joy was joyful as her name suggests. 

Joy was born in Mitooma District and she was my blood relative. She was an outstanding young legislator and many were surprised that she was only 27 years old because of the mature, composed and graceful manner with which she carried herself. She has been a very honourable Member of Parliament and a model in so many respects. 

She had distinguished herself as a very articulate Member of Parliament who was deeply concerned about the issues of her people. As members have noted, she advocated for improved infrastructure in Buhweju, including roads, health services and improved remuneration for health workers and teachers. In her short time in Parliament, she had done so much including distributing coffee seedlings. She was a humble and effective people’s representative indeed. She was deeply concerned about improving household incomes. So, this nation has lost a great future leader. 

To my uncle, my cousins and to engineer Kariisa and Joy’s children, I want to thank you for all the efforts that you made to save Joy’s life. I know that you tried all that you could, but it was God’s will. I ask you to thank God for the gift that Joy was to our lives. I know that He who knows the plans He has for our lives - plans to prosper us and not to harm us; plans to give us a prosperous future - will protect you and guide you, and He will be there for you at every step of the way. My prayer is that you trust God to fulfil that plan that He has in your lives. 

To our colleagues, I want to say that it is sad that we have lost Joy. However, as the Speaker said, we should take this moment to celebrate her life - (Member timed out_)

12.56
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, IGARA COUNTY EAST, BUSHENYI): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We extend our condolences to the family. Hon. Kariisa was a very determined lady. We used to meet during our meetings and she had two things for her constituency: the first was to fight household poverty and the second one was to work on the roads in Buhweju. I would like to ask Government, and most importantly the Ministry of Works to fulfil her dream and ensure that the roads in Buhweju are worked on.

Mr Speaker, I had the opportunity to see the late in the hospital in India; she asked me two things when I went to her bed. She asked about the people of Buhweju – you can see how much she loved her people – and she asked me about Parliament. This is the lady that loved her work as Member of Parliament and her people in Buhweju. So, I call upon hon. Biraaro to take up the struggle and the light that hon. Kariisa was carrying.

Mr Speaker, while I was at the hospital in India, I saw some Ugandans who had gone for treatment. They were ready for an operation but could not go into the theatre because they did not have money; they were waiting for their relatives here at home to fundraise and send it to them. I call upon Government to expedite the medical insurance scheme to enable Ugandans who cannot afford the medical expenses to access services.

Our fallen colleague has gone at an early age – at 27 – when we still needed her contribution politically, socially and otherwise.

I also join my colleagues to extend my condolences to the family and to call for their support. It is God who gives and takes away. To the family, please stay strong because that is the same road all of us will take. We shall continue praying for you so that you go through this difficult time. Thank you.

12.58
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Mary Okurut): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues to pay respect to our fallen colleague, Joy. And I apologise to the family because I have not been in touch with them. But when Joy fell sick, I was not well, either – I was fighting some horrible ulcer. That is why I was not in touch but I was with her. Joy was calm, composed and focused and she served with humility and the service was not just cosmetic; she spoke and she worked right from the heart.

Mr Speaker, when Bushenyi – we call it the “Greater Bushenyi” – when the debate about dividing it was raging, I had a fight here with my colleague, hon. Otafiire because he kept on insisting that we should remain united. I actually also argued that we should remain as one but then I thought again that if we split, we would bring more women to Parliament and so we parted ways with hon. Otafiire. But he actually appreciate the women coming in and so out of the district came our fallen colleague, hon. Nyakikongoro, my sister hon. Kamateeka also came and all of them are very capable legislators who we would have missed if Bushenyi had remained as one. And I actually used to tell hon. Otafiire that it is hon. Kabwegyere who told me that, “Maria, even if they gave me Shs 1 billion to stand as Woman MP for this huge Bushenyi District, I wouldn’t because this is madness; how do you represent such “-  So I brought that – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that hon. Kabwegyere wanted to stand as a Woman Member of Parliament? (Laughter)

MRS OKURUT: Mr Speaker, I am in no way suggesting a sex-change for hon. Kabwegyere, but that was Joy. This is thunderbolt to the family. Our people say that pain is felt by the finger that has had pain inflicted on it. So we know what you are going through, but it is only God who can stand in that gap which Joy has left. May God rest her soul in peace.

1.01
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to extend my since condolences to Engineer Kariisa and Mr Kanyankole, who are personally known to me. I would like to appreciate the life of Joy and her humble contribution in this House. When we talk of life, we talk of the unity of opposites; the very dynamics that propel you into fullness portend with the elements of destruction. As you grow, you die; so death should not be a surprise because people have died since Adam and they will continue to die until the end of time. But in the question of Joy, it is not dying; it is the question of when? She had begun her journey in life to make a stamp on mankind. She has just concluded at the end of the beginning; that is very unfortunate. There were many things she could have done but she has not been able to do them. 

I am grateful to my sister here, hon. Karooro, who said that the split of Bushenyi brought many ladies into Parliament. I am grateful for that because every dark cloud has a silver lining. My only regret is that you recruited drivers without trucks – they are wonderful drivers but no trucks to drive because the amount of money we used for service delivery when we were one district has now gone into administration. Yes, we have the wonderful districts but nothing to offer. (Laughter)

I appreciate the short life of Joy she has lived on earth. Much as I know that our sojourn through life is not much. The little time we spent here with Joy, she has made an imprint and that imprint has been characterised by humility and ability to be efficacious with all – the mighty and the low. This was Joy; she was able to engage in an argument – a reasonable argument – and show respect and appreciate for divergent views. That is why she has been appreciated across the political divide. This political divide is temporary; I do not appreciate people who treat Opposition as enemies. (Interjection) It goes for the government and it also goes for you on the Opposition benches. What is our end state in this world? To have a better country – whether a better country is built by NRM, DP or UPC, it is still our country. When UPC is doing something good, appreciate it and when NRM is doing the same, appreciate it. 

We do not have to live asunder in order to be useful. Our usefulness is a result of how we resolve the contradictions that are inherent in progress. That is what existence means. Existence does not mean breaking each other’s head in order to make your point - (Member timed out_)

1.05
CAPT SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to join the rest of Uganda in paying tribute to the late hon. Arinaitwe Joy Kariisa. On behalf of Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and on my own behalf, we would like to extend our sincere condolences to Eng. Kariisa and the family. 

Among the people who were passionate about women issues, Joy was one of them. In Parliament, this is where we sit. Whenever Joy would come to Parliament, this was our seat. Now when I look at my right, I see hon. Lowila hospitalised and on my left, Joy is lying before us. I always sat here in the middle.

I came to know Joy on our seat here when she introduced herself to me as a wife to Eng. Kariisa, which engineer I knew before because I worked in the Ministry of Defence. Because I knew Joy as being a Member who is passionate about women issues, I discussed with her the issues of the plight of the wives of soldiers. Joy was very particular to me. She told me, “One time I want you to take me to AcolPii. I have never been in the North. So that I can go and share the plight of those wives of soldiers in AcolPii and see how we can come up with a programme for them.” 


This is hon. Joy now lying before us, a legislator whom I had a lot of hopes in as far as taking care of the future and the lives of the wives of soldiers is concerned. Because Joy was a wife and being a wife to Eng. Kariisa who works with us, she was part of us and she really showed me interest in ensuring that the other soldiers’ wives also have a livelihood that is recognised.

As a country, we have lost. Joy was not only passionate about the wives or the women in her constituency or her district but you can imagine talking about AcolPii, which is in Pader. AcolPii has five division headquarters and it is the baby division of Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces. So you can imagine! She was trying to compare Buhweju being a new district with five division headquarters being the new division. I think she tried to compare the lives of women in AcolPii with the lives of women in Buhweju and I think that is where she got the interest and said, “I want to go to AcolPii” of all divisions because she could have preferred Mbarara where we have the second division but she said no, “I am going to AcolPii” – (Member timed out_)

1.07

MS VICTORIA BUSINGYE-RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kabarole District, my colleagues and Members of Parliament from Kabarole, I wish to deliver my condolences first and foremost to Joy’s parents who live in Kabarole; the Kanyankore family. The Kanyankore family is a very disciplined family, hardworking and enterprising. We have all their businesses running very well in Kabarole and no wonder the character of Joy reflects the character of her parents.

Kabarole has lost a woman it looked after because part of her education was in Kabarole District and when she came to Parliament, she was eager to know the Woman Member of Parliament. One day when I contributed on the Floor of Parliament, she sent me a note saying, “Kabarole is my second home”. We shall miss her.

To Mr and Mrs Kanyakore, just accept God’s decision. I know in the normal African culture, expectations dictate that it is the parents who are buried by their children but accept that God’s decision has no appeal. He is the only one who will fill the gap of Joy and fulfil all her activities. 

To Engineer, like we told you yesterday at the vigil, God cares and He knows that when He closes one window, He opens the other. Also on behalf of the Catholic Chaplaincy, I deliver our condolences to both the family of Joy and the parents because Joy has been one of us; very dedicated and compliant. She contributed monthly to the running of the Catholic Chaplaincy from her emoluments and we have no special words to describe her. I also deliver condolences from our Chaplain, Fr Phillip Balikuddembe, who is not here.

In totality, Joy fulfils the proverb that the softness of the chain is its strength. Humorous, humble, loving and down to earth was the description of Joy. It is very difficult and impossible for her to turn around and see what is happening and what is being said about her but if that chance existed, I know that with her dedication to prayer, she did not fear death - (Member timed out_)

1.09
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was not able to generate a poem as I usually do, I depended on hon. Mary Okurut. However, I would like to bring condolences levelled from the bottom of my heart to the family of the late Joy Kariisa and more so, Eng. Kariisa. I also bring my condolences in my capacity as the President of the Conservative Party.

Philosophers environmentally define death as the critical point at which life suddenly ends. Losing a person, young as she was, is a tragedy of bombardment beyond what William Shakespeare anticipates in Julius Caesar’s tragedy. William Shakespeare is very cynical about the concept of death. He says, “Let death come when it will.” 

It is problematic for me to extend a message of that magnitude to the family of the Kariisas. When a person, young as she was, passes away in the way she did, we in Parliament get worried because even the trauma of travelling from country to country could kill a person before she dies.

What am I saying, Mr Speaker? In the 1960s, one doctor called Karim from the Medical School at Mulago discovered a facilitating cure for pregnant women so that doctors would stop speculating on using the injection to cause immediate delivery. The atmosphere at Mulago then was conducive enough because the doctors were well facilitated and they did their research. But today in Mulago, what sort of research can you carry out when we even lack the apparatus? So, instead of spending so much on Defence, we would like to defend people who are living not those who are going to die. The time is now for us to reduce what we budgeted for Defence so that we can facilitate the medical technological order to be able to address some of the diseases, which we can match. Otherwise, there is a problem. I hope that in the next budget, Mr Speaker, we are going to be more particular about – (Member timed out_)

1.13
MR KENNETH KIYINGI BBOSA (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to add my voice in paying tribute to the fallen colleague and friend, the late hon. Joy Arinaitwe Kariisa.

On behalf of the people of Mawokota South, in Mpigi District, I extend sincere heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family, Engineer Kariisa, and the children of the late Joy Kariisa, the people of Buhweju, Parliament of Uganda and our motherland Uganda at large upon this loss.
The late has had a great impact on the youth most especially those aspiring to become leaders in different portfolios. Her youthfulness can only be depicted by the number of years she has lived on earth. Trust me, I had no idea that she was one year older than me. It is amazing! The actions of the late overshadowed her youthfulness. Her brilliance and commitment to serve the people of Buhweju, the hard work and devotion to the Almighty God have been something for us all to cherish in the service she has rendered to our country.

In that regard, I call upon all youth in Uganda especially those that have the heart to serve, to pick a leaf from the life and service of the late hon. Joy Kariisa. Please stand up and join us in the fight - fellow youth that are following us in paying tribute to the late hon. Joy Kariisa - so that we can be able to do profound service and have a contribution to our country while we are still live.

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, allow me to further thank Mr Kariisa and other family members for standing with the late. We have heard of what they did while she was in India; they contributed generously to each and everything that was looking forward to keeping her alive. Please stand firm and don’t give up. We pray that the late’s soul rests in eternal peace. Thank you.

1.18
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. On behalf of the people of Oyam and on my own behalf, I want to thank God for giving us the life of the late Joy Kariisa. But as a human being, I feel he has taken her so shortly. 

But you will recall that the Bible says that everything happens for the good of it, for those who believe in God. To that extent, I would like to say yes, the late has left us, but I believe God knows why He chose to take her at this time while we needed her most.

Mr Speaker, the late believed in core fundamental things. Those were roads and issues relating to women. These are two very important things that when we address them, we are actually addressing the problems of a nation. I would like to thank the late for that. I also ask the Government to address the issues she always stood for, if we are to celebrate her life properly. On that note, I call upon Government to address the issue of the health of women but of course not forgetting about the roads because these handle the centre of development. In that way we will be celebrating the life of the late Joy Kariisa in a good way.

I also would like to thank the husband because I was told that on two occasions, while the late was in India, he was by her side. I call upon all husbands to always be with their wives whenever they are facing both good and bad times. I thank you, Engineer Kariisa, for doing that for the late. God now loves the late much more than he did. I pray to God to always be with you and always defend and to take care of the orphans you have left behind.

Lastly, we were told and we even saw that the late was very patriotic. But I want to say that in Uganda, there is this one thing that is lacking: that is patriotism. If we were patriotic, we would not see corruption flying everywhere in the country and I – (Member timed out_)

1.21
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very, Mr Speaker. I wish to join Ugandans and to extend dear condolences from the people of Tororo County to the family of my dear sister, the late hon. Joy Kariisa. You have gone quite too early!

President Yoweri Museveni shot his way to power in 1986 in January and the late was born in February same year. Twenty seven years, the President is still in power but the late has gone.

Mr Speaker, while here paying tribute – are we paying tribute like animals that are helpless? What lessons do we learn? I want to call upon Government – our paying tribute whenever we lose citizens should not just be about lamenting like animals in the forests. When smallpox was wiping up generations in 1920s and 30s, the world had to sit down to find cure and prevention and so immunization was established.

Mr Speaker, this country cannot accept that a young girl of 27 years can die of a sickness that can be managed and prevented. I know that cancer is a complicated sickness but cancer comes as a result of us disturbing the environment. We have interfered with our environment. We all live around Lake Victoria. The contamination; the fish we eat caught from the lake; the destruction of the lakes and forests makes the diseases that would otherwise be in the forests toinvade the people. That is why you find young people of that age disappearing.

I want to call upon Government – we are not only going to stand here and lament as we pay tribute. I want to call upon Government to come up with a plan of action that will be serious and measurable to stop cancer-related death. We should not celebrate that Government paid for the air tickets.  Whenever one gets into a complication of that magnitude and you are to fly that distance – jet lag alone can cause your death.

In Mulago Hospital, the only machine for radiotherapy in the Cancer Institute has been down for three months; it was just repaired recently but with so many people walloping in pain.

Mr Speaker, at the end of sending off our dear sister, I would like to call upon Government – (Member timed out_)

1.25
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to join my colleagues who have spoken before me about the death of our young colleague, Joy Kariisa.

Mr Speaker, any Member of Parliament who comes from Bushenyi has a unique characteristic. They are very nationalistic; they are very hardworking and that symbolises Nyamurunga. (Laughter) A couple of years ago, we lost a daughter of Bushenyi called Bernadette Bigirwa. I attended the funeral and I only wish hon. Otafiire was here; he would have acknowledged the fact that my presence there did demonstrate that people in Bushenyi knew me better than him. (Laughter) So, when I am standing here to mourn my granddaughter I think the husband should not be surprised; and the people of Buhweju should not be surprised.

I only want to say that the death of this young lady is very sad to the family which is still very young. It is very unfortunate to the people of Buhweju and especially to the people of Uganda and the women of Uganda. It takes extra effort to bring out a woman from the ground and persuade her to embrace the politics of Uganda, which is so hostile to women: women are battered, women are ridiculed and women are abused. But for a young girl of 27 to agree to come out and contest and be a credible Member of Parliament, it takes a lot of courage! I think we really need to congratulate this young lady; she has made us proud. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, much as we have lost Joy, I only wish we would replay whatever we say whenever a person passes away. We make big statements but is our Government concerned about improving facilities in our own hospitals - (Member timed out_)

1.28
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Namayingo and on my own behalf, I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to our dear honourable sister whose last moments we are here to celebrate today. It is very unfortunate that right now we are here to celebrate and talk about Joy Kariisa. She has been my good friend. She has been a mentor. When we went to Kyankwanzi we used to sleep in the same place. I used to hear her talk about poultry and she mentored me in poultry keeping. She has been so dear to me. She has been humble. She has been a colleague, a friend and very developmental. It is very unfortunate that right now we are here to pay tribute to her. 

Mr Speaker, we have talked severally on the state of our health services in the country, and we seem not to be moving in the direction in which we need to be going because many people are leaving us. This very year we have had many who have parted and many people are changing geographically to another place where we have never been. 

It is my cry to the government that let us do what it requires to put right our health facilities. We have been hearing of Kariisa going to India and other places outside the country. How many Ugandans can afford to visit those places? We have many who are dying upcountry of the same problem. But if we improve our health services then we shall be able to improve the health of our people.

As politicians, right now we may be affected by many other diseases which are coming on board. One of them is stress. We are here but upcountry in our constituencies and districts, many people are openly contesting for our seats. So at the end of the day we are affected and we are stressed. How is the country prepared to handle all those stress moments? We may be here talking of cancer today when we have other ailments, which are also affecting us.

I stand here to encourage the family of the late Joy. It is really unfortunate – (Member timed out_)

1.32
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance to pay tribute to my sister Joy Kariisa. She has been good - all has been said. I only have to say that may her soul rest in peace and may all the angels welcome her to reach Heaven. I want to send my condolences to the relatives, Mr Kariisa and the country at large. We have really lost someone who is energetic; someone who would bring new ideas to this nation. 

But, Mr Speaker, I am always disturbed as we come to pay tribute to our friends. However much we say a lot here and out there when our people die, things end here. Even in Parliament here we have said it and things end here; and we die and we get all these problems at our place of work. As Members of Parliament we have a lot of work. The commissioner has just said that these phone calls contribute to the cause of cancer and these are the means of communication that we use. Apart from that, when we are here we do not rest. When we are in the constituency we do not rest. 

I want to move, Mr Speaker, with due respect, that if a Member of Parliament dies at a place of work, we do not end at appreciating and paying tribute. At least two children of the late should be paid school fees for up to the university. That would be good. In the Bible, it says that the dead are not dead. I know our sister is here and she is seeing us. She will be buried on Sunday but she will still live with us and she will be around in another form; I strongly believe it. Why don’t we pass a motion that at least two children of a Member of Parliament who dies at a place of work, during the very term, be paid school fees? That will be enough and it will be appreciation for the work done by a Member of Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

1.34
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me a chance to say a word as we send off our friend. I would have no words to say to a friend of this calibre who is lying before us but I pray God gives me the courage and strength to say something.

Joy’s office was opposite mine and we sat together in PAC. I remember the first day she went to Nakasero, I went to check on her but before that I had had a friend working with UCDA who had such a problem. I remember telling her, “Honourable, do not remain here, please. Try to go to India.” I thank the family for adhering to that request. 

I also want to thank the President because as party members, we went to State House for our business and told the President that one of our friends was sick and was supposed to go to India but now I have heard it from hon. Tashobya that the President lent a helping hand. Thank you very much, Mr President.

The representative of the leader of opposition has given a biblical quotation when she was giving her condolence message; that we should be ready; death is like a thief; we do not know at what time it is coming. Today, it has robbed us of someone in our generational cause. I am not a lawyer but I think thieves are always taken to court. If thieves keep taking generational cause people like these, what are lawyers doing? We should take it to court.

Mr Speaker, we cannot overcome the pain we have; we share it with the family and everybody because Joy was joyful and no one can believe that she was 27. Whatever she spoke was outside her age bracket. She was encouraging, motivating and hardworking. Joy, you have no problem with anyone in this House like I have heard and I know and we shall always pray for your eternal rest. May God bless you.

1.37
MR REMEGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Colleagues, I did not know Joy very much but what touched me about her was in the very first days when we came as MPs and she met me in the restaurant. She wanted to know my name and where I came from and thought I was a first time Member of Parliament and I told her I have been here before and I am from Karamoja. She was very keen to know what happens in Karamoja, what developments are there, especially in water. I told her about what we are doing about water together with the Minister for Karamoja who is the First Lady. She wanted a report of PRDP and what is happening in Karamoja about the dams. We had to walk to my office to get that report of what the government is doing there, and she even requested me that she wanted to meet the First Lady to tell her about their water problem. 

I was wondering about how Buhweju had no water. Many people have now said it that on the hill tops, people cannot access water. She was really keen about water and I do not know what the Ministry of Water and Environment can do about it. If we can do anything for her, then we need to look at the two issues: The issue of the roads and the issue of water.

Interestingly, it is the members from Bushenyi and Buhweju such as Biraaro, Joy and the former one Deus Bikwatsizehi who have been focused and humble. I found Joy to be a very good listener. She asks more questions and more questions and she wanted to know what was going on in Karamoja. Just like the representative of UPDF said that she was keen to know what was happening in Acholi Pi. 

Mr Kariisa and family, it is not only you who has lost a child, a daughter, a wife. I think we have lost someone who could have done so much for this country and contributed to the wider understanding and involvement in the developments of the country because she was keen to ask about what was happening in Karamoja and then to even listen. Sometimes in this Parliament, we do not listen to each other and I do not know why. We spend so much time talking and sometimes in a negative way. But I think let us spend time also listening to one another. It is very important to listen even when you cannot do anything.

1.40
MR STEPHEN BAKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. On behalf of the people of Bukooli County North in Bugiri and on my own behalf, I rise to condole with the family, relatives, friends and in-laws, Parliament of Uganda for the demise of our colleague, Joy Arinaitwe Kariisa. I knew her when we first came here as the Ninth Parliament. Joy was one person you could not miss. She was joyful as the name suggests, she was bright, charming, beautiful and very smart. 

Therefore, as you all know, when you are starting a new Parliament, you are interested in knowing who is around. So I got to know about Joy and fortunately when they allocated us offices, she was allocated just close to mine together with the hon. member for Ntungamo Municipality. I got to interact with her frequently in this House and got to know her as a very good person who had a passion for her people.

It is so bad that we have lost her when Parliament had actually started delivering on most of the pledges. I am quite sure that the issues of water and the roads that she started would have been delivered to the people of Buhweju before the term ends.

Again there was an opportunity for me to work with Joy Kariisa under the transport sub-committee of the IPU organising committee. For those of you who saw the beautiful buses that came here to alleviate the transport problem from Mombasa, Joy was on the transport sub-committee. In fact, one Friday before we hosted the IPU, I was supposed to travel with Joy to Mombasa to inspect the suitability and comfort of those buses before they were brought to Kampala for the IPU. I reached the airport, made calls to Joy, we were getting late for the flight and she was nowhere to be seen. I travelled alone to Mombasa and the following week when I got back, I learnt that actually Joy collapsed on that Friday and that was the beginning of her problem. Joy never got a good life again.

I was in India when colleagues visited her in hospital. I was not able to visit her in hospital because of the tight schedule but colleagues did and they gave us information that she was recuperating and things would be fine. She came here and thanked us; unfortunately, her situation worsened and we are now here paying tribute to Joy Kariisa. It is so sad.

To the people of Buhweju, I thank you for having brought this lady unopposed. In fact, these days they say “Basima ogenze” - we are paying tribute to her for having been able to galvanize the support of all the people.

1.44
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. On behalf of the women of Otuke District and on my own behalf, I would also like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to my friend, hon. Joy, the deceased.

I remember when we had just joined Parliament, we were curious to know what happens in this place. Being in that clique of first timers, the pioneer women of the new districts, the young, the freshers, we wanted to know everything that was happening in Parliament. The people who had been in Parliament before would tell us that, “You people, if want to be seen to be active in Parliament, you have to talk, talk on anything and everything.” Some of us actually took that advice and ended up with problems but I am happy that my sister refused to take that advice. She remained the true person that she was. 

Mr Speaker, I also remember that during our stay in Kyankwanzi, I got more time to interact with the late Joy. We talked about her sickness, she showed me the scar on her head after the first operation and these are some of the attributes I got to know or learnt from her as a friend. Joy was a very friendly person, warm hearted and open to advice. 

Joy was calculative in everything that she did. She was very careful. With any word she spoke, she thought twice before uttering anything.  

Joy loved her party, the NRM. You know at times we have smaller caucuses within the caucus and she was one of the members in those smaller caucuses that would meet somewhere deep in our hidden places and she was so vibrant and active. We would sit there and strategise and say what do we do for the party now? Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is bashing us seriously, how do we fight back? Joy loved her party, she did everything she would to make her party remain vibrant and in charge as it has always been. 

I would like to conclude by sending my heartfelt deepest condolence message to the family of the late Joy – (Member timed out_)

1.47
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues to pay tribute to the late Joy. She was a personal friend, close to me and really very dear to most of us.

I met Eng. Kariisa, the husband, during our lunch break and we had a series of interactions. I will now thank you, Eng. Kariisa, before the whole country. Engineer, thank you so much for loving hon. Kariisa and hon. Kariisa loved you. No wonder that is the reason she even took up your name. For some women, when you marry them, they cannot even take up your name – (Laughter) - but for her, she did. Joy loved you Kariisa and you cannot even differentiate between Kariisa you and Kariisa her. I thank you for being by her side.

I feel a lot of pain as someone who was orphaned at the age of those children I have seen. I know what it means; it is very painful, you will go through a lot of trauma and stigma but God will sail you through.

To Buhweju, hon. Kariisa was very passionate. Buhweju and Rwampara are similar. The challenge is the rugged environment in a way – mountainous. Our roads are very poor and you will hardly find water in some areas. In the health centres, the mothers deliver using some – there are no ambulances and whatever. But we always talked about this. 

I am happy that the time she was in Parliament, she delivered on the few promises she made that were campaign promises. But I also want to thank you Engineer. I am aware from the interaction with her that you were very instrumental in her being the politician she was. Thank you so much and God bless you.

Finally, to the Government; I know everything was done for Joy to save her life but it was not possible. Like my colleagues in the Opposition have said, we need to fix our things and put our house in order. Some of us may not be in position to even access the President if it is the President who will always deliver on who goes where. 

So, I am happy that we were together when hon. Yona Musinguzi went to State House but how many will get the opportunity for the Public Accounts Committee to speak for you? So, that is the reason I pray that we fix our systems.

Joy, you lived a joyful life, you were a very good – you lived like a candle in the wind. May your soul rest in eternal peace.

1.49
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and pay tribute to a good friend, Joy.

Death is strange. It strikes every time but every time it comes, it is very strange. I send my condolence on behalf of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to the family, the parents, the husband and children.

Joy was a very committed legislator, very committed to her constituency. The first time that I interacted with Joy, she was asking me what I have done for my people in Nakasongola District. At the time she asked me, I was running a poultry project for the women together with hon. Freedom Kwiyucwiny of Zombo District. She consulted us very late but she worked around the clock and joined the project. She joined us and we put the women together. The women of Buhweju, Zombo and Nakasongola districts came together for training and in the end, we supplied the chicks and the women successfully had their poultry projects running.

What was very striking in Joy is that much as we went for the project early, she brought in more women than ourselves. She was able to carry 40 women from Buhweju and it was very expensive. It was something like Shs 300,000 to train each woman for a week and be able to implement the project. I brought in 15 and I think that Zombo had like 20. Some of the 15 I brought, I had some men but Joy had only women. She told me that she believed in her women and her women excelled in poultry keeping.    

It is very sad for this Parliament that every time that we are burying – the other day, we buried hon. Cerinah Nebanda at 23 and today we are burying Joy at 27. When I looked at the body of my fallen friend, I could not even recognise her which means she went through a lot of pain, very painful treatment and I say sorry to the family because it must be very traumatising – (Member timed out_)

1.53
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

I stand here on behalf of the people of Busia Municipality and on my behalf. I also represent the Busia Parliamentary Group and the FDC party. 

I support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen Member, hon. Arinaitwe Kariisa. It is very sad indeed. Joy, as you see her, was so joyful, humble and everything as a religious person can be. 

One of the issues that we have failed to address in this Government of Uganda is health. Health, especially things like trauma and cancer are coming because of the ICT equipment we are using, the cars we are importing, the food we are eating - remember we have just passed the counterfeit goods Bill - and also the gases and chemicals that are sprayed all over. When the people inhale these things and they get contaminated, they get sick with such problems.

I just want to urge Government to bring or build a hospital for cancer and such related problems but our health system is very sick in this country because we do not have the facilities. I just want to thank hon. Jalia Bintu for having told us that there is a partner in India who wanted to build a hospital in Uganda but now it is four years down the road, and the government hasn’t done anything! I just want to tell you that let him come to Busia because for us we have land. We shall give him land to build such a hospital because our health system will improve. It will cut down on the costs of travelling to India and it will even attract tourists to come. The government will get revenue and also other people will get revenue from such facilities when we have them. 

Joy was such a religious person. She was Catholic and she was so committed to her religion and her behaviour depicted it. I want to thank the husband for being gender sensitive to our colleague and other husbands should emulate such an example – (Member timed out_)

1.56
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to speak about Joy, our colleague. I bring sincere condolences from the people of Bulamogi County, Kaliro District to the young family of the late Joy, the people of Buhweju and to the nation at large. 

This Parliament once again has been hit with sadness when a second young vibrant woman has fallen. It is very unfortunate and we need prayers for the Members of Parliament and for the country. 

I got close to Joy when I knew that she had come to this Parliament unopposed. Nobody contested against her. That attracted me to her and I went to share with her asking what she did. What was it that all these people could trust you to this extent that certainly in the politics of this country, someone can easily come to this Parliament unopposed? One would rather stand up against you knowing that they will lose but just to ensure that you do not come unopposed. But this shows the level of confidence and hope that the people of Buhweju had in our fallen colleague. I can just imagine the mood in Buhweju when they learnt that the person that the people sent to Parliament when everybody else withdrew had fallen. It is such a sad moment.

To the family, I say that in many situations when incidents like this happen, people ask questions like “God, why have you done this?” Even others castigate God for what He has done but the Bible tells us that the Wisdom of God is far beyond the understanding of mankind and I always tell people that if God ever got a cane and beat you, do not run away from Him but instead run towards Him. He is a Merciful God, He is a comforting God. 

To the government, there were words better spoken by our fallen colleagues. She talked passionately about health, staffing in the health centres and I believe and pray that her voice will continue echoing to those people in leadership and Government and that you will respond to her cries. 

Finally, to the Members of Parliament, there is nothing much we can do about this. Five of us are gone but what we can do is to change when we are still alive, and to be very sure that our lives are secure in Jesus Christ. Jesus is the Way, the Truth and Life. Let us give our love to Jesus Christ and only then shall we be certain that after we have departed, we shall have it. 

2.00
MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. On my behalf, on behalf of the people of Buzaaya County that I represent and on behalf of the entire nation, it is indeed a sad moment that we have lost our colleague. We have lost a person who has been a peace maker, a darling, a dear, a hardworking person and above all, we have missed her simplicity. 

Mr Speaker, my colleagues have already said a lot about Joy and indeed Joy has been a joyful woman. At this moment, we can’t say much other than to pray for the family and for ourselves so that God can do whatever He can to heal the wounds of the family and our souls. 

Mr Speaker, on the side of Government, I believe we have done a lot of lamenting. My colleagues have talked about the health sector in this country that is indeed lagging behind. So many people are moving out of this country to get health care. My question is, what is the role of Parliament when it comes to budgeting and appropriation? It is at this point that I urge Government and this Parliament to come together and set priorities on where we should spend other than moving in the way we are moving because when teachers come to complain, everyone stands up; when it comes to roads, everyone is complaining; when it comes to health, everyone is complaining. Do we have a set plan? Do we have priorities in this country? I believe if all other agencies of government join hands with this Parliament, we shall come up with set priorities and at least everyone will know where we are moving to. Thank you, Mr Speaker and may her soul rest in eternal peace. 

2.03
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, PWD Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. This is a very difficult moment. Hon. Joy was a member of the committee on gender when I was the chairperson. I knew her as a humble, very kind and very focused person. She could not speak on issues that she was not sure of. She was so selective in her speech and very careful. She was very responsible in many ways. I want to tell you that if she was not coming for any committee meeting, she would ring the chair. If she was to be late, she would say so and you could hear the respect even on phone, which is very rare in many cases. 

Mr Speaker, when we joined the Ninth Parliament, I saw very many young people and I was happy. I knew that it was one way of sustaining leadership in this country but it is so sad now to lose a leader of that rank at the age of 27. My prayer is that the family should stand firm. These things happen - It has not been easy and I know from the time she fell sick, you have been following her very carefully. Let us accept the truth now and get prepared to do all we can to keep life moving. 

I know that we have lost a very strong lady. When she came from India, she was still weak, but when I spoke to her, she showed hope in life. She would say, “Honourable member, do not mind, I will be okay.” And she would struggle to come to Parliament. She tried her best to do what she could. So we should be strong at this moment because I know it is not easy. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

2.06
MR JOHN BOSCO MUBITO (NRM, Budiope County West, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. When we come here, there is a way we bond and act like members of one family. It is so painful to see one of our colleagues lying before us. 

I feel, Mr Speaker, that you and the commissioners need to do something about this. When I look around, most of these Members are sick. We are all sick and we are going. (Laughter) 

But it will be bad news to the nations when we see all our colleagues going one by one – I know we cannot all go at once, but Members are dying gradually and it is bad news for the country. I want to propose, Mr Speaker, that you organise a special day of prayer for our Parliament so that God can reduce on this death rate and spare the lives of the Members of Parliament. 

I know that death is a must, but as a young Member of Parliament, I pray that it takes Members who are above 60. (Laughter) The future of the country is in our hands, we the young Members of Parliament. But someone has gone at the age of 27! I am sorry honourable members for those of you who feel that I hate the elderly Members. But as a young Member of Parliament, I feel very bad that we have lost a Member of Parliament at the age of 27. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

2.09
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. On behalf of the people of Ibanda North and on my own behalf, I would like to extend my sincere heart-felt condolences to the family of the late hon. Joy Kariisa, and the people of Buhweju. 

Mr Speaker, a lot has been said about hon. Joy and it is true she has been joyful, very kind, upright, honest and objective in her deliberations and submissions. But I want to mention that perhaps her humility and humble ways are generic. Last year, when I was in Fort Portal, I slept in a hotel and I did not know the owner. In the morning, I met an old man who spoke to me with a lot of humility. After my interaction with him, I later discovered that it was Joy’s father. And it is not a surprise that Joy has been that humble because even her father is humble. 

My friends who are close to her husband tell me he is also very humble. I am on the Public Accounts Committee and so was Joy. She would make informed deliberations. In her few words, Buhweju and her family would dominate. She would rarely stay out in workshops. After a very busy day, she would drive home saying, “The fuel is provided by my husband so I have every reason to go back to my husband and children.” And that is when others were tired and running to have a rest. 

Death does not segregate; it does not segregate based on political ideologies, colour or tribe; that is why it has taken Kariisa at 27 while some of us have been praying to have that age tripled – (Member timed out_)

2.13
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Igara West and on my own behalf, I would like to convey our deepest condolences to the family, the people of Buhweju and to the nation at large. One of my sub-counties, Bitooma shares a border with Buhweju. We share a lot in common. 

I first met hon. Joy Kariisa at the time of her nomination for the primaries. People are saying she went through unopposed. That was in the second round, but in the primaries, she run a very smart campaign. She was opposed by a senior politician and she was young and new in the race of politics, but she convinced the people. That is when I saw the strength and determination of this young lady. 

The second occasion was when we had just come here. She had just bought a new car and in the morning, she was unhappy saying some thieves had vandalised her car. I thought she would break down, but she said, “They are joking, I am going to repair it within a short time.” So I saw a lady with a lot of courage. 

She spoke with a lot of passion on the issues of Buhweju. I know that they have talked about the lack of water and the road from Nyakabirizi to Bwizibwera. I would like to mention two other things, which were dear to Joy and I hope the Leader of Government Business will take this one on record: One, yes we can talk of hospitals – if you fall sick in buhweju and you are looking for a government hospital, God bless you, you have to travel to Mbarara, Kitagata or even to Fort Portal. But I know talking about a hospital is not a small thing; the minister will say, “We need to plan for it” and so on. 

The last time we visited Nsiika Health Centre IV, I was with hon. Biraaro in the company of the Speaker of Parliament when she visited Buhweju. The condition of that health centre was pathetic and since you, our honourable Minister, hon. Opendi are here, in honour of the late hon. Joy Kariisa, can we do something within the budget to rehabilitate and put the health facility back in shape? This will ensure that a Ugandan in Buhweju who falls sick will not be disappointed; the journey from Buhweju to Bushenyi or to Kitagata is painful. But at least if it was within their area, if we could rehabilitate that health centre, I would feel happy - (Member timed out_)

2.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Mr Speaker, I join the rest of my colleagues to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Arinaitwe Kariisa Joy, Woman Representative of Buhweju District. 

Mr Speaker, Kariisa Joy was a role model for the youth in the Ninth Parliament; she exhibited a high level of discipline and those of you who are looking for discipline, she was attractive. She handled her things in a humble manner and she was very eager to learn. She behaved as a married person – (Interjections) - Yes, and you could see it in whatever she was doing.

Mr Speaker, many people make false reports about parliamentarians but the fact that they failed to pick one story to write about her is enough to tell you how she distanced herself from some of these issues.

She was a good learner; the first time I came to know about this young MP, she came to me and asked, “Can you tell me how you managed to stay in Parliament for three terms?” And it was a bit challenging. So I had to try to recount what I did and I think has kept me here and communicated. 

She was a reliable member and she never deviated from positions we would take as a group. And she was a very good member of the NRM caucus. She was very religious – if I can recall. 

Mr Speaker, experience is not what happens to a man or woman but what they do with what happens to them. In this Parliament, there are things which have continued to bring us grief and you only talk about them when we have grief. But it is important that we address the issue of insurance and safety; it should be a requirement for all members of Parliament, for instance, to wear safety belts. I have an experience with a road accident and we have very many of our colleagues who have perished or suffered through road accidents. The insurance cover we have here is not adequate and we need to build a robust insurance for health and any other things that touch us. 

I thank the President for his big heart which he has exhibited across board. But what is very important is that we must build institutions, especially policies, that must safeguard us when we are in need. It is against this background that, Mr Speaker, since you are the chair of the Business Committee, I urge you to critically look into the health insurance scheme in this institution. 

When I had an accident, I was not able to go out of the country because when I asked my doctors, they said they did not have very good materials but they would fix it. And they fixed me. But, Mr Speaker, a year after, my insurance provider appeared to be thinking that maybe what they lost during that time, they must recover during the time I am – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have a condolence message from hon. Amongin Christine Aporu, Minister of State for Teso Affairs, addressed to the Speaker. I do not have time to read it now. I have another condolence message from Prof. Pius Okong, Chairperson of the Health Service Commission. This is also addressed to the Speaker, expressing condolences to the House.

Hon. Members, I have been requested to announce the following: Requiem mass will be at 4.00 p.m. at Christ the King Church. Let us all be there. Then there is a vigil at home in Nansana this evening. Please join the family. The casket leaves for Buhweju tomorrow morning. And, hon. Members, as I announced earlier, the transport for burial on Sunday will leave at 6.00 a.m.

Hon. Members, the motion is that: “Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the relatives, friends, the people of Uganda and particularly the people of Buhweju that she represented in the Ninth Parliament upon the loss of hon. Arinaitwe Joy Kariisa. Two, that it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contributions made by the late hon. Arinaitwe Joy Kariisa to the Ninth Parliament.” That is the motion before the House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We have had this debate but time now is for us to go and prepare for Church.

East African Community Anthem (One Verse)

National Anthem (One Verse) 

(Exit of the late hon. Joy Kariisa Arinaitwe)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, thank you very much for your contributions on the debate to this motion, which was a sad one and I apologise that time could not be extended to all of us but thank you for staying this long. We started at 11.00 a.m. and now it is coming to 2.30 p.m. That is a long time to sit through lunch - thank you very much. This is the respect we have accorded to our fallen colleague. 

We continue holding the family and the district of Buhweju in prayer. Let us pray for our country, let us pray for the family and for this Parliament that the gap created serves to give out lessons, which we can learn from and see how best we can handle situations of loss of this nature. Blessings to all of you! Thank you.

This House stands adjourned until, as was previously adjourned, to the 10th but this special sitting now stands adjourned. I have already announced that the requiem mass is going to take place in one-and-a half hours so allow the body to move there and Members, please let us move there to join the family in the Church and prepare also to go to Buhweju. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 2.22 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 10 September 2013 at 11.00 a.m.) 
