

Wednesday, 12 September 2018

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I apologise for the delay. We had a number of policy meetings this morning, which took a bit of time, but I hope we shall be able to catch up with our day’s work. 

We have a few issues of national concern.

2.53
MS DOROTHY AZAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On Sunday in my district, Kamwenge, a storm destroyed everything in Biguli and Bwizi subcounties in Kibale East Constituency, Kamwenge Town Council, Kahunge Subcounty and Bigodi Town Council. It is as if we had snow in our area. People who watched TV West yesterday saw how devastating the storm was.

Madam Speaker, I have raised this as a matter of national importance because as Members of Parliament, we appropriate money for disaster preparedness for the Office of the Prime Minister. However, it is very unfortunate that sometimes we raise these issues and we are not heard. Therefore, my prayer is that since we have homeless people right now and people have lost all the crops that they had planted, the Government should avail us with planting materials such as maize, beans, cassava and others, so that at least our people can plant since the season has just began. (Interruption)

MR ABIGABA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, it is not only crops which were destroyed. Since yesterday, I could not sleep because of the large volumes of calls from the LCI chairpersons and locals. Schools have also lost roofs. Some children are right now hospitalised in Rukunyu Hospital because they got hurt as a result of the storm. It is an appalling situation and we really call upon the Government to come to our rescue. Thank you.

MS AZAIRWE: Thank you, my colleague. Madam Speaker, we request the Office of the Prime Minister to rescue our people. It hurts because Kamwenge is one of the areas where the Office of the Prime Minister is present because we host about 80,000 refugees who are being given assistance. It would be bad to see our people having such problems and they are not assisted. We shall be very grateful to hear from the Government and see them go down to assess the situation there. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The minister in charge of disaster preparedness is directed to go to Kamwenge or to send his agents to establish the extent of the problem and to address it very quickly. It is not just the food but even the schools are in a bad shape.

2.56
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. 

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries put a ban on the sale of livestock and livestock products in March 2017 due to Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD), and the ban has remained in place up to today. We wonder why the ban has taken very long. Some people are selling their animals as if they are thieves and at low prices. Some Government officials have made this a lucrative business. They allow the farmers to sell but they charge whoever sells a truck-full of livestock Shs 500,000 as a stealthy method of getting money. 

Madam Speaker, some children are unable to go to school because of that ban and we have not even registered new cases of foot and mouth disease –(Interruption)

MR NOAH MUTEBI: Madam Speaker, what is happening in his district is also happening in Nakaseke and Nakasongola. When you go to my constituency, out of six subcounties, there are three markets in three subcounties that are open. In the other subcounties, the markets are not functioning. I wonder whether it is possible for foot and mouth disease to be prevalent in three subcounties and yet cattle markets in the neighbouring three subcounties are operating normally.

Madam Speaker, I think we should conduct a thorough investigation so that we see how our farmers can be guided in handling foot and mouth disease.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is directed to urgently come and address us on the impact of the ban, which has been on since March 2018. This means that the livelihood of the people in that community is affected. It is urgent and we want an answer on Tuesday.

2.59
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, National Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to bring to your attention the status of some Rwandan nationals who are being arrested by security forces and detained without being produced before courts of law. I have a couple of names that we should take note of. The names are Vanessa Gasaro and Jessica Munhongerwa.

Madam Speaker, in the Daily Monitor of 9 August 2018, it was reported that some Rwandan nationals resident in Kakumiro were arrested. When their relatives tried to find out about their whereabouts, they were told to go to the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI). All the attempts to reach them have been futile.

Madam Speaker, aside from security concerns, there are concerns about the diplomatic relations with Rwanda. I am aware that Rwanda National Congress has been accused of mobilising within Uganda to destabilise the Government of Rwanda and it has greatly put our business interests in jeopardy. I have some young people who were doing business in Rwanda and they have had to leave the country because of their concerns and worries. 

In the spirit of the East African Community – since we are all members of the East African Community – it would be important for the ministries in charge to inform us about the status of our diplomatic relations with Rwanda as well as the security status of Rwandan nationals in Uganda, so that we can ask the Rwandan Government to reciprocate the same for our nationals there. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether this should go to the Minister of State for East African Community Affairs or to the minister in charge of security. However, let us ask the Government to come and address us on the issues raised by hon. Adeke next week.

3.01
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

We have a regional referral hospital in Lira but at the moment, the director is retiring. The status of the regional referral hospital is alarming. There are no specialists in the hospital and interns can no longer go there. Everybody is well aware that it is interns who help us more than doctors because most of the doctors are many times not available. The situation there is not okay. 

Above all, Madam Speaker, we have not had power in the hospital for the last three days. The hospital is operating on Yaka which and we are wondering why a Government hospital would be operating on Yaka. I do not know whether you understand what I mean by Yaka. It is not the other billing system that we used to have; with Yaka, they pay whatever they consume. This means that – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the matter for which you came to me was absenteeism of doctors; now have you moved to Yaka? (Laughter)

MS JOY ATIM: I told you, Madam Speaker, that the hospital has not had power for the last three days. That means surgical operations on patients in the theatre are not happening and people are being referred to a private hospital. 

Madam Speaker, I therefore wanted the minister to assure us on what they are ready to do in the hospital now that there are no specialists and the director is retiring. The theatre is not operational because of lack of power. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, hon. Joy Atim, for giving way. The information I would like to give this House is that some time back, I think in the Ninth Parliament, we debated this issue of important installations like hospitals being on Yaka. We resolved that these installations could not be on Yaka because you can be in the middle of an operation and the Yaka gets over. So, this is a serious matter. I do not know why this hospital would now be on Yaka rather than constant supply of electricity.

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite the Minister of Health to respond to that issue.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start with the issue raised by the honourable Member of Parliament from Lira District regarding the absenteeism of specialists – the doctors. Time and again, we have said we have a challenge. All our regional hospitals are supposed to be teaching hospitals, implying that interns are supposed to be posted there and trained by the senior consultants. However, we have had a challenge; the Health Service Commission has always advertised these jobs, but the pay for these consultants and senior consultants is still low. They are not attracted to work for us in Government. Those who take up these positions work once or twice a week. 

Madam Speaker, until we address the issue of remuneration of senior consultants, we shall not be able to attract them to our health facilities. We came up with an ideal structure but Government would not be able to pay those wages. We agreed that maybe we shall be able to address this in a phased manner. So, until we address the issue of pay – (Interjections) – Yes, people are dying but if a senior consultant is given Shs 3 million and yet he can be paid Shs 10 million in Kenya or Rwanda or even at private health facilities around, what would attract him? Therefore, Madam Speaker, this is our biggest challenge. 

Absenteeism comes in because they work for Government for two or three days and move to other facilities elsewhere. We hope we shall be able to address this slowly. However, it remains a big challenge. Now that we are going into the next budgeting cycle, I think we need to look at this further.

Madam Speaker, regarding the issue of electricity supply, Yaka would not be a problem but the bigger problem is that the funds given to the health facilities are not adequate to enable them cover utilities. This has always been a challenge, but we have had discussions with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to see how best to support these health facilities.  

3.08
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week on Tuesday and Wednesday, I noticed suspicious people trailing me. Even at my home, we saw suspicious people close to my perimeter wall. My life is in danger. I do not know why they are trailing me. 

Madam Speaker, you recall that in the Ninth Parliament, a similar incident happened. The Minister of Security then was hon. Karooro Okurut. I brought the matter to her attention and thereafter, I got some relief. I do not know why, in a country where all of us are citizens, we are encountering situations which are unclear and unexpected. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence and raise the matter before the Minister of Security, the Minister of Internal Affairs, and the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs. I would like them to assure me whether I am safe because I am not sure whether my life is safe. This country is slipping into a situation where we cannot be sure about what is going to happen next. Therefore, I would like to hear from the ministers whether I am safe and why I am being trailed. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Monday the Parliamentary Commission convened and among the issues we discussed was the issue of security of Members. We agreed that for those Members who feel endangered, we shall ask Government to give them special attention depending on the degree of concern to their security. Accordingly, I now inform the Ministry of Internal Affairs to take interest in hon. Nzoghu’s issue so that he can be assisted. We shall discuss other things later.

3.11
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we speak now, no one in Uganda is safe. Even those that have not yet got threats to their lives are insecure. We should not wait for tragedy to knock again; it is time for Parliament to pronounce itself and say “enough is enough”. Somebody who wants to take anyone’s life will not send even a signal; tragedy just knocks suddenly. Madam Speaker, maybe Members have not got time to confide in you that they no longer stay in their homes. Some of them have taken up accommodation elsewhere. I do not want to mention where they stay because of security reasons. 

Madam Speaker, it is high time that Government prioritised the security of Members and everybody else in this country. Otherwise, you might have to communicate to the appointing authority that the leaders in the three ministries - defence, internal affairs and security - should either be moved and some other people that are up to the task front for those jobs, or they tender in their resignations. For how long are we going to continue with such tragic losses? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did not want to go into the details of what the commission discussed. We are taking some measures which I would not like to publicise, but we are concerned.

In the distinguished strangers’ gallery we have a delegation from the Nairobi City Council Assembly, the Speaker’s Panel. They include hon. Kennedy Obuya, Member for Imara Daima Ward; hon. Anthony Kimemia, Member for Harambee Ward; hon. Evans Otiso, Member for Kwa Reuben Ward; hon. Jackline Apondi who represents the women; hon. Silas Matara, Member for Dandora; and Mr Adam Kibwana, the committee clerk. You are all welcome. (Applause)

We also have a young generation of Ugandan pupils and teachers from St Kizito Ediofe Primary School in Arua, represented by hon. Atiku and hon. Moreen Osoru. You are welcome. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EFFECTS OF THE INTEGRATED FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ON THE BUDGET OPERATIONS OF NATIONAL MEDICAL STORES IN FY 2018/19

3.15
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make reference to the concerns raised in this House regarding the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) on the operations of National Medical Stores (NMS). We uploaded the statement on the intranet. I will try as much as possible to summarise it. 

The purpose of this statement is to provide clarification on the rationale of having National Medical Stores operate on the IFMS, like any other Government institution whose funding is charged on the Consolidated Fund as appropriated by this House.

The Integrated Financial Management System is one of the major public financial management reforms that was introduced and adopted by Government to enhance accountability of public funds. It is a tool that facilitates tracking of budgets from appropriation to expenditure management and eventually to accountability. In addition, Government abolished operations of Government accounts in commercial banks and required all Government institutions to open accounts in Bank of Uganda to facilitate the operations under the Treasury Single Account (TSA), which has greatly improved the management of Government revenue and boosted the Government cash flows. To date, all central Government votes operate on this system and consequently, execute all their transactions through this financial system.

National Medical Stores is in this category but 92 per cent of its funds, which are for payment to suppliers of medicines, are expended on this system while the remaining eight per cent (Shs 22 billion) for operations and appropriation in aid budget from donors are processed off the system.

As part of the budget preparation for FY 2018/19, all Government ministries, agencies and local governments, including National Medical Stores, were instructed through the Budget Call Circular to provide details of their budgets by item where the funds would be approved and expended. It is against this background that National Medical Stores was required to break down their budget in order not to budget on one line item for medical supplies which is meant for procurement of drugs and medical supplies and yet some of their expenditure relates to operational activities such as salaries, allowances, fuel and many others which were not being reflected appropriately. Prior to this, National Medical Stores used to lump all their budgets under one item, that is, 224001- medical supplies, when actually they spend some funds under other items, contrary to the existing law. 

On the expenditure side, block transfers of funds were made from the Consolidated Fund to the National Medical Stores’ commercial bank account. They would then proceed to undertake their detailed transactions outside our main Government system. This phenomenon circumvents detailed scrutiny of expenditure and constrains Government reporting on actual aggregate expenditures.

In line with the guidance in the Budget Call Circular, all institutions, including National Medical Stores, were required to prepare and submit detailed budget estimates and work plans for financial year 2018/2019 for the funds under the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) as well as Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) which they spend as appropriation in aid. National Medical Stores complied with this requirement; the estimates were part of the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Health appropriated by Parliament and the money allocated at item level in line with the appropriation by Parliament was duly loaded on this system.

Out of the total budget for National Medical Stores, which now stands at approximately Shs 300 billion, Shs 75 billion was availed on our system for quarter one on 12 July 2018 for warranting and spending by NMS. Accordingly, in order to implement the budget on the system, at the beginning of the financial year 2018/19, the Accountant-General wrote to National Medical Stores requesting them to submit details of their suppliers so that they are entered on our system for NMS to start processing payments. However, NRM –(Laughter)– Madam Speaker, I am glad that both sides of the House are happy to hear that.

The reasons that they refused to comply included the following: 

1. 	The National Medical Stores cannot operate based on the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, which constrains reallocations to 10 per cent of the level appropriated by Parliament – through the virement; 

2. 	The National Medical Stores operates other software systems that focus on procurement, storage and distribution of drugs across the country, which are not compatible with our system and as such would constrain operations in the financial year 2018/2019;

3. 	The National Medical Stores receive off-budget support from other donors such as the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) whose financial support cannot be accessed through the Consolidated Fund. 

Madam Speaker, on 23 July 2018, the Minister of Health and our ministry held a meeting involving the General Manager of National Medical Stores and other technical officers from the two ministries. We discussed this matter and it was agreed that - 

(i) 	Funds would be warranted and transferred to an operational account as an interim measure to avert delays in service delivery, pending harmonisation of our system and the other operational systems under the National Medical Stores.

(ii) 	The General Manager, National Medical Stores, was advised to submit his accounting warrant for quarter 1 for approval and the account details to the Accountant-General where the funds for operations would be remitted. The general manager, from the information that was given, delayed to submit the information required on account of the issues above. However, the warrants were actually submitted on 1 August 2018, causing a delay of a month before the National Medical Stores could access funds for the first quarter.

(iii) 	Donor funds shall be handled on a case-by-case basis, as is the case for the rest of the sectors, to streamline the management of both on-budget and off-budget modalities at National Medical Stores, with a view to utilising a single system for consolidated budget management;

(iv) 	A technical team has been set up, comprising of National Medical Stores, Ministry of Health and my ministry, to further discuss the concerns raised by National Medical Stores. The main focus of the technical team is to study the impediments of our system as well as the possibility of integrating our system with the other systems operated not only by National Medical Stores but also other sectors.
 
Madam Speaker and colleagues, it is our common goal to have an efficient and effective drug management value chain. However, we must also ensure that there is transparency and accountability in the context of the Public Finance Management Act for the entire appropriation in line with the laws of Uganda. It is also important that we operate harmoniously. My ministry is committed to seeing that National Medical Stores smoothly performs its mandate while at the same time complying with the Public Financial Management Legal and Regulatory Framework that governs all the votes.

The system-related issues will be addressed by the joint technical team involving the Ministry of Health, National Medical Stores and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They will ensure an interface between the systems operated by National Medical Stores and IFMS, so that ultimately the National Medical Stores fully operates through the financial management system like the rest of Government, for all the monies appropriated by Parliament.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the issues, which were raised then have been resolved.  We have put up a committee to follow up this issue to ensure that the two systems speak to each other so that the distribution of our medicine is not affected in any way. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I just want to confirm if the Minister of Health is satisfied with the update.
 
3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, following our presentation of the issues, - we were responding to Members’ concerns that there were no medicines in the health facilities - we held a meeting with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. That is true. 

What we would like to make clear on the Floor of this House is that National Medical Stores is not against operating under the IFMS regarding payment for medicines and other supplies. We have no problem with that. That is the 92 per cent of the money that we sent. The challenge comes with donors’ money and also the eight per cent, which is money for operations such as payments to the drivers who take these medicines to your districts, other allowances and so on. That is where NMS needed flexibility and that is why Parliament, in its wisdom, directed that National Medical Stores be left to operate under the old system.
 
Since there is a technical team from National Medical Stores, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Accountant-General, let us allow the technical teams to come up with their reports and then we shall be able to report accordingly once their report is out. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We shall now ask our Committee on Health to handle that issue and if there is anything to report, they will come back to us. 

DR BUKENYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We foresaw problems when we were reviewing the budget. We advised that for a little while we keep with the old system as they harmonise. Why this issue came up is because there were shortages because of rushing a new system. This is a service industry where if you cannot access drugs for two months, that is a problem. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was in a hurry, maybe to catch up with NMS over the other old loans. They wanted to squeeze them very fast and see that they are the ones responsible for not delivering the drugs. However, our issue was that in the short run, we leave them as we harmonise. 

This issue only came because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development refused to follow the guidance of Parliament. That is why complaints came here that there were no drugs. Now they are setting up committees, mid-cycle, to sort out problems. You sent this to the committee and when it advised, they disobeyed; it is complex. I think there are some people in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who are working to disorganise this Government. After we have increased the budget of National Medical Stores by Shs 50 billion, they come and make sure that there is a shortage in the first quarter. There are issues with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that we cannot understand.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have directed that our committee continues to watch over this situation as we await the technical team. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I just want to give a small clarification. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development follows the laws, which have been made by this House. I think the House should sympathise with us on that one. We passed the Public Finance Management Act so that every Government institution passes through this system. These ad hoc instructions do not replace the law.
 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to introduce pupils and teachers of Kalongo Girls Primary School. They are in the public gallery and they are represented here by hon. Ogenga Latigo and hon. Franca Akello. You are welcome. (Applause)

On this side, we have pupils and teachers of Nangera Child Development Centre represented by hon. Robinah Mukisa and Hon. Stephen Mayende. You are welcome.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Government request to borrow up to $45 million from the Islamic Development Bank to support technical and vocational education projects in Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and to report back.

3.32
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the following reports:
1. 	Special Audit Report on the Cost of Air Tickets at Parliament; 
2. 	Special Audit Report on the Defunct Banks;
3. 	Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of National Social Security Fund (NSSF) for the Year ended 30 June 2018.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, they are sent to the relevant committees for perusal and to report back.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE MENTAL HEALTH BILL, 2014

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as you recall, yesterday we were at committee stage. Let us continue.

Clause 9

DR BUKENYA: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, clause 9 is amended as follows:
(i) 	By substituting the headnote with the following: “Involuntary admission and treatment”

	The justification is: to cater for involuntary treatment.

(ii) 	By substituting clause 9 with the following:
“(1) 	A person with mental illness and prima facie requires treatment and care from a mental health unit but is for the time being incapable of expressing himself/herself to receive treatment may, on a written request under this section, be received in a mental health unit as an involuntary patient for treatment and care.

(2) 	Involuntary examination, admission and treatment shall only be carried out at a mental health unit.

(3) 	The request under subsection (1)(a) shall be in writing, addressed to the officer in charge of the mental health unit where the admission, treatment and care is being sought, and shall-
(a) 	be made by a relative of the person to whom it relates; or
(b) 	if there is no relative available or willing to make a request, by a concerned person who shall state in his/her application the reason why it is not made as provided in paragraph (a), the connection of the requestor with the person to whom the request relates, and the circumstances in which the request is made.
(c) 	if the requestor is not a relative, what steps were taken to locate the relatives in order to determine their inability to make the request;
(d) 	set out the grounds on which the requestor believes that admission, treatment and care are required; and
(e) 	state the date, time and place where the person was last seen by the requestor before making the request.

(4) 	An application referred to in subsection (1) may be withdrawn any time before a decision is taken.

(5) 	On receipt of the request, the officer in charge of the mental health unit to whom the request is addressed shall within three days make a written response, specifying the procedures to be followed for the examination, admission and treatment and thereafter shall cause the person to be brought to the mental health unit for examination.

(6) 	The officer in charge shall approve the request only if it satisfies the conditions for involuntary admission and shall, in writing, inform the applicant whether the person should be admitted for involuntary treatment and care or not.

(7) 	An examination under this section shall be carried out as soon as practicable by two mental health practitioners, one of who should be a psychiatrist, or where a psychiatrist is not available, a senior mental health practitioner.

(8) 	On completion of the examination, the mental health practitioners shall submit to the officer in charge their written findings on whether the person has mental illness and qualifies under subsection (1) to be admitted as an involuntary patient.

(9) 	Where the officer in charge approves involuntary treatment and care, he or she shall-
(a) 	within 48 hours after approval, cause the person to be admitted to the mental health unit for treatment;
(b) 	with the concurrence of any other mental health unit with the appropriate facilities, refer the person to that mental health unit.

(10) 	Where a person examined under this section can be treated at a primary health centre, a senior mental health practitioner shall issue a community treatment order in respect of that person.

(11) 	A person shall only be admitted as an involuntary patient where involuntary admission is the only means by which that person may be provided with care, treatment and rehabilitation that will benefit him or her.

(12) 	Involuntary admission shall be for a period of not more than three months, unless the board authorises extension of the period.

(13) 	An involuntary patient may be discharged at any time as may be determined appropriate by the mental health practitioner who attended to the patient.

(14) 	A person who wilfully assists a person with mental illness –
(a) 	who is being conveyed to or from a mental health unit for; or involuntary examination, admission and treatment, to escape commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 120 currency points or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or both.”
 
The justification is: To provide for a clear procedure to be followed for voluntary examination, admission and treatment.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, I have heard the justification but my concern is with the draftsmanship. Subclauses (5), (6), (7) and (8) are drafted in a layman’s language. I do not know whether the clerk was available to help in the proper formulation. The content is good but the language is lacking. I fully agree with him on the content but I think it needs redrafting to conform to statutory formulation. Could I be allowed to sit down with the chair and we go over this part and put it in the proper legal formulation rather than its current presentation?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where does your objection arise from?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Where the procedures are being given - “On receipt of the request, the officer in charge…shall…” “An examination under this section…” It is a description rather than a formulation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we ask the legal drafts people to formulate it later? We could agree now and when they are doing the final take, they improve the language. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee chairperson talks of the fact that involuntary examination, admission and treatment shall only be carried out at a mental health unit. In the whole of northern Uganda now, we have only two mental health units. The point I am raising is: Yesterday, we agreed that there are many people who are trained in psychiatry and therefore, it should be open and not limited only to mental health units. What if the doctor who has a knowledge of psychiatry is working in a health centre III or IV, can’t the treatment be done there?

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to inform the honourable member that that is the purpose of the Bill. Previously, the treatment was limited but now, the purpose of this Bill is to decentralise mental health services to the lower health facilities up to health centre III.

MR AOGON: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In the concluding subclauses, the chairperson talked about discharging a patient. If the person who committed the patient to the treatment unit was not a relative, at the point of discharging the patient, wouldn’t it be proper for the health facilities to write back to the person who requested for this patient to be treated, informing them that the person is now okay and is discharged? In this way, that person is exonerated from responsibility, just in case the man disappears after being discharged. Maybe this should be something for debate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, have you got the gist of what he is proposing? I think he was saying that after the end of the treatment, if the patient has been discharged, he would want the person who made the request to be informed that this person is now discharged.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I think we have no problem with that. However, sometimes the person might not be easy to trace. In situations where the person could have volunteered at that time to sign on behalf of this person but cannot be traced, then it may be a little difficult. However, we are okay with his proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, if I have handed over the person to the Government, why should it be my responsibility to stay in the know and to follow up? I do not think it is fair to pass that burden to a kind-hearted person who saw a sick man and handed him to Government.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, you know this society is difficult. You may be a good-hearted person and you make a request that this person be examined because there is a mental problem. However, after discharge, someone comes to you and says, “You are the one who took our person to the hospital, where is he now?” This is in case the person disappeared after treatment. This is for debate.

MS OPENDI: I think there are issues which can be handled in the regulations and there are issues which should be put in the law. I wouldn’t be comfortable placing that under this Act because these are issues that can be handled administratively.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 10 provides for the power of the police to effect involuntary or emergency admission: “…a police officer may enter any premises without a warrant where the health and safety of a person who is suspected to have mental illness and of a person who has contact with a person suspected to have mental illness may be in danger if admission is not effected immediately.”

Madam Chairperson, even without this, we have received complaints from high profile persons in this country where the police enter their premises and force them out claiming that they are mentally ill, regardless of the person’s claims to the contrary. Now, if we give a blank cheque to the police, even if you shout and tell them that you are normal and not sick, they will break into your house and arrest you under the guise of arresting a mental case. This has happened and it has been abused. 

Bearing in mind that we passed clauses 9 and 8 where the relatives should know very well, let the proper procedure be followed. I have seen a case like that of Prof. Kanyeihamba who was really manhandled. In the process, you end up being injected, subdued, embarrassed and handcuffed as a mentally ill person when actually you are normal but somebody just wants to subdue you. 

I propose that this clause 10 serves no purpose. After all, mental illness can be gradual or sudden and we have already provided for procedures of the relatives reporting a mental case and how it should be handled. For you to give powers to the police to even break into your house, I can tell you that even if you go to the balcony and say, “You people help; I am normal”, your cries may go unheeded because they want to arrest you for a given motive. By the time it is later found that you really had no mental health problems, it will already be too late. You will have already been humiliated and they will have done whatever they want. I propose that we delete this clause 10(1).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, assuming you are in a factory, in a confined space, and maybe there are 12 of you and one of you is running around with a panga – a fellow worker – are you saying the police should not enter? I know that maybe some mistakes have been made, but if there is a public outcry and the manager says, “Come and help me; there is someone here with a panga in the factory”, shouldn’t the police come?

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support hon. Ssekikubo on clause 10(1). That part can be abused. I will give a story of somebody whose property they wanted to loot in a car. When they reached somewhere, they said, “This man is our brother and he is running mad; throw him out of the taxi”, and these people looted the things. When you shout, “I am not mad”, they will say, “Can’t you see, even the madness has increased; he is shouting.” 

We can go with the second part, which says that if there is a problem and the person is really dangerous, we can do it. We have to put a human rights face to this law. When they say they should enter my house and arrest me even without permission, I am telling you that anybody can come and say, “She has run mad and she is in that room” and you will be arrested automatically. When you shout, they will say the madness has increased. I beg that we retain subclause (2) and delete subclause (1). Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We appeared before the committee as the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and we shared our experience in dealing with the many remand homes where we have children that are in conflict with the law. There are very many instances where you need the intervention of the police because in many cases, these people are in a state that is dangerous. It does not appear here but we made it clear that they should be in the company of a next of kin. 

In the second part, I am wondering why it is 24 hours. Why should you arrest someone and wait for 24 hours to produce the person before the police? I propose that it should be within 12 hours from the time of arrest.

MR ABALA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am in agreement with my friend, hon. Ssekikubo, on this subclause (1), because we all know the nature of the police in this country. First of all, many of them are brutal. When they come to you, they come with full force; all the power from the sky up to down is in their hands. If we agree with this kind of arrangement, we should be ready to see people with very many bruises; they will beat them up because of this type of arrangement. I will not agree with this kind of power.

Secondly, the most disturbing thing is that most of these mentally disturbed people have been beaten. You can go to Kampala here or any trading centre and you will find that most times they have been beaten by people and the police. If we are going to sanction this, it actually means we are going to tell the police, “Can you do the needful.” In my opinion, let us do away with part one totally.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, before we proceed, I would like you to distinguish between subclauses (1) and (2). Subclause (2) is where a person has committed an offence and it is suspected that he is actually mentally ill. The first one is where in a certain environment, there is someone who is suspected of being mentally ill and he or she may be in danger or the people he or she is with may be in danger. They are not the same.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not agree with deleting clause 10(1) because it is quite different from clause 10(2). Today we have got cases of drug and substance abuse. Take a scenario where somebody has suddenly become mentally ill; when will the police rush for a warrant? You will want to save lives and even save this person who has mental illness.

Madam Chairperson, many times people who have got the condition do not know. One time I found a madman saying that people were saying he was mad and naked and he was asking if he was really naked and yet he was actually naked. Therefore, usually the person does not know the situation. It is very sad that maybe we fear that it can be abused for political reasons. We can only strengthen and improve on the language, but we need to retain it to save the situation because there is no specific time when somebody is highly affected by the mental illness.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, it is never my habit to repeat what somebody has said. However, maybe I could just beef up this argument with an example of a scenario involving a colleague of mine. We were doing some advanced degree with her and the module was about preparing a meal for her mentally ill daughter. As she was trying to prepare the meal, the mentally ill daughter picked a knife and stabbed her and that was the tragic end of that module.

Madam Chairperson, I see the need and urgency to sustain clause 10(1) as it is but only on specific grounds that there is indeed an emergency and that all conditions that have been evaluated point to the direction of an immediate action or intervention to foil a tragic end or occurrence. Therefore, I think that under proper evaluation, section 10(1) should be part of this Bill.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I would like to support what hon. Ssekikubo has fronted. Society has now gone to lengths that we cannot sometimes understand, and more so with this current political environment where temperatures are high. Somebody can decide towards elections to come and declare that you are mentally disturbed. The police will come for you and drag you and you will be finished just like that.

Madam Chair, I think we should be very clear when we involve the police. At least, we should involve the police in situations where the affected person has demonstrated violence. A violent person should be arrested by the police and delivered where he or she is supposed to be taken. Also, I do not know whether in the law there is a part which expressly provides for the protection of people who are declared to be mentally affected. If you just come and say, “Honourable, this one here is mentally sick”, what is there to secure such a person? There should be a penalty so that nobody can just wake up and say someone is mentally affected. What is the penalty? The law should be able to provide for that. Maybe, there is already something within the law. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like you to address the headnote, which is about involuntary admission. If you read the provision, it says, “For the purposes of effecting an involuntary or emergency admission, a police officer may enter any premises, without a warrant, where the health and safety of a person who is suspected to have mental illness and of a person who has contact with a person suspected to have mental illness, may be in danger if admission is not effected immediately.” It is not just walking around. If there is a person who needs admission, there would be no time to look for a warrant. This is what the provision is about.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. You have guided rightly. We should not be thinking of the worst case scenario every time. Here, we are talking of when the person is in danger. Assuming someone who has mental health problems locks the door and starts beating someone to death, the police should be given the authority to break the door and save the life of that person. Therefore, Madam Chair, this part is very important and we need to leave it for the safety of our people.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, the mention of police scares everyone. However, the way this section is structured is really about the power of the police in involuntary admission. Take a situation where a person suffering from schizophrenia is stoning the whole market and no one can risk arresting him or her, you definitely need the police. Our fear of abuse of this power by the police can be taken care of under a mental health appeals tribunal, which is later going to be seen under this law. 

Secondly, in some jurisdictions –(Interjection)- Madam Chair, I need to be protected from hon. Ssekikubo. Here again, there are forms that must be provided in the schedule attached to this Bill. Actually, I am putting Government on notice; for this purpose of effecting arrests, there must be a form that will be filled by the police officer, and it must be attached to this law so that we take care of the likelihood of abuse. For that reason, therefore, I think it is in our best interest that we do not curtail the power of the police. If they are going to abuse that power, then we are going to provide for safeguards against the abuse. 

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to expound on the fear raised by hon. Ssekikubo. Sometimes, maybe when a father, son or mother become violent in a home as a result of a disagreement, they can call the police and say that the person they have had the disagreement with has run mad, claiming he or she is in the bedroom with a spear or panga. That can happen and it has happened; we have a story of someone who was taken to Butabika in this way.

However, Madam Chairperson, I think we should keep this provision in subclause (1) and only have a disclaimer that the police must ensure that within two days, that person is reassessed to see if he or she is actually mad or not. In that way, we leave the responsibility with the police. When somebody is so violent, using knives or other sharp things, the police can now be called in to take responsibility of arresting him or her. 

We recently lost somebody in my district, Apac. A granddaughter became so violent and hit her grandmother to death. In such a situation, everybody would be in fear. Therefore, there would be need to have the police involved. There are instances where we have doubt in the police but in making the law, we should have a blind law. It is only now that dealing with the police comes in. So, I would pray that we keep this provision. Thank you.
	
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would also like to advise that we do not interfere with clause 10(2) because if you read it carefully, it is about a police officer taking this person for assessment. You cannot do it in 12 hours. Supposing you picked him at 6 o’clock in the evening, where will you take him at night before 6 o’clock in the morning? Let us leave the 24 hours because it is really for assessment.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I would like to thank you, Madam Chair. Taking into account the concerns of Members, we need to be very careful when we are legislating and not try to whittle down the provisions of the Constitution. I am also aware that there are situations that warrant immediate intervention of the police. However, the right to privacy of a person’s home and other property is well provided for under Article 27 of the Constitution. Therefore, I would propose that once we agree to move against this Article, we should take due concern and care to provide for the proper safeguards. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, can we have an opportunity to look again at this clause so that later, we can put in some safeguards without leaving it open the way it is?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, will a mad person wait for you outside under a tree? Is that where you will find him? Because it is his privacy, you do not enter his house and yet he is sitting there with spears!  

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have listened to the two sides - those advocating for deletion and those supporting retention of subclauses (1) and (2). The fear of my good friend, hon. Ssekikubo, and the majority of my colleagues is the practical fear people have of the police and the assumption of bias the police may have. 

Madam Chairperson, I think it would not be fair for us to legislate with fear of the police at the back of our minds. You have explained and guided us on scenarios where somebody could come in with a panga but because of fear, you can lose life. Many examples are vivid in our society. I would think that the bias and assumptions about the police that hon. Ssekikubo or myself are mad -(Laughter)- when we are not mad, can be taken care of at a certain stage. I would also like to appeal to my colleagues that we retain both sections because they are different. We will be doing a disservice to ourselves and to the nation to legislate in anticipation of how somebody may be mistaken to be mad. Even excitement can make one believe that someone is mad when he or she is not mad.

Therefore, Madam Chair, for the purposes of moving on, we should retain those provisions. There are safeguards that can save us from the bias of the police.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, agreed to.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been listening to most of the Members’ submissions. As far as I understand, this Bill is not about madness but mental health. When we debate with a perspective of a mad person in mind, we are not going to have the right input. Mental illness is not necessarily being mad. One can be in a state of psychological stress or something else but not mad. Would we be proceeding rightly by focusing on madness and yet the Bill is talking about mental health?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this Bill is clear so let us go to clause 11.

DR BUKENYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Before clause 11, I would like to substitute the subtitle immediately after clause 10 with the following: “Special Treatment Options”. 

Justification: The treatment provided in clause 11 and 12 are treatment options given to patients under the different types of admissions, as long as the mental health practitioner deems the treatment to be in the best interest of the patient.

Insert a new clause immediately after the subtitle to read as follows: “(1) The special treatment options such as electroconvulsive therapy, seclusion psychosurgery and bodily restraint shall be provided only after exhaustion of all other treatment options. 

(2) These procedures shall be applied under the authorisation and supervision of a psychiatrist.”

Justification: To eliminate possible abuse of the special treatment options.

MS SAFIA NALULE: Madam Chairperson, I am sorry I cannot stand. I thought that the chairperson was going to rule out the option of electroconvulsive therapy because in the UN special rapporteur against torture, they described that kind of treatment as torture. In the concluding observations of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disability (CRPD), this kind of treatment and seclusion was regarded as torture and the CRPD called on Uganda to amend the Mental Health Act and do away with this kind of treatment and seclusion.

Persons suffering from mental illness have testified saying that when they undergo that kind of treatment – One lady testified that she even lost her memory - she could not remember her children - and they broke her teeth. I would like to propose that we completely do away with this kind of treatment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, are you in breach of the convention?

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to inform the Members that this is one of the recommended treatments by the World Health Organisation. Once WHO has agreed on a format, we cannot do away with it. 

I do not want to believe that story because if the person had mental challenges, how could she remember that? If she lost her memory, then how could she tell what happened when she was undergoing treatment? There are safeguards and that is why we said that it must only be done on the recommendation of a psychiatrist.

MS SAFIA NALULE: Madam Chairperson, I do not agree with the minister and I think she is still abusive. This is what people who undergo this kind of treatment say. Somebody is treated with electricity! How I wish she could experience it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from Dr Bukenya.

DR BUKENYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. During the committee interactions with the different interest groups, this issue was brought up. We consulted with the psychiatrists and also went to Nairobi to see how they practise. We also read the WHO recommendations. 

Hon. Safia Nalule is talking about the old model, which is no longer recommended by WHO. When you are going to undergo this treatment, if you can consent, yes you can, but it is done under anaesthesia; you do not feel anything. This procedure is done in about 30 seconds. There are no scientifically better alternatives available and yet the practitioners insist that this is the last resort for effective treatment. 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, when I had paralysis in my hand and went for tests to find out whether the veins were working well, I was examined using a procedure whereby an electric current was passed through me and it was so painful. I was shouting, “Doctor!” but the doctor wanted to see the recording on the machine. Later, he came up with his report. 

When it comes to electroconvulsive therapy, it is referred to as a therapy. Under torture, when an electroconvulsive approach is used, it is called inhuman and degrading treatment; in other words, it has been used for the purposes of torture. Here it is applied as a therapy with a lot of medical procedures. 

Sometimes you do not need to administer this only on somebody who is mentally sick. It is also administered on drug abusers. The science is that it is supposed to separate the pathogens in your systems; the electric power burns off the pathogens so that you get some relief from the many toxins that you consumed from substance abuse. We should leave it here; the international standard allows it but it should not be applied on children without laid down procedures.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Faith Homes Primary School, Kapchorwa, represented by hon. Rukia Chekamondo and hon. Kenneth Soyekwo. (Applause) When I get the information about those on this side, I will let you know. 

MR NZOGHU: I have some doubts that someone who has been defined as a patient would give consent. I do not know whether the committee took interest in exploring other mechanisms, like maybe having next of kin. 

I also looked at the fine set for a person who performs the electroconvulsive therapy contrary to this section; that amount is simply peanuts and would not deter people from –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have not reached there yet. Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR BUKENYA: Clause 11 - Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)

Clause 11 is amended in subclause (5) by deleting the word “thirty” appearing immediately after “exceeding” and substituting it with the words, “one hundred and eighty”, and substituting the words “fifteen months” with the words “eighteen months”. 

The justification is: To ensure safety of the patient by giving a deterrent sentence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nzoghu, you can now raise your issue.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I am not comfortable with what the committee has proposed because this is a matter of life. My proposal was that we could set it at 300 currency points, so that anyone who does this without the consent of the patient or next of kin knows that they will pay heavily. This will deter people from conducting such kinds of procedures without necessarily getting consent.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, considering that this kind of therapy is not supposed to be given anyhow and should come as a last resort, I have no objection to the proposal to increase it to 300 currency for a person who abuses it. I think the 15 months of imprisonment should also be extended to “not exceeding three years” maybe. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have been talking about the need to present proposals early enough so that we think through them, instead of presenting amendments on the Floor. I have not had time to evaluate the 300 currency points vis-à-vis the three years.
 
MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, while I agree with hon. Nzoghu and the minister, I would reinforce that with suspension of the officer, or depending on the extent or magnitude of that offence or oversight, their practising licences could be revoked. 

We should include that provision because what happens if somebody has one billion shillings and we are just talking about 300 currency points? Money may not be his or her problem. However, since we are handling somebody abusing the profession, I would encourage you to explore the possibility of including a suspension and also after clear evaluation of the extent of abuse or oversight, revoking the practising licence. A doctor would be concerned about losing their practicing licence other than the fine, because revoking the licence means the loss of a livelihood. They would attach a lot of meaning to some of these professional duties.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, of course, what you are saying is important but in many professions, there are different areas for discipline; for instance, we have the Uganda Law Council, the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council. Let us leave that part, unless the minister wants it included.

MS OPENDI: Chairperson, we have the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council, which deals with such issues. 

What I would like to say is that we are okay with the proposal by hon. Nzoghu regarding the currency points. I would like to suggest, based on your advice, that you give the legal team time to look at it because the currency points should match the years. Allow the legal team to look at the years and match them with the currency points and then revert to us before we go for the third reading. 

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, I still have a fundamental problem. This is a Bill that borders on life and death and there is no better intervention to put in place than saying if you made a mistake, it would invoke disciplinary action. Giving a suspension and also their standing in the profession matters a lot. I would rather that we leave this open to suspension, of course upon proper evaluation just like the minister has mentioned. Currency points are not good enough.

MR AGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to augment the point my colleague is making. 

There are different bodies, and in this case the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council has already set in place a method or system of disciplining or taking action on any errant doctors or medical practitioners who may make some professional mistakes, especially deliberately. Are we legislating this on top of the action that is taken by the concerned council or are we providing this as the alternative punitive measure for the council to adopt and not necessarily allow its own punitive measures? What if the council, like we are saying, de-registers a medical practitioner, would he or she be de-registered and on top of that pay the 300 currency points? We need to be guided. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us leave the professional bodies to do their disciplinary work. In any case, I do not know whether we even have the provision of a tribunal in this law to handle discipline.
 
MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, this is my last submission on this issue. As one of the top most lawyers in the country, you will know that any Bill that comes on the Floor should clearly spell out the rights, duties or responsibilities and obligations. The same Bill should be in a position to put forward enforcement procedures and mechanisms. The moment we lose that at Bill processing level, then it becomes difficult for the enforcers, because that particular Bill misses the relevant citations. In the event that somebody abused it, which law are you going to cite if that is not catered for in this particular Bill? Therefore, it is very important, Madam Chairperson. 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, the spirit of this law is for one to bear the burden or carry the cross for the mistakes that they do, especially concerning electroconvulsive therapy. That is why the punishment is being provided for this particular section immediately. Any other intervention by professional bodies is simply administrative, but here we are talking of your mistake under this particular section, and you must pay for it. It is to deter psychiatrists or any other clinicians from acting ultra vires especially when administering electroconvulsive therapy.

My only bone of contention is on (2) (b), where an approval of electroconvulsive therapy by a psychiatrist must take into account or determine whether the patient can consent. Children cannot consent. Consent by children is guided by our Children’s Act. That is why I said if this therapy is to be administered to children who have mental illness, we must ensure that we provide, strictly, an additional provision, especially because this whole therapy relies on consent. Children by definition I think go up to the age of 18 years. How do we handle that? That would be the only bone of contention I have, and if the chair can agree with us and we save time -

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, allow me to state that this therapy is not used for treatment of children with mental disorders. Therefore, it is not supposed to be applied –(Interjections)- Yes, we can state so. It is not supposed to be applied on children. It is okay, we can insert that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in the public gallery we have pupils and teachers from Dabani Boys Primary School in Busia, represented by hon. Gideon Onyango and hon. Jane Nabulindo.  Join me in welcoming them. (Applause)
 
Honourable members, do you want to say that for avoidance of doubt, this treatment should not be used on children?

DR BUKENYA: The standard treatment guidelines for childhood mental disorders do not qualify for this treatment. If you have malaria, I cannot treat you for HIV. Therefore, we do not need to put it here. That is what we thought. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I thought that maybe the chairperson of the committee would guide this House on the recommended procedure to be taken for children who have mental problems. There are some children who are mentally disturbed; therefore, which procedures are you proposing so that then we also have that in here?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let me propose something: “For the avoidance of doubt, electroconvulsive therapy shall not be administered to children”. Is that okay?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, “children” means anybody aged between 1 and 18 years and yet there are some eligible age brackets, from 12, 13 -

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, do you want to put an age bracket in the law? What do you want us to say? Make a proposal.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I had not looked at it closely but what I know is that we are trying now to put a stop to the medical doctors who may, with the advancement of science and technology, find children of between 10 to 18 years - As he has said, there are safety valves but they may be candidates for this treatment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you want us to do? Do you want us to say something about children? I have made a proposal but you are still fighting against the proposal.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, I go with what you are saying, and we do not need to break down or cluster children because our laws are very clear on the description of who children are. Therefore, the age bracket in this scenario may not be necessary.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

DR BUKENYA: Clause 12 is amended as follows:
(i) 	By substituting subclause (5) with the following: “A patient shall not be kept in seclusion consecutively for more than twenty-four hours.” The justification is: To protect the patient from negligent behaviour of the medical practitioners.

(ii) 	By substituting in subclause (8) the words “thirty”, appearing immediately after “exceeding”, with the words “one hundred and eighty”, and the word “fifteen” with the word “eighteen”. The justification is: To ensure safety of the patients by giving a deterrent sentence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are we insisting on the other currency points we passed? Are they the same?

DR BUKENYA: These are in keeping with the previous ones on ECT. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, clause 12 (1) says, “A person shall not cause a patient to be held in seclusion at a health unit which is not a mental health unit.”

Madam Chairperson, this provision presupposes that our country has adequate mental health facilities and this may not be tenable on the ground. What I would propose is say that once you visit a health centre, the doctor there can find a room as a temporary measure to put you under seclusion for onward reference to a mental health unit.

Madam Chairperson, I come from a village and I know there are not many health facilities that have mental health units. Therefore, for us to presume that indeed, at each corner there is a mental health facility would be overstating it. Therefore, I would propose, “A person shall not cause a patient to be held in seclusion except at a health unit or a mental health unit.” For us to completely lock out the health unit and say seclusion can only be at a mental health unit would be exaggerating the standards of our health system.

MR AGABA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to just improve on the amendment by hon. Ssekikubo. It is not that a person shall not cause another to be held in a health unit which is not a mental health unit; I think we can say, “A person shall not cause a patient to be held in seclusion at a health unit where such provision is not provided”. This means that they can seclude them in a health unit where a provision for seclusion is made. That amendment caters for the interest in other health units. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the mischief we are trying to cure?

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, allow me to inform the House that although we have not tackled the definitions, we define a health unit as any Government hospital and it includes the primary health centres and any other Government and non-governmental hospital. We go further to define the mental health unit as any building or part of a building appointed by the minister under this Act or by a statutory instrument for admission, treatment and care of persons with mental illness. 

As I indicated from the beginning, we have been having challenges with mental health units across the country. Services have been limited to regional referral hospitals and a few general hospitals. However, under this Bill, we want to de-centralise these services to the lower health facilities. Across the country in almost all subcounties, you will either find a Government health centre III or where there is no Government health centre III, there could be a private health facility or a private not-for-profit health facility which can provide this service. I would like to propose that this particular clause be left as it is.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I have had a second look at clause 12 (1) and I propose, “A person shall not cause a patient to be held in a health unit, which is not a mental health unit.” The general presumption is that seclusion for these patients is only done in mental health units. Even for the reason that this facility is a mental health unit, you should not just subject a person to seclusion for the sake of it. That is the spirit behind this.  

In clause 12(2) the provision goes ahead to say that although it is prohibited for any person to hold someone in seclusion, a patient in a mental health unit may, where necessary, be kept in seclusion. It is done where necessity arises. That takes care of what my brother was saying. 

It does because the general rule in 12(1) says that no person should hold someone in seclusion in a facility, which is not a mental health unit. In other words, we have ruled out any medical facility, which is not a mental health unit. You cannot hold any person in seclusion in that health unit. The minister is saying that for the benefit of Ugandans, they have allowed the regional referral hospitals to be used as mental health units. Therefore, in a health centre III, for example in Erussi, the subcounty where I come from, or a general hospital like in Nebbi, you should not hold anyone there in seclusion. It is not allowed. Even when you are in a referral hospital like Arua Referral Hospital, there must be necessity for you, even where it is marked as a mental health unit, to hold someone in seclusion.  

Holding someone in seclusion means that you are detaching this person from everyone for a number of days. It is more of detention. You are confined. We should not allow people to be confined anyhow.

MS MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to concur with hon. Ssekikubo on this. I will give you an example of my district where 50 per cent of the subcounties do not have health centres III. With such an arrangement, you only have health centres II. However, locally, for provision of services, they have made express provisions, for example to have some maternity beds for people to have treatment. 

They also have a programme for mental health practitioners to access these areas and give treatment on specific days, and these are not health centres III. However, this is just for purposes of providing services and assisting our people so that they do not travel long distances. We have subcounties where the distance from one subcounty to another is more than 12 kilometres. That is where I concur with hon. Ssekikubo. 

Today, as long as the Ministry of Health has not provided subcounties in the whole country, including in my district where 50 per cent of the district does not have health centres III, I agree with hon. Ssekikubo’s proposal. We can have a provision where in a health centre, not necessarily a mental health unit, the health practitioners, the leadership of the area and the administrators agree to provide services in the interim to the people so that they get mental health services.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let the chair give clarification. As he comes up, join me in welcoming students from the African Centre for Legal Excellence. 

DR BUKENYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. For purposes of clarification, our subtitle was “Special Treatment Options” and we inserted a clause saying, “These procedures shall be applied under the authorisation and supervision of a psychiatrist.” That is the first clarification.

The second is that seclusion rooms are specific and have special specifications according to WHO, and you do not find them in any health unit. Because seclusion is taken, to a certain extent, as a human rights violation, you cannot just do it anywhere. That is why we were insisting that it has to be at a mental health unit where there is a psychiatrist who has been authorised and is going to supervise. If you want to put it in a health centre II in Ssembabule, then we are going to cause problems.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please look at the provision on seclusion of patients carefully. It says, “A person shall not cause a patient to be held at a health unit which is not a mental health unit.” Therefore, you can only seclude at a mental health unit. 

MS SAFIA NALULE: Madam Chairperson, seclusion is torture in its first form. However, without any other option - People who have actually experienced this have told us that this is the way it is administered: Somebody is put in a very cold dark room and they are naked because it is feared that they might tie themselves using their clothes. There is no light in the room and there is no toilet. 

I would like to propose that as we finalise this, under 12 (4) where it says that the authorisation to keep a patient in seclusion shall be in writing and shall indicate the period for which it is given, we add that the place shall be habitable, at least with some of those facilities such as a toilet.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you suggesting that the director of a mental health unit will allow a person to be secluded in the toilet?

MR KAMUSIIME: Madam Chairperson, this seclusion is not done in bad faith. I had the opportunity to practice at Butabika Hospital. This is done to safeguard the life and health of the patient as well as the other people around the patient. The rooms used are prepared in a way that they cannot even harm this patient. In an instance where you cannot calm down this patient using drugs, you definitely have to keep this patient in a safe place. Can you imagine there are even mattresses? It is like studio where the walls are cushioned so that in case this patient is fighting, nothing will happen to them. 

Therefore, it is done purely in good faith. It is protective and no one should get worried about it. I have seen it being done and I can assure you that whatever has been put in this clause is okay. I beg honourable members to keep it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, I request to transfer clauses 11, 12, 13 and 14 of the Bill and place them immediately before part III, for the sequential flow of the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clauses 11, 12, 13 and 14 be moved. Are they moving to part II? Are you creating another part? Okay, our legal team will sort out the sequential flow.

Clause 13

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 13 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

DR BUKENYA: Clause 16 is amended by substituting the last three lines with the following: “…commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one hundred and twenty currency points or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or both.” The justification is that this –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that clause 16(3) or 16(5)?

DR BUKENYA: It should be clause 16(5). It is what would have been paragraph (c). This is to deter possible offenders from assisting patients to escape before they receive full treatment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 16(5)(c) be amended by the addition of the proposal made by the committee chairperson.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

DR BUKENYA: Clause 17 is about staff of a mental health unit permitting the escape of a patient. Clause 17(5) is amended by substituting the word “thirty”, immediately after “exceeding”, with the word “one hundred and eighty”. This is to deter staff of mental health units from abusing their authority by conniving to permit a patient to leave the mental health unit without following the proper procedure.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, the question is that clause 17(5) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

MS NAUWAT: Madam Chairperson, they have quoted clause 17(5), but when you look at the Bill, clause 17 has no subclauses, unless the copy I have is not what everyone else has.

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, I think that was a typing error.

THE CHAIRPERSON: On what clause is that amendment?

DR BUKENYA: It is still on clause 17 but amended by substituting “thirty” with “one hundred and eighty”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does it mean subclause (5) was a mistake?

DR BUKENYA: Subclause (5) is not there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, you propose the amendment.

DR BUKENYA: Clause 17 is on staff of a mental health unit permitting escape of a patient. It is amended by substituting the word “thirty” immediately after “exceeding” with the word “one hundred and eighty”. This is to deter staff of mental health units from abusing their authority by conniving to permit a patient to leave the mental health unit without following the proper procedure.

THE CHAIRPERSON: When you amend currency points, you also need to amend the period of detention, but you are only addressing the currency points.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I think since Members are not objecting to one hundred and eighty currency points, we shall leave the legal team to –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you cannot address the currency points without addressing the sentence.

MS OPENDI: That is why I am saying the legal team should look at what the one hundred and eighty currency matches with in terms of the months of imprisonment. We had already done this for the three hundred currency points earlier.

MR NZOGHU: I thought that this would have been for consequential consideration, because we agreed on the three hundred currency points and the spirit of the fines for the various offences. They had indicated one hundred and eighty currency points but we amended it to three hundred currency points. I thought we would, therefore, carry this and have consequential considerations for all these offences.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do all the offences merit the same currency points?

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, we are talking of seclusion and someone who assists a patient to escape; they are almost the same. It would be fair that all these are considered similar offences and the fines should be similar.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we are not going to legislate like that. We should be specific on every issue. You cannot say, “I think this one might be big, so let it go there” No, honourable members.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, like you have guided, the currency points must be seen to be matching with the alternative sentence – it is also a sentence - which is imprisonment, confinement, custodial sentence. If you are paying a fine of 30 currency points and every currency point is Shs 20,000, it adds up to Shs 600,000 - (Interjections)- Yes, I have checked in the schedule and a currency point is Shs 20,000.

Therefore, we would be interested to know because every punishment or sanction must have a rationale. You are saying that this is a very serious offence and you are raising it to 180 currency points; that is Shs 3.6 million for any staff of a mental health unit permitting an escape of a patient. You are saying that what was proposed in the Bill is not sufficient.

Madam Chairperson, in my view, I think that you are creating an offence and backing it up with a punishment. If getting to 180 currency points is going to be one of the greatest punishments here, I think we would rather maintain it as it is - the 30 currency points and 18 months. The mathematics of 180 currency points would be something that can even be challenged as disproportionate sentencing or punishment, given the offence.

MR AGABA: Thank you, hon. Oboth, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, there should be some logical relationship between the 30 currency points mentioned here and the imprisonment for the term not exceeding 18 months. Now, if you go for 180 currency points and you keep the term of imprisonment not exceeding 18 months, I think we may lose the original spirit of the legislation. I thought I should give information. 

We are safer staying with what we have - the 30 currency points or the alternative of the imprisonment not exceeding 18 months - other than going into the mathematics of equating the 180 currency points to whichever length of imprisonment that we would come up with, which might be much bigger than expected.

MR OBOTH: Thank you for that very useful information. We are not only talking about the currency points; the discretion is on the sentencing magistrate. He or she can actually say 30 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 18 months, or both. That is why you find the pronunciation of my name is easy. It is even in sentencing - (Laughter) - or both. You can be given both; will that be fair?

Madam Chairperson, I seek the indulgence of the chairperson of the committee to concede to this proposal and leave the Bill as proposed by Government.

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, we concede. 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, international best practice, especially for medical practitioners, has been that if they are being handed sentencing, most of the laws talk of not more than one year. The reason is that you need the services of this person but this person is again subject to the administrative decisions of the professional body. Therefore, in a nutshell, we are being extremely harsh when we talk of 18 months, considering that these medical practitioners are even few in number. Anything that takes them to prison for even six or eight months is good enough punishment for them but also, we miss their services.

Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek the indulgence of the minister, who is even in the right docket, as a professional. Are we doing a good service when we over-define the punishment term to 18 months for people whose professional services we need? It should not be more than a year. I had the pleasure of reading the Mental Health Act of Canada and the one of UK of 2007 as amended - it was originally for 1983 - it is all about one year and the justification is that they want them back. Any sentence is good enough punishment for them but this is done because we want their services. 

Therefore, I would like to implore the chairperson and the minister, let us not put it at 18 months. If a magistrate decides to give the maximum sentence of 18 months, we are the ones who are going to miss the services. Some of these things are out of professional mistakes, not because they have intended.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the movers. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think what we proposed here is not exceeding 18 months. We are saying “not exceeding”. So, 18 months is actually the maximum. Therefore, the magistrate or whoever is handling this case can even give one month or two months. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Honourable minister, once you put it in the law, it would be discretionary to the judge sitting. He or she can give a maximum but if you give a lower limit, that is what will be followed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to know from the minister; are we reverting to the old provisions that came with the Bill? 

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, the chairperson of the Committee on Health conceded and withdrew his amendment. So, what stands is what we have in the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that throughout the Bill now?

MS OPENDI: No, I am talking about this particular section, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Of course, different actions attract different sanctions - Hon. Ssewungu, there is nothing to amend.

MR SSEWUNGU: It is just a small amendment and it is very useful, Madam Chairperson. I would prefer, if the chairperson of the committee would allow, that we say, “A member of the staff of a mental health or anybody…” I would like to add that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that under clause 17? 

MS SSEWUNGU: Yes, under clause 17. I propose that we say, “A member of the staff of a mental health unit or anybody who…” What if it is Ssewungu, a relative, trying to steal this patient out of the mental health unit? We have seen this in several areas. Wouldn’t it be useful to say “or any other person”?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ssewungu, go to clause 16(5)(a), it is already provided for there.

Honourable members, I now put the question that clause 17 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, agreed to.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, I had proposed an amendment of 12 months instead of 18 months and I thought it would be reasonable to put it to vote. We are divided and so, you could put it to vote. My justification is that some of these things are not intended by the professionals and we need their services.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, don’t you think the magistrates will have the intelligence to see if it was clearly an accident and so give the person three months? The discretion is theirs. We have moved away from 18 months. We abandoned it.

MR AGABA: No, Madam Chairperson, we have not. It stayed as it was. Even though we did not abandon the 18 months, it is very unlikely that a health worker would aid the escape of a patient. It is most likely done by the askari or some other staff that are charged with guarding the hospital. A health worker who badly needs the patient to come back for treatment cannot aid the patient to escape.

MR ANYWARACH: In a mental health unit, a patient can be given a holiday in order to go and relax, because their going away will be part of their healing. They will be asked to return to the admission point later. Technically, a medical officer may play around within the decision and tell the patient not to come back when they are required. That is why we are talking of –(Interruption)

MS NAKIWALA: Madam Chairperson, are we proceeding well? You rightly ruled on clause 17 and we took to a vote; why are we resuming the debate on clause 17? 

Clause 18

DR BUKENYA: Clause 18 - voluntary admission and treatment. Clause 18 is amended by substituting the clause with the following: 
“(1) 	A person with mental illness who has attained the apparent age of 18 years, and submits voluntarily to a health unit or a mental health unit, shall be received or admitted as a voluntary patient by the health unit or mental unit, and is entitled to voluntary treatment.

(2) 	A person with mental illness who has not attained the apparent age of 18 years and whose parent or guardian, by application, desires to submit him or her for treatment to a health unit or a mental health unit shall be received or admitted as a voluntary patient by that health unit or mental health unit and is entitled to voluntary treatment.

(3) 	The application mentioned under subsection (2) may be verbal or written. 

(4) 	A person received as a voluntary patient under this section may leave the health unit or mental health unit upon giving the person in charge 72 hours’ notice of his intention to leave and if he or she is a person who has not attained the apparent age of 18 years, upon such notice being given by his parent or guardian, and the release shall be at the discretion of the person in charge of the health unit or mental health unit. 

(5)  	A voluntary patient shall only receive treatment after giving informed consent to the treatment.” 

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Looking at the amendment, subclause (3) is about informing the person in charge to allow them leave. Isn’t it the medical personnel to determine the condition of the patient and discharge or refer them for management elsewhere? The amendment to me is redundant. 

MR MBABALI: Madam Chairperson, this voluntary admission and treatment sounds very good but there is no safeguard as to which voluntary person is to be treated. Before embarking on any treatment, they must be thoroughly examined to prove that they are sick. Otherwise, some criminals can hide under this provision claiming to be sick and in a mental institution. Let us have a provision after subclause (1) which says that voluntary admission and treatment is subject to the health officials proving that the person is actually sick.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can the minister give us a rationale for the voluntary admission?

MS NAKIWALA: Examination is part of treatment. You can go claiming that you have malaria and part of the treatment will be to test you and tell you that you do not have malaria, if it is not found. So, we are in order in these particular cases. Part of the treatment will be to tell you that you do not have any mental illness and you are discharged.  

Madam Chairperson, I would like to comment on the word “guardian” in subclause (2). For children, we do not recommend the word “guardian” because substituting a parent is done through a care order and anybody doing the work of a parent is called a caretaker. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Suppose you have an order for guardianship; can’t you use it? 

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, I believe that “caretaker” is broader than “guardian”, but I take your guidance.
	
THE CHAIRPERSON: We should leave the word “guardian”. Please, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Adyel Primary School in Lira, represented by hon. Akena and hon. Joy Atim. 

Minister, can you give a rationale for the voluntary admission and treatment.

MS OPENDI: Voluntary admission and treatment is different from involuntary and I would like Members to understand that. Voluntary treatment arises where somebody personally goes to the health facility; it is not like what hon. Mbabali described, that you may be subjected to certain things. What hon. Mbabali raised applies to involuntary admission.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. When a person goes to the hospital voluntarily and in the process their condition escalates and they become unconscious, what will happen? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is in the hospital and under treatment. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 be amended -

MR AGABA: Madam Chairperson, I think hon. Mbabali had a point, which the minister did not understand. You can volunteer yourself to the health unit thinking that you have mental illness. However, he wants to know what happens if a person feigns mental illness and volunteers themselves to the hospital to take advantage of whatever benefits the patient will get. What do we do? That is why he is proposing that we insert a clause immediately after to say that the patient must be confirmed as ill by the health workers in the hospital. That is the point he is raising.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, when a person walks into any healthy facility, they are expected to be examined by a health professional. They cannot just administer any drug before examining them. Psychiatrists take time to talk to you and they can gauge whether you are pretending or not. 

When you go to a health facility suffering from any other disease, let us look at what happens - assuming you may not have visited a mental health facility. I have taken patients there myself and they take time to interrogate this person to see whether they are mad or it is something spiritual. Therefore, it is not something that you can just be given treatment for before examination. We first diagnose malaria to see whether you really have it – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, I am in agreement with the minister but why don’t we go with clause 18 in the Bill and then insert an amendment saying that the doctor should be convinced. Yes, you may have voluntarily submitted yourself, but the doctor must be satisfied that you are mentally ill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you read section 18 (1) of the Bill? 

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It is needless to mention the criteria for admission of any patient in a health facility. There are laid down procedures for any condition. 

Honourable members, I tell you that when we talk about mental illness, there are a variety of illnesses including depression or stress. Therefore, a patient may feel different or a relative may advise that according to your condition, please go and check into a health facility. When you go to the health facility, indeed the doctor must be satisfied beyond doubt that you need treatment and you are sick. Beyond that, you will never receive any treatment. That is why wrongdoers who hide behind the cover of being mad or having lost their senses are always discovered and disapproved by doctors making what we call “a mental state examination”. Let us not worry and redo work that has already been done under the medical procedures. Thank you. 

MR BASEKE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. To add to what hon. Kamusiime has just described and what the minister also said, - I am a member of the committee but I am trying to clarify because we interacted with the stakeholders - when you look at subclause (1), it is already implied that before you give treatment, you will have ascertained that there is a disease you are treating. There is no need to include a provision saying that the doctor must be satisfied. 

We are talking about the concept that this patient is entitled to voluntary treatment. Entitlement comes after the doctor ascertains that this person is sick. Therefore, it is already implied and we do not need to add anything.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, this is a very simple thing. If the minister had yielded to the clarification - What can be comforting to Members? Probably, they do not know that it is automatic. You cannot just walk into a health facility and say, “I am unwell; I need to be admitted.” If that is one of the signs of the sickness, yes, but you will still be examined. 

To sort this out, can we insert “examined” immediately after “received” - “received, examined or admitted”? – (Interjection)– Okay, we could say, “received, assessed or admitted”. That should be able to resolve this matter. Immediately after “received”, we insert the new word.   

Even as it is there, that could go a long way in probably understanding what he said, that when you go to the facility, it is as if it is automatic. When you go there, you will be received or admitted. However, if you state the procedure - received, assessed/examined or admitted - we put in some process.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you cannot just walk in and say, “I want to be on bed No. 3.” They will first ask who you are and you will say, “I am Oboth” and then they will ask where you come from and you will say, “West Budama.” They assess you first.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, can I propose. What hon. Oboth is talking about - As I said before, it is standard practice that any patient who goes to any facility must be examined and they must be diagnosed before treatment can be given. 

For emphasis, there is no harm but I would like to propose that we take it to subclause (2), which states that a voluntary patient shall only receive treatment after giving consent to the treatment. You shall receive treatment after examination –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you now prescribing the work of the doctor in the law? No!

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I indicated that the doctors do their work but Members are insisting that for emphasis –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are not going to just agree because Members want; then they will say doctors should wear a black tie that day. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20

MS SAFIA NALULE: Madam Chairperson, looking at the object of the Bill, we talked about care and human rights. I would like to request honourable members to accept this proposal. 

We want these people, after discharge, to be integrated into the community. Bearing in mind that children and women with mental illness suffer a lot of abuse, stigma and discrimination, I had come up with an amendment to insert after clause 20 (3) the following: “The state shall provide gender and age-sensitive assistance and support for persons with mental illness, their families and caregivers including through the provision of information and education on how to avoid, recognise and report instances of exploitation, violence and abuse.”

MS NAKIWALA: I thank my colleague for that amendment. By the time you leave after treatment, it is assumed that you are no longer a patient with mental problems under this Bill. Therefore, we are under no obligation to handle conditions of people who have left the bracket of “mental illness”. 

We have so many laws and by-laws in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development that take care of resettlement schemes and after-patient care, and it is a long debate. I am of the view that we stick to the condition of mental health that is the subject matter of the Bill. 

MS SAFIA NALULE: Madam Chairperson, I am talking from experience – (Interjections)- No, I am not. Madam Chairperson, people suffer from mental illness and sometimes it is a permanent condition and sometimes it is on and off. Dr Bukenya knows this because people have come to his committee and submitted that instead of being institutionalized, they would prefer to be settled in the community.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I really want to caution us. The Court of Appeal that sat in Mbale took issue very much with us going beyond the object of the Bill. Let us first concentrate on mental health and treatment for now. Let us not run into areas where we are going to clash.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, this particular clause is on discharge of patients under assisted admission. What she is taking about is aftercare services, which in developed countries would be a standalone clause. If somebody had mental illness and has been attended to, she is referring to those aftercare services to resettle the person so that his or her situation does not regenerate into a mental disorder. I think your guidance is right because if you included that under this, it would mean care after you have been discharged under assisted admission.

In a nutshell, that also brings in the issue that if we had foreseen all this, in the long title and short title of the Bill we would have captured all these. I know there are people who when they come out of a mental health facility, because they miss out on those aftercare service, they degenerate again.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 20 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, clause 30 says, “The cost of transferring a person who is not ordinarily resident in Uganda to another country shall be borne, as may be agreed, between the Government and the mental health unit of the country where the person is to be sent.”

Madam Chairperson, I can be resident in USA and come here and develop a mental illness but I am a Ugandan. Why must we ask USA or any other country where I am resident to meet the cost of transporting me to any other country where I am going to receive treatment? If you are resident in another country but you are a Ugandan, I think it is our country to bear the burden of your transportation from that country back to Uganda. Why should we make an arrangement with the USA or any other country in which the person is resident to bear the burden; what if they refuse? What would my right be under that arrangement?

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I think I would have appreciated his point better if hon. Anywarach gave us what he was thinking.  What amendment do you want to make? We thought that a person who has a mental challenge and is resident in Uganda or another country-

THE CHAIRPERSON: This provision is about someone who is not ordinarily a resident here.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, some Members do not have the Bill but let me read the clause as it is in the Bill: “The cost of transferring a person who is not ordinarily resident in Uganda to another country shall be borne, as may be agreed, between the Government and the mental health unit of the country where the person is to be sent.”

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If the person is a USA citizen or Kenyan, the international arrangement is that the person under this particular situation would be referred to the embassy. Actually, international law provides that there is nothing that you can undertake on that particular person without informing their embassies or the missions in the country.

I do not know whether it will serve any purpose. The reason I am saying this is because there are already international provisions. In the event that that scenario happens, then a request should be made to the missions at home.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can’t those issues be contained in the regulations, because now those are procedures after a decision has been taken to send someone home?

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, that is the reason why I am saying that we cannot afford to have those details as part of our Bill because the arrangements are already covered under international law. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you still have an issue with clause 30?

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, this provision is imposing an obligation on another country to transport their mental patient from Uganda to their country. I will give an example. If a Ugandan resident in Iraq develops a mental issue, can’t we take it as our obligation to transport this person, under the transfer of persons with mental illness, to another country? Why don’t we also look at our own Ugandans who are residents out of the country but they need to come back. 

Also, you can have a case of a Ugandan who is resident maybe in Zambia, he gets a mental problem as he is visiting here and he is willing to go back to receive treatment in Zambia; what is our obligation? We are imposing obligations on other foreign countries but running away from our own? That is my concern.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us concentrate on the Bill. Let us not create new provisions, please. I put the question that clause 30 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34 

MS NAUWAT: Madam Chairperson, in clause 34 (2), the second last line, it says, “…seek the opinion of another mental practitioner”. I would think that we need to add the word, “health” so that it reads, “…seek the opinion of another mental health practitioner.” We insert the word “health” immediately after the word “mental” in the second last paragraph of subclause (2). 

MS OPENDI: I think we are okay with that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 34 be amended as proposed. Those in favour say aye, to the contrary nay. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36

Respect, human dignity and privacy

DR BUKENYA: Clause 36 is amended by inserting, immediately after sub clause (1), the following sub clauses to it;
“36(2) Subject to such limitations as are prescribed by law, a person with mental illness shall not be subjected to any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.” The justification is to protect persons with mental illness from abuse and hatred.

“36(3) Subject to such limitations as prescribed by law, a person with mental illness has the right to protection from physical, economic, social, sexual and other forms of exploitation and abuse.” The justification is to ensure the protection of the mentioned rights of persons with mental illness.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 36 be amended as proposed.

MR KATUSABE: Madam chair, this is just a minor observation that when I went to the United States of America, no employer would hire you without running through the employment form and one of the questions asked is your mental stability history. 

This particular clause is not adequate enough to say that you were maybe going through some mental stress for just a moment but the medical records indicate that you have gone through a mental instability situation and that becomes part of you. 

I am wondering whether at this point in time it is not possible for us to specifically qualify the privacy and confidentiality, that depending on a particular situation, this may not be part of your history. 

For instance, if I walk into your office to appear before the appointments board that you chair and what I have amongst my credentials is that there was some bad mental history; I am wondering whether that would not bias or influence the decision of the chairperson or the committee. I am specifically drawing your attention, Madam Chairperson to the confidentiality and privacy clause because this is not really particularly qualified. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether you are saying that if you once had a mental illness and you recovered and you have now come to the appointments committee you must show whether – unless there is an objection about your status - if there is, then I would have to ask you and say, “Did you spend some time in the other place?” (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think we might take it quite lightly but this is something that could have some long term bearing on an individual. As scientists will tell you, 99 per cent have got a mental disability issue. Including myself because if I capture myself within the statistics of scientists, they will tell you 99 per cent and 99 per cent is as good as 100 per cent – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Atkins, there is no requirement to carry a certificate of sanity in this country so I would not ask. It is not a requirement in our laws.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, as you have rightly guided and in most cases there is evidence and you are the one to give it. If anybody is describing somebody, for example, in legal proceedings, you will have to refer to hon. Katusabe as believed to be of sound mind. Nobody has a right to allege otherwise, unless you volunteer that you are not of sound mind. That is discrimination and I think it is well covered, hon. Atkins.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 36 be amended as proposed. Those in favour say aye, to the contrary nay. 

Question put and agreed to.

(Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 37

MR BUKENYA: Clause 37 is amended by deleting in the head note the word “prohibited” appearing at the end.
By substituting in sub clause (2) the word “similar” with the word “equitable”. This is for clarity.

By inserting immediately after sub clause (4) a new sub clause, “Appropriate action under sub section (4) shall be in accordance with the employment laws and other laws of Uganda” The justification is to ensure fair treatment of persons with mental ill-health and protection of their employment.

MS NAUWAT: Madam Chairperson, an amendment has been made to clause 37 and I would imagine that when we look at the arrangement of clauses on page two, we also look at 37 which we just made an amendment to. Now we also need to amend that one on the arrangement of clauses for conformity with what we have just amended.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Our legal officers will do that one at the end. They will renumber the clauses.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, on issues of inheritance, we are talking about discrimination and rights, it is not only on issues of employment. I have seen people who are writing wills, distributing property and the rights of the mentally ill should be protected. If someone has recovered, the person should be protected to the extent that they are able to benefit like the rest. I do not know if that is provided for already.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Under our law, when you are lucid, even if you have been mad, but you have lucid moments, you are able to execute a contract during that time and it is valid.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 37 be amended as proposed. Those in favour say aye, to the contrary nay. 

Question put and agreed to.

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

DR BUKENYA: Clause 38(2) is amended by substituting the subclause with the following: “An employee of a mental health unit who contravenes this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one hundred and twenty currency points or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or both.”

The justification is to ensure that the rights stated in the clause are granted to the patient by putting a deterrent sentence to whoever contravenes the provision.

MR SONGA BIYIKA: Madam Chairperson, why is the offence restricted to the employee of a mental health unit only? What happens in a situation where a normal person, for example, abuses someone with mental illness? Thank you.

MS SAFIA NALULE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to bring it to the attention of this Parliament that this clause 38 presumes that a person with mental illness will be living in an institution. However, these people also live in the communities. 

You find women with mental illnesses being sexually exploited – the men produce children with them and abandon them. You find that men with mental illness in the communities are given heavy work and they are underpaid. Therefore, why do we only restrict ourselves to this? Why don’t we also cater for exploitation and abuse even in the community or schools?

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to take hon. Safia Nalule back to the objective of the Bill, which is to provide for care and treatment for persons with mental illness at primary health centres. What she is talking about is a valid point but what we are looking at here should be guided by the objective of the Bill, which you have been referring to.

MS SAFIA NALULE: Madam Chairperson, let us read the objective of the Bill again. It starts by providing “for care and treatment” but it also goes on to say, “to ensure the safety and protection of persons with mental illness and the protection of their rights and safety”.

In addition, I think that when we are making these laws, we should also have the spirit of domesticating the conventions which this country has ratified. Basically, we should rule out the thinking that persons with disabilities should be living in institutions.

MR ABALA: I would like to thank you, Madam Chairperson. Looking at this clause, especially the period of six months being given for imprisonment, seems to be a challenge to me. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where?

MR ABALA: The part that says: “Any employee of a mental health unit who contravenes this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one hundred and fifty currency points or imprisonment or a term not exceeding six months or both.”

Madam Chairperson, given the fact that this is now negligence, I am worried because the six months seem to be a lenient penalty. In my view, we should be talking about over one year.

Secondly, the currency points, which translate to around Shs 3 million is small given the gravity of the matter because we are talking about life. If you have mismanaged this person who is mentally ill and you pay Shs 3 million only – what is Shs 3 million in terms of life? In my view, we should actually increase this to a higher figure. I suggest that in this case, we should be talking about five hundred currency points. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I know exactly what my colleague, hon. Abala, wants to say – the penalty should be stringent enough. My proposal is that we put it like we earlier put - three hundred currency points somewhere and we talk of imprisonment for 15 or 16 months so that we look a little consistent. We could carry on with what we had applied before. I think it would make more sense.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to address the issue raised by hon. Safia Nalule – the general issue of human rights. I think we need one of the other laws that deal with the management of people to address the abuse of these people even on the streets and other places. I think we need to find another home for it. It is a valid point.

MR AGABA: Madam Chairperson, my issue is with the spirit in which we would like to toughen as far as the punishment is concerned in order for it to act as a deterrent measure.

However, we failed to relate properly between the currency points suggested and the alternative punitive measures being given. I am hearing three hundred currency points being proposed in this amendment but it corresponds to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months. 

Creating this relationship is difficult and I do not know why we do not take what is reasonable. Three hundred currency points is extreme, really. If six currency points is insufficient, maybe we can take 50 currency points, which is still within reach for a term not exceeding three months. Thank you.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, I understand the concern of my colleague. My take is that we want this punishment to be deterrent but what we are imposing are the maximums. Even if we put the one hundred or three hundred currency points, a judge or magistrate can still impose a fine of Shs 10,000 and the person walks away. Likewise, he can imprison a person for one week and he walks away. 

Therefore, if the idea is really to impose a deterrent sentence, then we do not need to increase the upper limit but what we can do is to impose a minimum as well. There is no justification in saying six months is a small amount of time for confinement and that it would not be a deterrent. 

There is no justification that a judge must impose the maximum sentence which is prescribed in the law. It is at the discretion of the officer in court. He can give what he thinks is appropriate. He can even give one day and the person goes home and it is within the law.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I have understood what my colleague has said but it would be the first time that we have seen in the law that we are prescribing the minimum for a judge. I think that would be very contrary. 

In most of the Acts that we have seen, at least we have put there the maximum that the judge can give but not the minimum. This is because he has to receive facts, first of all. Everything must be based on evidence. 

Do you want to crucify somebody before hearing from him? What if he had a good case; what will you do? So, the judges must be left to do their work. Let us put the maximum but not the minimum. I think that will not be in order.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I wanted to draw your attention to the existing law on fines and other financial amounts in criminal matters. An Act of 2008 provides that where there are two currency points, they amount to one month of imprisonment. If you have 300 currency points - if two currency points is one month of imprisonment. Then this is serious because for 300 currency points, that is 150 months. This is the law on fines and penalties. So, two currency points is one month and 10 currency points is five months.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, I really would like to thank you for that guidance and discovery because the currency point is supposed to be related with the time.

I would like to draw colleagues’ attention to the fact that we are making laws. This is not a ministerial statement, it is a law. We do not want to give the enforcers the burden because this particular law falls short of the required clarity and procedure.  That is the reason I would like to thank you for guiding us because someone could say “that is not enough to deter some individuals; let us put it at 1,000 currency points”. Therefore, we have to relate it with the months.

Lastly, I would like to let colleagues know that in law, you go by the maximum. There is nothing like the minimum so that you leave the presiding judge with enough leg room really to work around what could work in a particular situation confronting that particular court. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Moyok Hillside Nursery School represented by hon. Lydia Chekwel and hon. Lawrence Cheptoris Mangusho. You are welcome. (Applause)

MS ASAMO: Thank you. I would like to think beyond the box about the abuse of rights. I would like the chairperson to help me because I understand the drugs that our people take make them hyper and their sexual affinity rises. I think Dr Bukenya would help me medically on that.

So, when we are judging the people and punishing them, we needed to understand whether it was the patients who drew this person nearer to them or it is otherwise because we do not want to deny them the right to sex. 
However, I wanted to just bring it out so that we are clear when we are making the law. Maybe, Dr Bukenya, you can help us because I know the drugs make them hyper. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, we are dealing with exploitation and abuse mainly by the mental health workers, not by the victims. 

Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 38 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, in relation to what you advised in terms of the currency points and the number of months, I do not know whether we will still not make a clear pronouncement here that wherever the punishments are provided, we need to harmonise.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall have to do that. We shall ask our legal team to look through them because we have made decisions here and changed there. 

Clause 39

DR BUKENYA: Determination of mental health status

Clause 39 is amended as follows:

    1. By deleting in subclause (2) the word “Another” appearing on the last line. The justification is for grammatical correction.
    2. By substituting in subclause (5) the last three lines with the following, “a person who carries out a determination of the mental health status of a person contrary to this section commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 120 currency points or to imprisonment to a term not exceeding six months.”

The justification is for a deterrent sentence to protect the rights of persons with mental health from abuse from practitioners.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 39 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44

DR BUKENYA: Capacity and Competency

Clause 44 is amended:
    1. By inserting a new sub-clause immediately before sub-clause (1) to read as follows: a person with mental illness has the right to enjoy legal capacity on equal basis with others in all aspects of life.

	The justification is that persons with mental illness are human beings in all aspects and they so deserve all legal rights accorded to humans.
    2. By substituting in subclause (3) the words, “do not agree” with the words, “have differing opinions”. The justification is for clarity of purpose. 
    3. By substituting subclause (5) with the following, “the assessment need under this section shall be restricted to evaluating the capacity of persons with mental illness to determine the ability of managing his or her own affairs.”

The justification is to augment the right of a person with mental illness to manage his or her affairs.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 44 be amended, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45

DR BUKENYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

Right to appoint a personal representative

Clause 45 is amended by inserting a new subclause immediately after subclause (2) to read, “The personal representative under subsection (1) may be a relative, a concerned person, mental health practitioner or a lawyer appointed through advanced directive when the person with mental illness is capable to make the appointment.”

The justification is to clearly state the category of persons who can be appointed as personal representative in order to avoid abuse by persons alleging to have been appointed whereas not.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 45 be amended, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46

DR BUKENYA: Appointment of Personal Representatives by Courts

Amend clause 46:
    1. By substituting subclause (5) with the following, “A personal representative or public trustee shall act in the best interest of the person with mental illness, to the extent determined by court.”
	The justification is to provide for a situation where a Public Trustee is managing the estate of a person with mental illness.

    2. By substituting subclause (6) with the following:
	"Where, upon review, a person with mental illness is found capable of managing his or her affairs, the court shall revoke the order made to the personal representative or public trustee."

The justification is for clarity and to provide for a situation where the Public Trustee is the manager and the order is revoked by court when the person recovers and has the ability to manage his or her own affairs.

MR AOGON: When somebody goes to seek for mental health services they will have a form to fill in. On the form, they will ask them for the next of kin. If you provided details of your next of kin, then that should be the person who takes charge of your affairs in case of anything. What comment do you have about this? 

DR BUKENYA: First and foremost, the next of kin may mean anyone that can be contacted but mental illness is not ordinary - you may be admitted at a time when you are not in control of your facilities. 

If you have a trustee you appointed earlier, this makes much sense. The next of kin does not necessarily mean that the person manages your affairs but your contact when there is an issue.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are dealing with the legal representative appointed by court under the law. That person must come and say things for you in the court. Like sign documents for you and others. I put the question that clause 46 –

MS NAUWAT: Madam Chairperson, my concern is on clause 2 (b) which has listed down people including dependants; I would like the word “children” to come out clearly.

When we talk about dependents, the biological children of the person with mental illness may be left out if that representative does not care at all. Let us include children so that the sentence reads, “be the guardian of the person with mental illness and of the children and dependants of that person.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nauwat, I have not understood your issue.

MR NAUWAT: I am looking at a situation where the person with mental illness has biological children. However, we are only talking about dependants which could include nephews, sisters or cousins formerly under his care before he/she went ill. The word “children” should come out clearly so that the personal representative takes care of them. Thank you.

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The word “dependant” takes care of children. There are four types of dependants; including those that are legally acquired and those that are depending on you for their survival. Thank you. 

The law provides for legal dependants who are children - biological and non-biological so long as you processed them under the law to take care of their livelihood. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We could look at the future of dependants if it is in the interpretation section and we could define it further.

MS OPENDI: It would be better to define what dependants mean and that would cover what she is talking about. We shall include it in the interpretation clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Formulate it when you are doing clause 2. I put the question that clause 46 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47 

MS NAUWAT: 47 subclause 2 (a)”…not withstanding subsection (1), a personal representative shall not without the special permission of the court; (a) mortgage, charge or transfer by sale, give, surrender, exchange or by any other means mortgage, charge or transfer any immovable property of the person with mental illness.”

I am looking at a situation where this person with mental illness does not own immovable property like buildings or land but owns movable property like vehicles, livestock or crops.

Should we say that this personal representative is at liberty to sell those movable assets of that person? I suggest that we insert after “any immovable” we say “or immovable property” so that we bring on board other property which is not necessarily immovable.

MS OPENDI: That proposal is okay with us.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 47 be amended, as proposed by the two positions.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 47, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, this is a new clause, “power to order transfer of property of persons with mental illness residing out of Uganda.”

Part IV is amended by inserting a new clause immediately after clause 48 to read, “Where any movable or immovable property is in the name of or vested in any person residing outside Uganda, the Board or court may upon being satisfied that such a person is with mental illness and that a personal representative or public trustee has been appointed for his or her estate according to the law of the place where he or she is residing, order a fit person to pay, deliver or transfer the property, or any other part of it, to the name of the personal representative or public trustee so appointed, as the court may think fit."

The justification is to provide for a situation where a person with mental illness owns property outside Uganda.

MR AOGON: Hoping that when we talk about court being the appointee, the law guarantees that the process of getting an administrator of the estate (s) is going to be followed through.

I know that in Uganda, when somebody, for instance, passes on or a situation where somebody has lost his senses and cannot manage property - perhaps you clarify on the process of getting an administrator.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a process.

MR AOGON: Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause – yes, honourable.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, please accept that I draw your attention to two concepts.
    1. Arrested. It is 49 (i)

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are not yet there.
 
MR KATUSABE: I am sorry.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced in the Bill as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS SAFIA NALULE: I just knew that for clarity, we must mention specifically where this person must be taken for assessment. “Where it appears to a police officer arresting a person that the person is suffering from mental illness, the police officer shall not arrest or detain the person but shall take the person for an assessment of his or her mental health in a mental health unit.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this part deals with mental health treatment for prisoners but not just people walking everywhere. This is about prisoners.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, what hon. Safia Nalule is talking about is covered under clause 39 (iii). It states, “Where the police officer determines that the person requires treatment for mental illness, the person shall be taken to a health unit by the police officer.” That covers what she is talking about.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to be guided; are we on clause 49?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are now on clause 49.

MR KATUSABE: Alright. I would like to draw your attention to clause 49 (1) and specifically interest ourselves to two concepts;
    1. Arresting or Arrest, and
    2. Detention

I am struggling on whether we should now labour to find appropriate words or concepts. Mental illness or distress for that matter is not a crime. Should we really address ourselves to “arrest” and “detention”? 

I would rather that we get a concept that we would align to this because “arresting” and “detention” are on suspicion that probably you could have committed a crime. I wonder what crime a mentally disturbed or disorganised person would have committed to really warrant arrest or detention. There is no criminality; it is only in the criminal world that arrest and detention would apply.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is the arrest issue here? Honourable members, please read the head note of part five, “Mental Health Treatment for Prisoners”. That is what we are dealing with.

MR KATUSABE: I thought we are on clause 49.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are on part five; “Mental Health Treatment for Prisoners.”

MR KATUSABE: I could be distorted because I do not see where you got it. I think I have a distorted version. I am sorry but I saw “detention” and “arrested”. How do you arrest a mentally disturbed person? Can we find some appropriate word? 

Madam Chairperson, as a lawyer, somebody enforcing the arrest has grounds acting on either suspicion or circumstantial evidence. But we are talking about a sick –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Katusabe, let us read the provisions properly. Clause 49 (1): “Where it appears to a police officer arresting a person that the person is suffering from mental illness, the officer shall not arrest or detain that person but shall take the person for an assessment of his or her mental health.”

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, the title for part five is “Mental Health Treatment for Prisoners.” My understanding of a prisoner is that person who is detained in a gazetted detention place. 

Why are we bringing the police to arrest? There is a disconnection. I am looking at mental health prisoners; those who are already in prison. The chairperson should clarify on this because there is a total disconnect with the title. 

DR BUKENYA: Can I first explain this? I will use an example that I am here with hon. Abala and we have committed crime. They can arrest and detain hon. Abala but if the police officer has reason to suspect that I have a mental health problem, before taking me to cell, he will take me for assessment - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the point of order?

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, we are not talking about beautiful things here. Is it in order for the Chairperson of the Committee on Health to – yes, you are a doctor – to use the hon. Abala; one of my greatest friends in this House, as an example of things, which I would not love to hear? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson of the committee, just use the “person” but not the distinguished member from Ngora.

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, you know I am a doctor but much obliged. I do not know whether the honourable members have captured my point. I was saying that we are three people who have committed crime; two of us are very normal but then the third suspect does not look to be normal. This person should not be detained; he should be taken for assessment before detention.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: If you are objecting, can you give us a word, which you can use. 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment. To cover it, we can just amend part five in the title and say, “Mental Health Treatment of Suspects and Prisoners.” When you go down after 49; 50 is on assessment of mental health status of prisoners and children on remand. 

In the real sense, if we do not add “suspect” to the title in (V) then we must do away with both (i) and (ii) of clause 49 so that the flow goes straight to clause 50 where you say “Assessment of mental health status of prisoners and children in remand.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the minister have an objection to that amendment?

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, that is what we were looking at and I would like to entirely agree. I think this particular clause was misplaced because “Mental Health Treatment for Prisoners” should come just before clause 50. 

When you look at the powers of the Police - Madam Chairperson, if I can take you back to Clause 10 (Power of the Police), I would like to propose that the entire sub clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) should be taken under Clause 10. It falls under part two of the Bill.

Let us stand over it and then we see where it fits but they are valid sub clauses only that they are placed under a wrong part.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we could pass it and ask the draft people to take it to the right part of the Act.

MS OPENDI: Okay. Madam Chairperson, I entirely agree.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, just a small one, it is not different from your wise ruling. I was trying to draw the attention of the minister there to (ii) and (iii) further qualifies (i) - a qualification of (i) and (ii) to rule out ambiguity.

I was saying that I think we can go by what you have just ruled upon but maybe subjecting it to further interpretation from the legal team. We do not stand over it but pass it and subject it to further legal interpretation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 49 -

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I have just been listening and meditating on what is going on. I heard you say treatment for patients, prisoners and suspects. Now I am wondering whether prisoners should be in hospital or in prison. I need some clarification there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us first deal with clause 49 then the minster will clarify on that one.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 49 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: The instruction to the Director for Legal Services is that find the right part of the law for that provision. 

MR ANYWARACH: From the explanation, the chairperson is envisioning a situation where you arrest a group of people and one of them is mentally ill.

My amendment is only one word, if we just added in the title; it would just be captured by saying, “Mental Health Treatment for Suspects and Prisoners” so that 49 (i) and (ii) is straight away for suspects, and clause 50 for prisoners. If we are to take it under clause 10 as she was proposing, this is a little different because it talks about involuntary treatment of a mentally sick person.

The one we are talking of is about a suspect who has a mental case. Therefore, these two are different. Under clause 10, a person could have not done anything wrong by the way but under clause 49, we are looking at a suspect who is a mental case. We are saying that the police officer should not take this person to the police cell but to a medical unit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the head note be amended by the inclusion of the word “suspect”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50

MS NAUWAT: Madam Chairperson, the title of clause 50 reads, “Assessment of mental health status of prisoners and children in remand”. However, when you read the sub clauses under clause 50, you realise that it refers to prison and prisoner but no reference to children. I do not know whether we need the word “children” in remand in the headline of that clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But it is there.

MS NAUWAT: Let me read, Madam Chairperson, can I just give an example? Clause 50 (iii) the psychiatrist, medical practitioner or mental health care practitioner who carries out an examination under this section shall make a report to the officer in charge of the prison.
(iv) The report made under (iii) shall specify the mental health status of the prisoner and where necessary indicate the plan for the treatment of the prisoner - “children” or “child” is not appearing anywhere and yet we have it in the headnote.

MR BASEKE: Madam Chairperson, we have it in (i) already. When you read where it appears that the officer in charge of a prison through personal observation from information provided that a prisoner or a child in prison may have a mental illness, the officer in charge of the prison shall cause an examination of the mental health status of the prisoner or a child to be carried out.

MS NAUWAT: Madam Chairperson, do we even say a child; do they put children in prison? What is he referring to here?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is something we need to distinguish. There are children in remand homes but there are also children living in prisons because their mothers are in prison. Are we catering for those because they live there?

MR AOGON: I think that it is proper but what she means exactly are the children who are not there purposely because their parents are there or born there but these children who got a problem and maybe were taken to the would be prison - children are not taken to prison but remand homes. I think let us cater for them so that the law is clear.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we need to distinguish between the children who are in custody and those who are there because their parents are in custody because they also live there. Suppose they have a mental problem, how does the Commissioner of Prisons deal with them?

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, we need a stand-alone clause for prisoners with exemption when they are adults. I think clause 50 (i) up to (iv) is looking at that. We need a stand-alone clause for children in remand homes for how they would be handled.

THE CHAIRPERSON: And then children who live in prisons.

MR ANYWARACH: Exactly. Now children who live in prison but may have a mental case; how do we handle them? That is now another clause and I think we could stand on this clause.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, what hon. Anywarach is saying is okay. Some of us have been on the Committee on Human Rights and almost every prison in this country has children. There are children whose mothers are in prison and they stay there. Now my question is, at what age should some of them be there? For how long? This is my thinking but not within the law here. My problem is that if the child is around 15 years, should he or she be in prison because the mother is in prison?

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I think the point that has been raised here is that we have children on remand and then those who are in prison because their mothers are in prison. What this particular clause intended to talk about was prisoners and children on remand.

Therefore, the other children who are not on remand but are there because their mothers are in prison - we have health facilities to which even when they are sick with malaria, they are taken. 

Therefore, they are catered for under the usual arrangement. They are not taken as prisoners - they are taken to the health facility and treated like any other person would walk into a health facility.

Therefore, this particular clause is for prisoners and children on remand. However, maybe for emphasis as the honourable member from Amudat is saying, there is no harm in us including children on remand. We are okay with that.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, I am just standing to support what the minister has just introduced. I am trying to beef up what our colleague, hon. Anywarach, said. That we do not require a new clause for children in remand homes because it is clear that we are addressing ourselves to the mental health status. 

It is not about treatment and scope or range of treatment or how they should be treated. We are just looking at assessment of mental health and I would suggest that everywhere we sound a prisoner, just as we have it in (1) we should add children in remand homes. The subject has got to relate with content and vice versa that the content relates with the subject matter in Bill processing as you are always in charge of the same, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nauwat can you speak your amendment so that we can move?

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I think I have an amendment here. Actually, where there is need to consider the two appears in (1), (3) and (4) because (2) is as universal as possible.

“Where a psychiatrist is not readily available, examination shall be carried out by a medical practitioner or a mental health care practitioner.” That does not need amendment. 

Let us go to (3); “The psychiatrist, medical practitioner or mental healthcare practitioner who carries out an examination shall make a report to the officer in charge of the prison or remand home.” My assumption is that there is an officer in charge of the remand home so that will cater for (2). 

When we go down to (4); “The report made under sub section (3) shall specify the mental health status of the prisoner or the child in remand and where necessary, indicate the plan for the treatment of the prisoner or the child in remand.” I think that will cure it. 

Finally on (1), it is the same, except we should add “or child in remand” so that we are not talking of a child per say in the last sentence of clause 51.

MR AOGON: At the same time, we need to take care of the word “home”. Is it enough to say a child in remand? Or we should go ahead and say, in a remand home? Think about it and give me the difference.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe we can add the home in the head note, to make it children in remand homes.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 50 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 51

MR ANYWARACH: Now, clause 51 is talking about treatment of prisoners with mental illness. I am wondering why they left the children in remand homes out. I do not know how unique this provision is that it must only look at the adults because up here, clause 50 takes care of an examination and report and the actual treatment is 51. It should be for both prisoners and children in remand homes.

MS NAUWAT: Just to add on his concern. Like we have seen in clause 50, and we have amended by inserting the words “child or remand home”, now even in clause 51, there are those issues of prison and prisoner. 

Like hon. Anywarach is suggesting, treatment should also apply to children in these remand homes and so I suggest that again where there is “prison”, we insert “remand home”, where there is “prisoner”, we insert – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 51 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 52

MR ANYWARACH: Actually, as he points out his amendments, the same; by inflection, 52 would be amended consequentially.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, our legal officers are directed to exponentially make that amendment or look at the similar occurrences also to add children in remand homes.

DR BUKENYA: Clause 52 is amended by substituting the word “once” with the word “twice”.

The justification is to ensure safety and availability to medical care and treatment to the prisoner or the child with mental illness. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 52 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 53

DR BUKENYA: Clause 53 is amended by:

    1. Substituting the word “mentally” in the head note with the word “mental”. The justification is for grammatical correctness.
    2. Substituting the word “magistrate” in paragraph (c) with the word “court”. The justification is for consistency with other provisions in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 53 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I hope your guidance on consequential amendment is flowing through up to clause 54.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have instructed the legal team. They will do it. I now put the question that clause 54 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 55

DR BUKENYA: Clause 55 is amended by inserting in sub clause (2) the word “to” immediately after the word “prison”. And by substituting, in sub clause (3) the word “for” with the word “from” for grammatical correction.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 55 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 56

DR BUKENYA: Clause 56 (1) is amended by substituting the word “do” appearing on the second last line with the word “does”. This is for grammatical correctness. 

MR ANYWARACH: The title of clause 56 is so good. However, what is the justification for limiting local authorities to local council executives when the other time we were even considering community development officers? I do not know whether it does any harm to the tile or whether in the definition clause “local authorities” will also mean “Community Development Officer”. 

Madam Chairperson, I would consider “local council executives and the Community Development Officer of the area where a person with mental illness who is released from prison resides shall monitor the person to ensure that he or she…” We can even say a relative or parent. 

Let us say “any other person” because this is now somebody coming back to the community. Are we putting a duty on the local council or we are just getting concerned with the presence of this person in the community? If he is a concern of the community, then it should be multi-dimensional. Let us not tie “local council executives” to “mean local authorities”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you propose?

MR AOGON: Let me propose. Yesterday, when we were debating the issue of getting somebody who is mentally ill, we agreed that we can use a member of the Uganda Police Force, member of the local authority or any other person. Why don’t we use the same even now so that we make it easy? That is the proposal.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, nowadays people go to churches and mosques for prayers. I think we can add something to do with religious leaders. In my view, these are people who are always with - I am telling you people are taken to some of these places, by the way, for your information. That is why I am saying we include it as an element such that they are bound by this law. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, what do you say about the proposal by hon. Aogon?

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I think we did not define who a local council executive is under the definition clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we check under clause 2?

MS OPENDI: Yes, we need to define the local council executive and I have no problem with that proposal, to be consistent with what we said yesterday.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, we shall amend the interpretation section to say that in this context the local authorities include the Police.

MS OPENDI: Yes.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, that being the case, it is now easy. We can now say: “Clause 56. Duties of local authorities” and instead of saying “the local council”, we just say “the local authorities of the area where a person with mental illness……”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR DULU: Madam Chairperson, I feel that prison officers have been left out yet they are the people who spend more time with these people than any other person we have talked about here. A Police officer simply apprehends and hands over –

THE CHAIRPERSON: When they are in the community after they have left the prisons?

MR DULU: No, that is the definition because once this person is identified, you do not leave this person in the community.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want the prison officers to follow up the patients in the community?

MR DULU: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 56 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 57

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I hope that when we moved to amend clause 56(1), then clause 56(2) is consequentially amended that way.

MS NALULE: Madam Chairperson, I am of the view that when we come to the interpretation section, we also define “minister”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall go to clause 2 and if you want to make amendments you can say it. 

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, allow me to seek your indulgence. It appears like the Government is very committed to downsizing the number of boards, authorities and commissions to the extent that we now see they are being merged. Maybe the minister could be in a position to give valid justification for “Uganda Mental Advisory Board”. 

I am saying that because tomorrow we may be faced with another Bill. Are we really again going to have within that Bill an authority or advisory board? I am wondering because we already have a medical council or dental practitioners something and those are clusters in terms of departments and disciplines.

Maybe the minister is in a position to allay my fears because I do not specifically see a valid justification for a Mental Health Advisory Board. Who is it advising and what will be the scope?

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, a few days ago, the Laboratory Bill was kicked out of this House because of something to do with the board. At the same time, today in New Vision and Daily Monitor newspapers you really find the Government has decided to downsize by merging and scrapping some agencies and boards.

I am now worried that if we maintain this board, tomorrow we might be stepping on a red line. In my view, we should actually put this thing within the Ministry of Health to address matters to deal with this area other than creating another board because that is where we are going to have another problem before the law comes into effect. Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think we need to look at issues differently. When we are talking about the Mental Health Advisory Board, it is different from what Members are talking about. What we have been doing as Government – which we are still doing – is proposing the scrapping off of some authorities and commissions whose work is already being done by the ministries. 

However, when you look at mental health as we speak now, apart from Butabika Hospital, in the Ministry of Health we had only one psychiatrist, who was Dr Sheila Ndyanabangi. She alone – we really need to appreciate her because maybe this Bill would not have got to this level without her participation. She passed on about two weeks ago. 

What we are talking about here is an advisory board and you can look at the composition of this advisory board. If you bring this assignment to the ministry, we shall not have these people there; the psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, the social medical worker, the psychiatrist nurse, principal psychiatrists - we do not have them in the Ministry of Health. So, this is why we are calling it even an advisory board, not the full board that we actually know.

So, these experts will be working maybe in the regional referral hospitals where they are. They would be able to give us technical advice because they advise the ministry on policy issues and others. Their functions are very clear; it is to monitor the mental health services in the country because this is now something that we are just taking up. 

As I said before, these services have been restricted to the regional referral and the national referral hospitals. Now, we are moving it down. We need these specialists to monitor the services at the lower health facilities for which at the ministry, we do not have that capacity.

Honourable colleagues, for purposes of understanding, the magnitude of the mental health in the country stand at 16 per cent; it is close to six million people and the numbers are still growing. We need a specialised team and this is why the advisory board should remain. Thank you.

MR KATUSABE: I raised this issue and I asked the minister to give valid justification. I am glad to mention that indeed, the minister has given a valid justification. 

My only concern was the burden that is already placed on our over stretched resource envelop. She has allayed my fear that it is not going to further strain our limited resource envelop in the sense that these are people who have Government jobs somewhere. So, their expertise, experience and competencies will only be required on a pro bono or some minimum understanding. I tend to support the advisory board. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 57 –

MR ANYWARACH: When I looked at it from what she said that this is an advisory board, I got convinced. However, look at this provision up to clause 68 (1) where it says funds of the board shall-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we handle that when get there? We are still at clause 57.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, that is one thing incomplete - In fact, I am talking of part 6. I am of the view – I love the fact that we should have the advisory board but my fear is that, honourable minister, if you went back to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and presented this, it is going to be an extra charge on the Consolidated Fund in terms of money appropriated from here. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Was there no Certificate of Financial implication? I put the question that clause 57 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58

DR BUKENYA: Composition of the Board
Clause 58 is amended:
    a. By substituting in sub cause (1) for the word “ten” the word “six” so that it reads;

The justification is that a smaller body is more efficient and easier to manage financially.
    b. By substituting clause 3 with the following: 

“3. The members shall include:
    a. The Chairperson;
    b. The Director General of Medical Services or his or her representative;
    c. A consultant Psychiatrist;
    d. A police officer at the rank of Commissioner of Police;
    e. A mental health service user nominated by the recognised or duly registered association for mental health service users;
    f. A representative from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; and 
    g. A lawyer specialised in human rights advocacy nominated by the Uganda Law Society.
	The justification is to ensure relevancy of the members of the board through their experience.

    c. By substituting sub clause (4) with the following, “The National Mental Health Co-ordinator shall be an Ex-Officio Member and Secretary of the Board.”
    d. By substituting sub clause (5) with the following, “The chairperson and members referred to in sub section (3) (d) and (e) shall be appointed by the Minister who shall, in making of the appointment, take into consideration the principle of equal opportunity and gender.”
	The justification is to ensure gender and equity in the making of appointment.

    e. By substituting sub clause (6) with the following, “The member referred to in sub section (3) (ii) shall be nominated by the Minister of Internal Affairs.”

The justification is that the Minister of Internal Affairs supervises the Police.

MS SAFIA NALULE: Madam Chairperson, I am first seeking for clarification because as though I heard the chairperson of the committee say he is moving the composition from 10 to six and doing away with the representative of the users. 

DR BUKENYA: Hon. Safia Nalule has not read sub section (e) where mental service users are nominated by a recognised or duly registered association from mental health service users. So, the users are represented.

MS SAFIA NALULE: That is where my point is. Members, if the chairperson of the committee is saying we have one representative from the mental health users nominated by the Mental Health Service Users Organisation, I thought that each representation needed gender balance. It is because automatically, when it is only one representative, generally the men will take over this. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I have looked at most of the Members and they have over contributed. I have looked at the time and it has gone beyond 7.00 p.m. 

When I look at what is remaining, the work is so much still. When you look at where we have reached now, this is the most critical part of this Bill which we need to handle when we are fresh. 

Therefore, I would like to move a motion without notice that you do adjourn the House and we come back and start from where we have left off when we are fresh so that we make something better for this country. Otherwise, we might make many mistakes. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, motion for the House to resume. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

MS OPENDI: Madam Chair, the motion was not seconded. Nobody seconded this motion and what we are left with are not really very serious issues. I would like to suggest that we complete this committee stage.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MS KATUSABE: I would like to encourage honourable colleagues to really mind about their commitment; that you can stay in one place all this time and have a chance to look at the unfinished business. 

They lay under literally the declaratory statement of intent or they do not require specific applications. Boards are boards and we have the rules and regulations that govern them. So, there is nothing much really left in this Bill. Tomorrow, we will deal with something else.

So, Madam Chairperson, I ask that you persevere for a little bit for us to get this Bill out of the way so that we have something new and pressing tomorrow. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 58 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 58, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 59

DR BUKENYA: Clause 59 is amended by substituting in sub-clause (1) with the following; "(1) The chairperson and members of the board, except those in subsection 3 (b) and subsection (4) shall hold office for four years and are eligible for re-appointment for another term." 

The justification is for clarity as to the term of office of the different members of the board.

MS OPENDI: I would like to propose that we maintain the three years as proposed in the Bill - but renewable - because this is standard practice for most of the boards that we have been appointing at Cabinet level. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 59 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60

MS SAFIA NALULE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose in clause 60 (b); “…monitor the implementation of this Act and present annual reports to Parliament on the status of these implementations.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: The board to present to Parliament?

MS SAFIA NALULE: Madam Chairperson, the picture depicted in Parliament today is rosy but the problems people with mental illness face in the community are so big. They do not have enough medication, the type of medicines they need are normally not included on the list of essential drugs in this country -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nalule, are you creating an authority which will report directly to the House? This is a board.

MS SAFIA NALULE: We are talking about implementation; how are we going to check the status of implementation of this?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Through the policy statement. I now put the question that clause 60 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When you read clause 66 (3); “for the purposes of this section, a mental health tribunal shall investigate and arbitrate or advise on a complaint referred to the board by a patient, a personal representative…” to refer to the board is already self-defeating.

Secondly, a tribunal reviews decisions in relation to the right of patients under this Act. I propose an amendment for clause 66(3) that, “For purposes of this section, a mental health tribunal shall review, investigate, arbitrate or advice on complaints referred to the tribunal by a patient, a personal representative, a relative or a concerned person concerning the treatment of the patient and where necessary take or recommend.’

The decision of the tribunal is subject to the person who receives it who is independent. I can appeal or challenge it under the courts of law.

If we tie it to the board, which is an administrative body, then the safeguard of patients under this law is already compromised.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please propose.

MR ANYWARACH: My proposal should be, if we are done with the fact THAT the complaint will be referred to the tribunal and have added the word, “review” now therefore, concerning the treatment of the patient, instead of talking about the treatment of the patient we should say, “concerning decisions made in relationship to the rights of a patient under this Act.”

We do not need to mention treatment because there are so many other rights even when you are not well assessed. When you are received you are assessed, treated, admitted, discharged or you are under community treatment order.

Once we limit it only to treatment, how about a suspect who has been taken by the police officers for his mental status to be assessed? What are his rights? 

What about a normal person who has been arrested by violation of powers by the police officer who arrests me, as a Member of Parliament. Let us just talk about any decision made in relation to the right of a person under this Act whether a patient or not. Mental health tribunal, international standards is about safeguards of rights of persons who are -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you propose what you want us to enact.

MR ANYWARACH: For purposes of this section, a mental health tribunal shall review, investigate and arbitrate or advise on a complaint referred to the tribunal by a person whose right - in relation to decisions made within the rights of a person under this Act. 

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, I was pleased with your flow of speed; it was perfect. I only want to draw my senior colleague hon. Joshua Anywarach to clause 67; tribunals are just an international practice.

There is nothing new we can introduce in this particular one because a tribunal is a tribunal regardless of its corporate range or jurisdiction. He is trying to draw our attention to what is already catered for under clause 67 – (Interjections)– can I introduce this. 

Madam Chairperson, you ruled in one of those processing sessions that we should be very clear when on the Floor that every commission, agency, authority or board should factor in gender because you find situations where six or eight members on a particular Board are male and only two are female. 

Madam Chairperson, they are confronted during the execution of their duties and responsibilities with matters that have gender dimensions that focus on the female. Some of these boards, as you know, are supposed to take a vote and I would –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that under Clause 66 (3)?

MR KATUSABE: No, I am saying that under the composition, the legal team should factor in –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have done it already.
 
MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I have drafted it and it reads: “For purposes of this section, a mental health tribunal shall review, investigate and arbitrate or advise on complaintS referred to the tribunal by a person in connection to decisions made in relationship to the right of the person under this Act.” This caters for a person who has been framed, is mentally ill, somebody who is actually mentally ill and any person who gives complaints under this Act violates his right. In that way, it cures it. 

My problem with Clause 67 where –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, do not go to clause 67; let us do one thing at a time. Can you remove the word “and” so that it reads, “investigates, arbitrates or advise”. They do not have to be tied together.

Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 66 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 66, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.


Clause 73

DR BUKENYA: Clause 73: Powers of the minister to make regulations.

Clause 73(i) is amended by inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph 8 to read, “To designate and appoint mental health units and hospitals.”

(ii) 	By inserting a new paragraph immediately after (d) to read, “Prescribing the procedure for treatment of women, children and youth with mental illness.”

The justification is for adolescents and youth who constitute the majority of the population and so need to clearly be catered for in addition to the other special categories of persons who need special care at the mental health unit.

(iii)	By inserting a new paragraph immediately before paragraph (e) to read; “Prescribing a procedure for integration of community mental health services and psycho-socio support in treating and caring for persons with mental illness.”

The justification is to implement Government desired policy of integrating community-based care and treatment of patients. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, thank you. I would like to get clarification. According to clause 73, it means that we are now giving the minister sweeping powers to designate and appoint mental health units and hospitals.

That now means that there is going to be specific health units that are going to benefit from this law. In this case, it is the minister who will determine and not the law. I need to be helped to understand. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the role of the minister is to say, this facility in Kotido meets the standards to be a health unit and he declares it.

MR DULU: In clause 73 (2), I feel segregated. What if in (3) we used the word, “persons” instead of parading up “women, children and youth” as if men cannot fall sick and suffer from mental illness. Why don’t we use the word “persons” to have all of us on board? Why have you excluded men?

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I think the committee imagined that men are the alpha and omega. That means they will not fall sick.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is that we delete the words, “Women, Children and youths” and substitute them with “persons”. 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 73 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, my amendment would be that if such a regulation is made by the minister, why wouldn’t the copies be laid before Parliament so that we know? The standard practice has been that once a regulation is made, the minister is mandated to lay a copy of the regulations here. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to add that the regulation shall be laid?

MR AOGON: Is laying it at the table enough or shall it be debated or shared? What is the essence of having it laid if we are not going to have an input anywhere?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are not going to run the ministry from here. It will be laid; if you have an issue you then can raise it. However, we should not sit here and debate the regulation.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, the standard practice is that we bring regulations here to lay them for information of Members except when the Bill states so. Like we had the HIV/AIDS; because of the controversies in the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund, the clause was inserted stating that the regulations will be brought to the House and the House is supposed to make an input in the regulations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Once we have made the regulations, what input do we add? I would like to remind you, honourable minister, that we had so much trouble with the regulations of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets (PPDA). We attempted to do it from here but it took almost seven months. 

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, the standard practice - where there are no controversies - is that we simply lay. Unless otherwise stated, I am just drawing the attention of the members to, for example, the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund because there were issues that the money would be used for workshops and other things. 

Parliament wanted to make sure that the regulations were in conformity with the Act as a pact and that is why we brought it here. Otherwise, standard practice is that we just lay them here. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the regulations should be laid and if you find issues then you can raise it on that area; not when plenary is sitting and then say regulation No. 1.

Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be added as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 73, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 74

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like now to invite hon. Anywarach to make his proposal before we go to clause 74.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I propose to introduce an independent clause under the miscellaneous on independent mental health advocates to state that:

    i. The board shall make such arrangements as it deems fit to allow the establishment of independent mental health advocates.

    ii. The minister shall make regulations prescribing for the qualifications and licensing of persons as independent mental health advocates.

    iii. For purposes of this section, “independent mental health advocate” means a person who is specially trained to work within the framework of the Mental Health Act to meet the needs of the patient.

The justification is that international best practice is that you have persons who act as mental health advocates but they must be licensed. These persons give all the care and protection. For example, if a mentally ill person is also disabled and deaf, you may not have to charge it on Government but these persons provide the services for that person. 

In addition, they may not be necessarily established under the Government structures. It can be any group of persons or professionals who are willing to do that work but must be licensed. Therefore, the board will set the terms and conditions of license. Therefore, it is an extra safeguard for mental health persons. Thank you.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, I am mindful of the fact that we are processing a Bill. The moment we pass this, it is going to be translated into an Act or a law. I am struggling and I want to be helped by my senior colleague, hon. Anywarach. What could be the purpose for this importation? This Bill already captures the tribunal and the moment we introduce new arrivals like basic men or health services or independent men or health advocates -

Madam Chairperson, this is not the first Bill to be processed here. I would rather that this House takes the burden not to quickly adopt this because it might introduce a precedent that in the future, we might find a lot of difficulty in. I would rather that we subject this to further legal interpretation and try to ascertain how much room or space we have within our legal region to absorb this. 

Madam Chairperson, I know where my senior brother is coming from - a practice that is applied somewhere and he wants to adopt it here. I would encourage him to explore the difficulty in doing this because we have to make sure that this is aligned to our pressing and emerging issues in relation to legal systems and regimes. I am sorry; I think this may not really apply because it introduces many complications that would have future legal interpretations, Madam Chairperson.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not see the importance of this in this Bill. We have so many advocates for NCDs, malaria etcetera. The work of the advocate is similar to the civil society organisations. We cannot have the board making such arrangements to allow establishments of these mental health advocates. They can operate outside the ministry just as we have the civil societies and NGOs. I, therefore, do not see why we should bog ourselves down because he is putting an additional task on us to make regulations prescribing for the qualification and licensing of these mental health advocates.

Madam Chairperson, I would like to suggest that let those who wish to complement our efforts in this mental health-by the way, it is already there. Several organisations have been doing this advocacy work for mental health. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that this proposal by hon. Anywranch should not be accepted.

MR AOGAN: Madam Chairperson, I listened to hon. Katusabe and I felt that it would be proper to follow the line that he has suggested. Let us give him time so that we understand exactly what the honourable member is trying to propose here. I suggest we go on with what we are doing. We can leave this - this Act can be amended in future. Let us pass this law the way we are trying to and then we first do a study and where it is necessary we shall do an amendment. 

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Other than the phrasing of “Independent”, I would like to support the idea of having mental health advocates because I am looking at a situation whereby you have a group of people looking at the rights and interests of the mentally ill. 

What I propose is that if we find it difficult to constitute an independent board of these mental health advocates, then let us have these mental health advocates represented in the advisory board because already there, we have a group which is very amorphous - the health users, mental health users organisation which I do not know and what they represent.

Everybody is a mental health service user. I, therefore, do not know these mental health user organisations who are being represented in the advisory board yet these health advocates are activists who are interested in the rights and care of mental patients.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am seeing some difficulty here to have this board in the Government, move into the arena of the NGOs and supervise there and organise them - this is what this proposal is saying.

MS SAFIA NALULE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to inform this august House that even during the development of this Bill, the committee worked hand in hand with such organisations of the users. That is why you see a provision under the composition of the board, recognising representatives of the users. That is why I was urging to have gender balance in representation.

The users are already organised and have an umbrella organisation called Mental Health Uganda and under that organisation; there are other organisations. Therefore, the structure is there, chairperson. 

THE CHIARPERSON: I am addressing the proposals here. They proposed that the board shall make arrangements as it deems fit to allow establishment of independent mental health advocates. Really? You sit here and you go and organise there? 

MR KATUSABE: Will I come after him or should I speak before him?

THE CHAIRPERSON: He has made a proposal; speak to it and then he will come – (Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, it is international practice that a Bill at this stage has got to have a clear framework and definition of what the rights, duties, responsibilities and obligations of the people to enforce this Bill are supposed to be to help facilitate the enforcement.

Madam Chairperson, these are superb ideas only that they do not apply in here. They are not supposed to be consumed in this particular process because they will serve one purpose; to distort the flow and scope of the entire Bill. This is –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: I think hon. Katusabe did not address his mind to the varieties of different Mental Health Acts that we have internationally. He is distorting information that these independent mental health advocates are going to distort the administration and the whole Act if passed into law when actually what these mental health advocates are going to do is simple. They will ensure that decisions made in the care, treatment and handling of patients are made according to the Act. 

In a nutshell, I am giving a practical example. Imagine a situation where you are denied access to records – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Anywarach, will they be coming to the board to say, “We are demanding this, you have not done this?” How will they come to the board? 

MR ANYWARACH: They are going to be licensed. Once they are licensed, they will operate according to the terms. 

That is why we said that the board shall ensure establishment, shall license them and shall put down – for example, right now, it is in the best interest of the authorities at Butabika to deny you access for whatever reason, even to deny you information on the type of medicine that your relative is consuming. 

These mental health advocates will precisely ensure that the way you are handled under the Act is as the Act prescribes. It is to check on excesses even of the tribunal. It is really –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, in that case, there is a body called the NGO Board which is responsible for clearing these people and giving them licenses. It cannot be the Government.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, I think we are at your mercy right now for one reason; I come from the academia. I know where all of this is coming from and I am saying that it is not for this session. 

There are systems and processes that already cater for this kind of thing. We are trying to say, “let us stick to the process because the moment we lose it at the process stage, then we are going to contradict or cause a lot of complications in founding or executing the product.”

The moment we lose clarity and precision in Bill processing, then we are going to overwhelm the enforcers with execution. They are going to have problems with execution and that is the reason I am saying that this can be catered for elsewhere but not in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Aywarach, I understand what you are saying; it is important but it does not fit in this Bill. We cannot have NGO work inside the Bill to be organised by the Government.

DR BUKENYA: Clause 74 is amended by substituting the clause with the following. The following laws are repealed;

    i) Mental Treatment Act Cap. 279
    ii) Administration of Estates of Persons of Unsound Mind Act Cap. 155

The justification is that the procedure of dealing with the estates of the persons of unsound minds has been incorporated in the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 74 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 74, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 75
 
DR BUKENYA: Clause 75; Saving provisions

Clause 75 is amended by substituting the clause with the following;

    1. The provisions of this Act and any regulations made under it shall apply to a person received or admitted to a mental health facility or otherwise dealt with under the Mental Treatment Act Cap. 279 as if that person were admitted or dealt with under this Act.
    2. A building appointed by the minister as a mental hospital under the Mental Treatment Act Cap. 79 shall be deemed to be a mental health unit under this Act.
    3. Movable and immovable properties in use by mental health facilities under the Mental Treatment Act Cap. 279 shall, on the commencement of this Act, be considered properties under this Act.
    4. Staff of mental health facilities under the Mental Treatment Act Cap. 279 shall, on the commencement of this Act, be considered to be staff of mental health units created under this Act.
    5. Any action taken or document executed under the Administration of the Estates of Persons of Unsound Mind Act Cap. 155, which is subsisting at the date of commencement of this Act is deemed to be an act taken under this Act

The justification is to protect property, tax, action or documents executed under the Mental Treatment Act and Administration of Estates of Persons of Unsound Mind since they are repealed by this Act.

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I propose to amend clause 75(2) by substituting the words, “a building appointed by the minister”, with, “a place appointed…” because in some places, a building may not exist but a gazetted place or a cordoned off place or fenced off. Rather than saying a building, we can say a place.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You cannot appoint a tree to be a mental health unit.

MR DULU: Madam Chairperson, we have all these systems in place right from parish to district level. Now when we say, “A building appointed by the minister as a mental hospital under the Mental Treatment Act Cap. 279 shall be deemed to be a mental health unit under this Act,” are we saying we are going to alter – if that one occurs – the existing structure or we are going to have within these structures? I need a clarification.

MR OKOTH: From the beginning, we were told that one of the objectives of this Bill is to mainstream mental health care in our primary health care services. We know very well that primary health care services are provided right from health centres II, III and IV and it is a policy of Government that these health centres II, III and IV must be established in all these places. 

I remember that somewhere in the Bill, we also said the patient should access services in health centres nearest to the person. Therefore, I find it a contradiction again in the same Bill to say the minister shall appoint a building when in actual sense we are saying the purpose of this Bill is to mainstream mental health services in primary health care services. 

MR AOGON: My concern was on the issue of appointing a building. Can’t we use the word “declare” instead of “appointing”? Is “appointing” the same as “declaring”? If you are given appointment letter, is it the same as declaration letter? We will think about that and see. Are they the same? Madam Chairperson, you have always declared Serena Hotel and its precincts for parliamentary business. Let us think about that.

MS NAUWAT: On that one, if we have to maintain clause 75, I am equally concerned about the word “appointed”. I feel the word “designated” is better.

DR BUKENYA: Honourable members, the title of the clause is “saving provisions”. Therefore, we are saving the buildings that were appointed in the Act which we are repealing. However, that does not stop us from streamlining and creating new institutions like the health centres II you are talking about. The Mental Health Treatment Act of 1964 gave the powers to the minister to appoint buildings. Therefore, we are saving what she had appointed for continuity but it does not stop us from doing whatever the law talks about.

MR DULU: It is not yet clear, Madam Chairperson. I would like the committee chairperson to tell us very clearly. When we say “appoint”, are we referring to the existing health units? Maybe there are some buildings there and the minister says from now onwards this becomes -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if you look at the headnote “saving provisions” – it is saving from the past so that what was appointed 20 years ago continues under this law.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to refer Members to the interpretation clause where we talk about the mental health units. For these buildings that we are appointing, if you look at the definition, the “mental health unit means any building or part of a building appointed by the minister under this Act”. Therefore, what we are talking about in effect are really the health units.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is simply that the units that were appointed in the old law continue. That is what she is saying.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 75 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 75, as amended, agreed to.)

(Schedule 1, agreed to.)

Schedule 2

MS NAUWAT: Madam Chairperson, under the details of patients, there is information that is needed from the patient but I am concerned about the number, just about diagnosis. Whereas they are clear with inpatient numbers and number of children of the patient, if any, this other number above diagnosis is not clear and I do not know whether we need it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is that other number, honourable minister?

MS OPENDI: I think that was an error. It should be deleted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it an error?

MS OPENDI: Yes, it should be an error.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the word “number” be deleted from that schedule.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Schedule 2, as amended, agreed to.)

MR ANYWARACH: As a safeguard to avoid abuse of police power, I put the House on notice that the chairperson should provide for a form which should be schedule 3, where if under the power of the police in clause 10, the police officer exercises his power, then there should be a form for him to fill in the details in terms of why and what time one is arrested or detained and so on. It should also contain details of the person presumed to be a patient but providing specifically in relation to clause 10. That form should be schedule 3.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you understood his proposal? He wants a new schedule.

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, hon. Anywarach had proposed, during our discussion earlier today, that in order to protect people from abuse, we should have a form that is filled by a police officer at the time of effecting an involuntary or emergency admission. However –(Interruption)  

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, the forms exist and they are actually the emergency forms that existed under the old law.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, the forms you are asking about are called “medical forms” but we are talking about a form for the police officer who is arresting you under his powers stated in clause 10. To avoid malice, he should be able to keep a record of your name and details of what time you were arrested. 

It should be attached as Schedule 3. Madam Chair, this is to avoid the possibility – Yesterday, the honourable chairperson of the committee had agreed to it. I do not know why we should not provide for it and work with the technical bench to draft it.  After all, the Canadian Mental Health Act has even a copy of that form. Even the Uganda Health Act of 1964 should be having that copy of a similar form.

So, to avoid -

THE CHAIRPERSON: The form is there in the old Act. Therefore, it is still there; we do not need a new form. If we retain the old law, we have saved everything including the form. Let us go to - the laws are here. Issues of part of the old law are part of the new law. 

Now, interpretation section -

Clause 2

DR BUKENYA: Clause 2: Interpretation

Clause 2 is amended by:

    1. Inserting the definition of the words, “assisted treatment and care” immediately before the definition of the word “board” to read as follows: “Assisted treatment and care means the provision of health interventions to people incapable of making informed decisions due to their mental health status especially during episodes of mental illness.

    2. Inserting the definition of the word “community mental health services” immediately after the definition of the word “bodily restraint” to read as follows: “Community mental health services refer to a system of care in which the community of a person with mental illness not a health unit or mental health unit is a primary provider of care for the person with mental illness.”

    3. Inserting the definition of the word “courts” immediately after the definition of the word “concerned person” to read as follows: “Courts mean a court with competent jurisdiction.”

    4. Inserting the definition of the word “mental capacity” immediately after the definition of the word “medical practitioners” to read as follows: “Mental capacity means the independent and informed cognitive ability to understand the nature and effect of one’s decisions and actions.”

    5. Substituting the definition of the word “mental illness” with the following: “Mental illness means the diagnosis of mental health condition in terms of accepted diagnostic criteria made by a mental health practitioner or medical practitioner authorised to make such diagnosis. Mental health condition include but are not limited to depression, bipolar, anxiety disorder, Schizophrenia, addictive behaviour due to alcohol substance abuse, among others.”

    6. Deleting the word mental disorder.

    7. Inserting the definition of the word “mental health services” immediately after the definition of the word “medical health practitioner” to read as follows: “Mental health services refer to assessment, diagnosis, treatment, care, counselling or advice given to an individual or groups of individuals with mental illness or disorder.

    8. Inserting the definition of the word “mental health service user” immediately after the definition of the word “mental health services” to read as follows: “Mental health service user refers to any person receiving either continuous or non-continuous mental health care and treatment services from a health unit, mental health unit or community aimed at enhancing his or her mental health status regardless of age, gender, social or economic standing.”

    9. Substituting the definition of the word “primary health centre” with the following: “Primary health centre means a Government primary Health Centre II, III or IV or equivalent health unit in the private sector.”

    10. Inserting the definition of the word “treatment and care” immediately after the definition of the word “senior mental health practitioner” to read as follows: “Treatment and care means the provision of interventions whether medical or otherwise to a person with mental illness.”

Justification

It is for clarity and enhanced understanding of the words used in the Bill.

MS SAFIA NALULE: I propose to put the definition of minister so that this Bill can have a home. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You propose -

MS NALULE: I am proposing to have a definition of the minister to mean the Minister of Health. 

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chair, those are excellent definitions. My only concern to the chair and his team who worked together to bring those definitions; where did you originate the definitions. Are they Oxford or Cambridge definitions or definitions as they relate to this Bill? It is because that has to be very clear in Bill processing. Am only asking; is it as they relate to the Bill?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, let us go to - If you have an amendment, present it, if not -

MS NAUWAT: Madam Chair, I am looking at the interpretation of primary health centre and here it says, it means a Government primary Health Centre II, III or IV. In the report of the committee, they clearly recommended that Government should establish some framework for extending mental health care services to regional and primary health care centres and also encourage the private sector to participate in mental health care services. However, there are some districts like Amudat; the only Health Centre IV we have belongs to an NGO. 

Therefore, I would like to propose that we include in this sentence NGOs to read, “Primary health centre means a Government or NGO primary Health Centres II, III or IV” so that districts with only Health Centres IV that belong to NGOs can also attend to persons with mental illness.

DR BUKENYA: For clarification, in the report, we made a provision and we said substituting the definition of the word “primary health centre” with the following: “Primary health centre means a Government Primary Health Centre II, III or IV or equivalent health unit in the private sector.” So, hon. Nauwat, Amudat is catered for.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There was that issue of the local authority; for purposes of this Act, you had said it would be the police, the local government people and CBOs. Could someone formulate it so that we - 

MR KATUSABE: For this particular Act, Madam Chairperson, I would propose relevant local authorities because that would broaden - It could be a church leader or a community advisor. I am saying relevant local authorities. 

Honourable chairperson, on top of that, something to marry the other side is duty. I was wondering whether we could marry duty and responsibility. Under that, we bring what we - it is because duty is just like a restriction and yet when we add responsibility, we try to broaden the challenge for community participation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are trying to broaden the challenge for community participation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are just defining; we are not identifying the responsibilities.

MR MUHEIRWE: For purposes of this Act, local authority includes; police officers, members of a local council, religious leaders and other recognised persons in authority.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you forget the local government officials? What about the Community Development Officers, District Engineer, are they not part of the councils?

MR MUHEIRWE: Community Development Officers are not local authorities.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why we are saying that for purposes of this Act, because we are dealing with someone with authority who might find this person wondering and then he or she takes them somewhere or monitors and keeps reporting. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, at least when we talk about local authority, let us refer to the political leaders, a committee or maybe a council and also include technical officers of a local government specifically the District Community Development Officer.

When you talk about local council III; they have their executives but at the same time, we have senior assistant secretaries who used to be sub county chiefs. The Community Development Officers can do the work so we should allow for that.

MR MUHEIRWE: Madam Chairperson, in my proposal, I had mentioned other recognised persons in authority. Maybe if it sounds ambiguous, let us break it down but it would be a very big statement. Other recognised persons in authority would mean a parish chief; if I am in the village as a Member of Parliament it would mean -

MR OTHIENO: I would like to differ on religious leaders. These days everybody is coming up and calling themselves religious leaders. You may find a cult leader like the one we had in Kanungu who may collect all these mentally disturbed people. I suggest that we remove religious leaders.

MR ANYWARACH: Having listened to everyone, if we talked about the local council and then we go to the technocrats or any responsible person in authority, it would capture all so that it covers me as well when I visit the constituency.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, let us first pass the amendment and leave legal people to handle it and give us the right words. I do not think that we really need to struggle over this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This is an important part of the law. We can delegate the numbering and restructuring. That is one clause we can sleep over; we do the title and finish it tomorrow.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Chairperson, local authority appears like a new concept but we deal with on a daily basis. We have enough brains in this House at this moment to give us a cue. I might need your help to dress it up but this is how I would skeleton it.

Local authority would be a collection of witch doctors who also call themselves leaders. It should be relevant local authorities in a particular community.

Community taken care of both urban and rural settings - that is why I am interesting myself to community so that we do not restrict it to a village and yet the same challenge could also be in an urban setting.

A relevant local authority existing in a particular community that could help in the organisation of a particular task; Cambridge or oxford dictionary will provide a definition but we are only interested in a definition that relates to this particular Bill that is why I have come up with that.

Certainly you have the capacity to modify and dress up or strengthen what I have just given. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is no harm in standing over one clause and finetuning it so that when we leave here, we are all satisfied that we have covered everything. Motion for the House to resume -

MR MUHEIRWE: We need to define dependant.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, before we resume, I would like to make a small amendment on the definition of the community mental health services to refer to a system of care in which the community of a person with mental illness -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where are you in the interpretation?

MS OPENDI: Yes, on page 24, he had indicated; “it refers to systems of care in which the community of a person with mental illness” and then he said, “not a health unit.” 

We are removing the word “not” to refer to, “Care in which the community of a person with mental health, a health unit or mental health unit.”

I would like to remove the word “not” because sometimes the health facilities do outreaches at the community level away from the facility.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, the chairperson has no objection please move the motion.

MS OPENDI: I hope we will also come with the definition for dependants tomorrow.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Whatever is remaining on the interpretation will come tomorrow including the amendment of the title.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the committee of whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.) 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled; “The Mental Health Bill, 2014” and passed it with amendments but stood over the interpretation clause. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, I had two amendments. One was shot with the contempt it deserved but I had not yet proposed the other one. Would it be procedurally right to allow me put it tomorrow?

In the definition clause, it is all captured as well as in the update of the Bill in Clause 2; “To provide for basic mental health care services, which –“

THE SPEAKER: Clause 2 is still open.

MR ANYWARACH: It is not clause 2. You had guided that we needed it printed out and in our consideration - I had meetings with the legal counsel of Parliament. It had no issue apart from the independent mental health advocate, which has been shot down. However, the basic mental services as redrafted –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is part of your proposals creating health units in the institutions of higher learning - this and that.

MR ANYWARACH: What it is doing is creating counselling and guidance, psycho-social interventions, mental health sensitisation activities; mental health programmes and employee assistance programmes. Even the honourable minister agrees with me that in the health action plan and policy they have, all this is captured but we need to actualise it. 

Mental health is a big issue cutting across. When you are unemployed, it has mental torture on you; if you are about to retire from your job, it has a mental disorder on you. If we had this basic mental health services taken as responsibilities of employers and institutions of learning - particularly the other one is about women who are pregnant. Yesterday, I was giving you the statistics of World Health Organisation where one in every 10 women or two in every twenty, have mental disorders so it would come that –

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, hon. Anywarach is my good friend and he has so many issues that need attention of this House and therefore require enough time. Wouldn’t it be procedurally proper that he allows you to adjourn the House then we reconvene tomorrow and look at these matters? (Interjections) 

I am here to raise a point of procedure to make you rule whether it is not –(Laughter)– to allow you rule whether it is not procedurally okay for us to defer all these arguments to tomorrow? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I read hon. Anywarach’s proposals but the longer I read them the more they moved out of the Bill. That is why I said that they are good ideas but not for this Bill.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, finally, that means the short title of the Bill –

THE SPEAKER: No, no, we shall handle the title tomorrow.

MR ANYWARACH: It will have to change to “Mental treatment...”

THE SPEAKER: The title and clause 2 will be handled tomorrow. What are you doing at this stage?

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I would like to advise hon. Anywarach that since we are adjourning to tomorrow and we shall be considering it, let him look at the proposed amendment under clause 73 and see if it does not cover what he is talking about. 

The basic mental health services that he is talking about; there was a new amendment from the committee prescribing the procedure for integration of community mental health services and psycho-social support in treating and caring for persons with mental health.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 8.26 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 13 September 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

