Thursday, 1 September 2005

Parliament met at 10.58 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to today’s sitting and to appeal to you to work diligently for several hours today and tomorrow. We intend to go on recess on Tuesday, 6 September 2005. Therefore, we should have completed all the work by Tuesday afternoon. As such, we shall sit on Monday and we shall sit in the mornings and afternoons. Please, both members of the Executive and of the Back Bench should ensure that they are here all the time. Thank you.

11.00
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek guidance from the National Political Commissar or any persons connected with the Movement. We know very well that constitutionally all Members of Parliament are also members of the Movement not withstanding their different shades of political opinion. Why is it that whenever they have social functions some of us are deliberately excluded? Yesterday they had a party, we were excluded. The other day they had a party, we were again excluded. When they went to some place to get money, we were excluded. What does the Constitution say about the Members of Parliament who all belong to the Movement? What is this marginalisation to mean to those of us who are always left out?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the NPC explain how he attends parties without hon. Awori?

11.02
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Awori for seeking this clarification. I agree that all of us in Parliament are members of the Movement political system and that is why during the constitutional amendment all of us should have supported opening up political space. For the party that some of us attended last night, I must say I was surprised not to see hon. Awori, but this was a party for the NRM political party, not of the Movement political system. Nevertheless, prominent members like hon. Awori should have been invited. I am sure that next time this will be corrected.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, without wasting any more of this august House’s time, my honourable colleague is saying there is a distinction between NRM and the Movement. Is it in order for NRM to continue using the facilities of the Movement Government to the exclusion of other people who are also constitutionally members of Movement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I do not know the sources of the funds of the activities, which they do. I really cannot rule on that. I do not know where they get their things for doing what they do. However, I am aware that there is another function today and I hope you have been invited.

DR KIYONGA: Yes, Madam Speaker. First, of course the President is a President for everybody: FDC, UPC, NRM and it is his prerogative to decide when he wants to meet UPC or when he wants to meet NRM. I think we should respect that. But about NRM, you are right. The caucus in Parliament of NRM members is holding a party within Parliament area and I do hope that all our colleagues have been invited.  I thank you.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, once again, I rise on a point of concern regarding the conduct of the ministers in this august House. You spent a lot of time, a lot of effort reminding the Prime Minister that indeed ministers should be here to answer questions from the members. If they request to be put on the Order Paper to make ministerial statements, they should abide by that. If they are not going to fulfill that commitment, they are always free, in fact, obliged to tell you in advance. We need an explanation from the members of the Front Bench on why item No. 3 should not be honoured. Surely, they owe us an explanation.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Awori is definitely correct to raise this concern. This morning before I came here I talked to the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs and he assured me he would be here in time to make this statement.  However, they were also having final touches because their policy statement is due for discussion this morning. It is possible that that has caused the delay but I pray that we give it a bit of time. When they show up we will get a better explanation as to why they are not here. 

11.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE, MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, when we were adjourning the House we could not pronounce ourselves on our budget because the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was not around. Now that he is around, how do we proceed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall pronounce ourselves totally with the other reports, which you have completed. Then the Minister of Finance should remain here for the whole day until we are able to pronounce ourselves on his ministry’s report. You should also stay until we finish all the budgets.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker for your indulgence on this matter. Before we pronounce ourselves on this budget, there is duplication in some of these figures. On page 17 of the committee report, on a matter regarding land tribunals, there is a budget provided for under the Judiciary. We are now asking again for the same budget to be approved under Lands and Natural Resources. They should tell us whether this is a mistake. Are they seeking for money from the Treasury under two different ministries?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is why I have postponed the finalising of these reports. However, we shall do them all today. Let us finish with Trade and then we shall return to figures. I think the minister will explain how much and where the allocations are.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

11.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Joseph Mugambe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to present a report of the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry for the financial year 2005/2006, and to move a motion that you adopt the report.

Madam Speaker, on page 1 of this report, paragraph 1 is an introduction, paragraph 2 is mode of operation, paragraph 3 on page 2 is appreciation, page 4 spells out the mandate of the ministry. In paragraph 5 of page 2 the committee makes the following general observations:

The committee notes with appreciation that there has been an increase in funding to the ministry this financial year by Shs 9.56 billion. Nevertheless, we appeal for more funding in the subsequent years.  

The committee observed that the ministry acknowledges the role of the private sector in poverty alleviation through increased competitiveness. The ministry is committed to creating a vibrant private sector to improve national competitiveness through strengthening small and medium enterprises.  

On page 3 we observe that the ministry has put in place a detailed work plan for the tourism sector especially since tourism has become Uganda’s largest foreign exchange earner. The committee notes that the ministry recognises areas of private sector support to boost tourism.  

The ministry has committed itself to collect, analyse, store and disseminate trade and marketing information to help the private sector to make informed business decisions to improve their competitiveness and returns. The committee observed that the marketing information system in all districts is long over due.

The committee also observes that amidst the expected changes in the tariff and non tariff barriers to Uganda’s trade in the East African community and other regional agreements, the ministry is committed to identifying and implementing ways of gradually reducing and eliminating market barriers.

The committee makes the following general recommendations in paragraph 5.2:

The ministry should put more effort into mainstreaming trade into the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) by linking trade to the private sector and poverty alleviation.

Wage subventions of semi-autonomous bodies under the ministry should be separated from non-wage allocations in order to reflect the true funding of the ministry.

In an attempt to strengthen the Inter Institutional Trade Committee, the ministry should ensure that it is legalised and provided with the budget and secretariat.

The ministry should consult with the private sector while collecting and disseminating market information to determine current information needs and to design the channel of information flow to the private sector.

The ministry should also utilise the strategic position of foreign missions in collecting and disseminating trade and market information.

The ministry should sensitise the private sector about the applications of the technical barriers in trade and how they can exploit opportunities such as African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) and other global markets.

There is need for more resources to enable the semi autonomous bodies under the ministry to carry out their mandate.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee made a sectoral review of the ministry.

On the trade sector the committee noted that -(Interruption)         

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I have just been counting and there are about two million words in this report. I wonder whether we are going to read all the two million words. I wish the chairperson found a way of summarising this report. There is no way we can pronounce ourselves on the whole budget this evening, if we must read all these words. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could the chairperson just address the highlights? After all, eventually the full report will be inserted into the Hansard.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Last year we were promised that the whole report will be inserted Hansard. However, it is only what was mentioned here on the Floor that was covered in the Hansard. However, I intended, as the honourable minister may have noted, to skip some sections. I was only mentioning the sector achievements, performance and the plans. I would have left out other issues if only he was patient. However, I will oblige. 

On page 4 there is performance of the trade sector in the financial year 2004/2005. In summary, as far as trade is concerned, there has been an average trade balance of US $800 million. There were ten key planned programmes for the year 2004/2005 under the trade sector as indicated. 

On page 5, the following achievements were realised during 2004/2005:
1. 	Completed the mainstreaming of the trade policy into the Poverty Eradication Action Plan.
2. 	Improved market access to regional and international markets.
3. 	Finalised and had the Marketing and Agro Processing strategy approved. 
4. 	Developed further domestic trade initiatives. The draft agricultural zoning initiative strategy was completed and distributed.  
5. 	Evidence of trade policy capacity building through the successful hiring of two officers.  
6. 	The link between government and Non-Government bodies in trade development was strengthened through the establishment and operationalisation of the inter-institutional trade committee.
7. 	Trade information dissemination measures were implemented, for instance, through the availability of trade information on the ministry web site.  

On page 6 we have the following proposed activities:
1. 	Finalising and popularising the national trade policy.
2. 	Developing the National Trade Sector Development plan to help in implementation of the national trade policy.
3. 	Sensitising the business community and private sector in general about the updated and consolidated national trade policy.
4. 	The Diagnostic Trade Integration Studies (DTIS) were carried out to identify more priority areas for mainstreaming in the national development plans.
5. 	Negotiating bilateral and multilateral trade agreements: prepare for and participate in international trade negotiations effectively.
6. 	Co-ordinating with Ministry of Local Government, and local governments to streamline taxation and licensing policies and practices.
7. 	Putting in place a structure for implementation of the Marketing and Agro Processing Strategy of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA) and start on implementation of the strategy.
8. 	Updating and completing the value chain analyses.
9. 	Implementing relevant aspects of the functional analysis of the ministry.
10. 	Strengthening the district commercial offices so that they act as avenues through which trade information can be collected and disseminated.
11. 	Collection and dissemination of trade information to relevant stakeholders.
12. 	Guiding the district commercial offices to incorporate trade development plans in the respective district development plans.
13. 	Strengthening the consultative mechanism between the Government, private sector and civil society on trade policy matters.
14. 	Working with the relevant stakeholders to sensitise the public about the implications and opportunities of international trading arrangements that Uganda is a member of.
15. 	Organising the second National Trade Sector Review Conference.
16. 	Putting in place a strategy for the implementation of the competition policy and law, and the national standardisation strategy.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, section 6.2 on page 7 concerns the tourism sector. We have key planned programmes for the financial year 2004/2005. Recurrent activities are listed up to page 8. 

On page 9 we have achievements for the sector during 2004/2005.

Because of those activities, Tourism contributed US $316.6 million in 2004/2005 compared to US $180.8 million during 2003/2004. This makes the tourism industry Uganda’s leading foreign exchange earner, excluding remittances from overseas.  

The planned recurrent activities and programmes for the financial year 2005/2006, on page 10 are:

1.	Workshops with key stakeholders to discuss the draft report on the revision of the Uganda Wildlife Act.
2.	Mobilisation, sensitisation and involvement of more communities in management of income generating economic development projects in their locality or on their land.
3.	Participation in the decision-making and implementation processes of the East African Community (EAC).
4.	Classification and grading of accommodation and other hospitality service facilities.
5.	Participation in marketing and promotion of East Africa as a single tourist destination.
6.	Co-ordination of and participation in meetings and tourism trade fairs and implementation of decisions where Uganda is a contracting party.
7.	Inspection and licensing of tourism related facilities to enforce quality assurance for the tourism sector. 
8.	Supporting districts to establish district tourism development plans.
9.	Establishment of district tourism associations/groups.
10. 	Development of a strategy on meetings, incentives, conventions and exhibitions.
11. 	Organisation of scheduled national events.
12. 	Stakeholder meetings at trade association level, during developing and implementation of tourism programmes.
13. 	Carrying out market research in selected markets both existing and potential. 
14. 	Use of the Internet to promote and strategically disseminate correct information about Uganda.
15. 	Undertaking a consultative process for establishing of the Tourism Satellite Account (TSA).

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the next sector is industry and technology on page 11. The performance of the recurrent activities during 2004/2005 is listed, as you can see in section 6.3. The achievements of the sector during the financial year 2004/2005 are also listed, up to 10. 

The overall industrial sector constitutes about 20 percent of the national GDP, with formal manufacturing at about seven percent. The growth in the industry and technology sector during 2004/2005 is estimated at around 9.4 percent.

The following are the proposed activities for the industry and technology sector for the financial year 2005/2006:

1.	Implementation of the national industrialisation policy.
2.	Training and upgrading industry and technology staff in policy development, analysis and implementation.
3.	Building more linkages for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) with domestic, regional and global players.
4.	Operationalisation of the industrial and innovation fund.
5.	Rehabilitation of the existing infrastructure for technology development.
6.	Initialisation of adaptation and localisation of agro processing technologies.
7.	Carrying out training in industrial process skills using pilot plants at the Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI).
8.	Dissemination of information and market adapted technologies.
9.	Establishment of information centres in the country.
10.	Development of skills for industrial human resource.
11.	Development of training modules in quality and productivity.
12.	Provision of technical advice on production processes and new technologies.
13.	Enforcement of cleaner production technologies.
14.	Hosting of the 2005 Regional Jua Kali exhibition.
15.	Construction the common facilities centre for Jua Kali (Jua Kali Park).
16.	Carrying out import and export inspection.
17.	Facilitation of Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) to fully participate in international and regional standards setting.

Madam Speaker, honourable members, section 6.4 on page 13 discusses the Cooperative Department and its mandate. The cooperatives made many achievements in the financial year 2004/2005. These are listed from page 14 to 16. 

On page 16 we have Antiquities and Museums Department. The committees notes that this sector made three main achievements during 2004/2005:
1. 	Increased visitors to Uganda Museum from 70,000 in 2004 to 100,000 in 2005.  
2. 	Uganda Museums and Monuments Agency (UMMA) revenue collection increased from sites, monuments and museums and the canteen from Uganda Shs 15 million during 2003/2004 to Shs 80 million during 2004/2005.
3. 	The Uganda Museums and Monuments Agency capacity was built from 27 staff during 2003/2004 to 54 staff during 2004/2005.

The statutory institutions include: Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS), Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI), Management Training and Advisory Centre (MTAC), Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA), Uganda Export Promotion Board (UEPB), Uganda Tourism Board (UTB) and Uganda Wildlife Education Centre (UWEC).

The following are the achievements of UWA in the Financial Year 2004/2005:
1.	It completed construction of UWA headquarters and made saving on the rent dues.
2.	Internally generated income from tourism activities expected to be Shs 8 billion as compared to Shs 6.8 billion in 2003/2004.
3.	UWA raised internally generated income to finance 50 percent of operation expenditure as compared to 46 percent of 2003/2004.
4.	UWA developed memorandums of understanding with communities to access resources in the protected areas.
5.	Revenue share paid to communities around protected areas increased by 241 per cent from 2003/2004 to March 2005.
6.	There were increased tourism services through provision of quality service. This increased the number of tourists visiting our protected areas.

The budget for the sector for 2005/2006 is as follows: income, which is internally generated is Shs 7.7 billion; concessions, Shs 0.1 billion; other internally generated income, Shs 0.2 billion; Government of Uganda (recurrent expenditure), Shs 1 billion; IDA/GEF PAMSU, Shs 21.4 billion; donors and others, Shs 1.5 billion; and the total is Shs 31.9 billion.

Recurrent costs are as follows: payroll costs are Shs 5.8 billion; other personal costs are Shs 3.1 billion; the operating costs are Shs 5.4 billion; capital investment, Shs 17.5 billion; others, Shs 0.8 billion; and the total is Shs 32.6 billion.

The committee notes that the PAMSU project will provide substantial capital expenditure for UWA. This will be in form of construction of protected area infrastructure and will take about Shs 14 billion of the investment estimates.

Uganda Wildlife Education Centre (UWEC) serves the following major objectives: conservation education, rehabilitation of injured animals, breeding of endangered species and provision of a recreation centre.  

The achievements of UWEC in 2004/2005 are listed from page 18 to 19. The committee notes that in 2002, the trust embarked on a second phase development plan with a US $3.509 grant from the World Bank under the PAMSU project. The grant is to be spread out in a period of five years from July 2002 to June 2007. By this time the centre is expected to have set up a US $4 million trust fund from whose interest UWEC is expected to supplement its budget, hopefully recovering all operational costs.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, Uganda National Bureau Of Standards (UNBS) is mandated to develop and promote standardisation, quality assurance, laboratory testing and meteorology to enhance the competitiveness of local industry, to strengthen Uganda’s economy and promote quality, safety and fair trade.  

The following are the achievements of UNBS in 2004/2005: The committee notes that UNBS services to the public are both regulatory and supportive to trade in nature. UNBS activities in both regulatory and trade support functions ensure that manufacturers produce quality products that are competitive both locally and internationally, while local consumers get value for money.

1.	UNBS verified 233,424 weights and measures.
2.	UNBS made 62 factory inspections.
3.	Through Operation Q, UNBS handled 160 complaints.
4.	UNBS inspected 15,409 import consignments though it had targeted 35,000.
5.	UNBS carried out export inspection of 27,600 tonnes of maize.
6.	Laboratory sample tests were carried out as follows: 1,125 in chemistry, 846 in microbiology, 264 in materials and 190 in electrical equipment.
7.	UNBS engaged in development of standards as follows: 50 were deliberated upon, 37 were approved, 30 were harmonised under the East African Community (EAC) and 20 were harmonised under the Common Market for Eastern and Southern African (COMESA).
8.	UNBS conducted 25 training programmes and seminars.

The amount of funds requested for the sector: recurrent expenditure is Shs 2.8333 billion and development expenditure, Shs 1.1 billion.

The Uganda Export Promotion Board (UEPB) made achievements listed from page 20 to 21, and it has the following planned activities, as on page 22:
1.	Undertaking contact promotion strategies in regional marker for the manufacturing sector.
2.	Implementing sector studies and strategies for export of services, honey, as well as art and crafts developed in 2004/2005.
3.	The board has also planned to help exporters to meet market standards as they arise from market demands for good practices.
4.	Exporter training shall continue to be a key component of the board’s programme and activities to help exporters acquire the necessary skills to manage and meet the ever changing and increasing challenges of international trade.
5.	Diversifying the export base is another key component of the Board’s planned activities.
6.	The board shall in the next financial year finalize and seek to implement the National Export Strategy now under development.
7.	The board will seek further to strengthen her trade information centre that has already proved tremendously useful to the business community.
8.	Contact promotion programmes for other sectors will also be undertaken focusing on such sectors as the art and crafts to the United States and Canadian markets and honey for the European Union (EU) market.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the main objectives of UIRI are listed at the bottom of page 22 and its planned activities for the financial year 2004/2005 are on page 23 from 1 up to 17. 

The achievements for the sector during the Financial Year 2004/2005 are as follows:
1.	Products of four industries formulated to improve quality and develop labeling procedures that meet appropriate standards. 
2.	Eight meat processing and two milk processing industries were given technical support to improve their processes.
3.	Three industries were given technical support on establishment of quality assurance procedures.
4.	Energy audit and industrial maintenance services for one incubator industry were done at UIRI.
5.	Participatory research on alternative technology approach to food security was carried out. 
6.	Five different types of new technologies were deployed.
7.	Fifty small and micro scale processors were trained in food processing.
8.	Various students from a number of institutions were trained.
9.	UIRI laboratories are now the national reference centre for micronutrient analysis. 
10.	Participated in the development of fortified food standards.
11.	Participated in the development of intellectual Property rights.
12.	Over 200 samples for industrialists were tested to support their quality assurance programmes.
13.	Capacity building of UIRI staff for maintenance of engineered technologies.
14.	The Centre for Vocational Excellence was established.
15.	Ten new incubator clients were recruited.
16.	At least ten new products were developed and piloted.
17.	Processed food products for high-risk populations for example milk for children whose mothers are living with HIV/AIDS.
18.	Attended meetings, workshops and other networking activities.

The mission of Management Training and Advisory Centres (MTAC) is stated on page 24 and the three achievements during 2004/2005 are on page 25.

The following are the planned activities for MTAC for the financial year 2005/2006:
1.	Needs assessment report on:
§	Policies and institutional reforms for Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) development in Uganda
§	Trade and investment in Uganda.
2.	A study tour of Malaysia, Thailand and Vietnam for African policy-makers for SME development.
3.	Conducting several workshops and courses.
4.	Executing consultancy assignments.
5.	Setting up modern training and seminar rooMs

The Uganda Tourist Board (UTB) is mandated to promote and popularise Uganda as a viable holiday destination both locally and internationally in order to:
§	Increase the contribution of tourism earnings and Gross Domestic Product.
§	Improve Uganda’s competitiveness as an international tourism destination
§	Increase Uganda’s share of Africa’s and world tourism market.

The two achievements of UTB during 2004/2005 are listed on page 26.

The following is the report on the recommendations of the programmes and activities made by the Budget Committee in the May 2005 report. The Chairperson of the Budget Committee presented a report from sector to sector. In the Tourism Trade and Industry Sector the following recommendations were made:
1. 	Strengthening the Ministry through functional analysis. The committee was informed that the ministry has met the officials from the Ministry of Public Service and is waiting for a harmonisation report. The final report will be distributed. The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance should help to expedite the implementation of the recommendation in the functional analysis.

2. 	The Budget Committee recommended that the wage subventions of semi-autonomous bodies should be separated from non-wage allocations of the ministry in order to reflect the true funding of the ministry. Nothing has changed ever since the recommendation was done.
 
3. 	Government has divested itself from most of the industrial establishment to the private sector yet it had a vital role to play. The Committee was informed that despite the above, Government still plays the following roles:
§	Guarantees to investors.
§	Building conducive policies and infrastructure.
§	Providing tax incentives and holidays to investors.
§	Ensuring standardisation and quality assurance.
§	Providing industrial research backup through setting up of UIRI. 
§	Capacity building.
§	Availing the innovation fund.

4.	 Low allocation of resources to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. The committee had observed earlier that there was an increase of Shs 9.56 billion in the resource envelope for the ministry for the financial year but notes that more need to be done.

5. 	We have been informed that the Government intervention in AGOA activities was just a temporary intervention and would soon be phased out. As a matter of fact, the budget for AGOA has decreased from Shs 800 million last year to 600 Shs million this year.

6. 	Delay in the proposed merger of Uganda Tourist Board, Uganda Export Promotions Board and Uganda Investment Authority. The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry was informed that the merger has up to now remained an unfunded priority. The ministry is preparing a memo to Cabinet seeking for guidance on how to proceed with the matter.

7.	 Availability of funds to market Uganda as a tourist destination. The committee notes that Shs 2 billion has been provided to specifically market Uganda as a tourist destination for the financial year 2005/2006.

8. 	Strengthening and legalising the Inter Institutional Trade Committee (IITC). The committee was informed that a Bill to legalise the IITC is before Cabinet.  

9. 	Strengthening UNBS and providing a home for it. The Tourism, Trade and Industry committee was informed that the Government has identified a development partner and concrete negotiations are on going to have a home built for UNBS. 

10. 	Contribution to international organisations. Funding has been inadequate and therefore as a country, we have not fully met our obligations. This year Shs 12 million has been allocated to that item.

11. 	Goat export drive. The committee was informed that the piloting of this initiative was launched by the President in Mubende. 

12. 	The Warehouse Receipt System Bill, 2005 was read the first time in July 2005 and we are about to finalise with our report on it.

13. 	Innovation and Industrialisation Fund. The committee was informed that the industrialisation fund is being routed through the Uganda Development Bank and is Shs 5 billion. A cabinet memo establishing the innovation fund is still before the Cabinet. 

14.	Facilitation of the Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI). The committee notes that government has allocated Shs 3.026 billion to UIRI this financial year but hopes that more will be allocated to it in the subsequent annual budgets.

15.	Transformation of the Department of Antiquities and MuseuMs The committee observed that during the financial year 2004/2005, the department could not be transformed into an agency because it was regarded as an unfunded priority. The ministry has written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to fund the agency. The committee learnt that the budget line with a token fee of Shs 1,000 has been created for the agency.

16.	Establishment of the District Tourism Offices. The committee was informed that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry wrote to the Ministry of Public Service requesting to be allowed to establish eight posts of tourist officers in eight pilot districts. This is being handled in an on-going functional analysis and sector review in order to address issues of establishing extra posts.

17.	Strengthening the Department of Co-operatives. The committee was informed that the ministry was developing the Cooperative Policy to guide the development of all types of co-operatives in Uganda. On strengthening the department in terms of the staffing, the ministry is in dialogue with the ministry of public service.

Honourable members, No. 8.0 is, budgetary proposals. The committee recommended the following amounts for approval of Vote 015, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry for the financial year 2005/06: recurrent expenditure, Shs 13,759,513,000; development expenditure, Shs 18,998,230,000; and the total is Shs 32,757,743,000. Madam Speaker, I thank you and I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and your committee. I have perused the report and I can see that it is signed by 13 out of 17 members of the committee. Therefore, it is eligible for debate.  Let us have four members on my right hand side and four members on the other side.  

11.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Mine is a very specific question regarding wage subventions on semi-autonomous bodies under the ministry. This issue has been raised over and over again, year after year. The ministry itself is being suffocated. They do not want these wage subventions to stay in their budget.  Hon. Minister of Finance, what does it take? Can we know what it takes so that we do it here and now? We cannot continue saying that this sector is very important for the future of Uganda and yet we say things that we never fulfill. Can the Minister tell us what it takes to get this money off and create different budget lines?

The other specific question is about the merger of Uganda Tourist Board, Export Promotions Board and the Uganda Investment Authority. This issue first came to Parliament when I was chairing the Finance Committee in 1999/2000. We are debating the Budget for 2005/06. Every year the report says that the ministry is preparing a cabinet memorandum. I would like to know how long a cabinet memorandum takes to be prepared, to be considered and how long it takes action to be taken. There is money for the Export Promotions Board and for the Investment Authority on separate votes. There should be money for wage subvention in the budget of the ministry for the Tourist Board and we are saying this is an unfunded priority. What does it take to get out this money from your budget, put it aside and get these people out of the ministry? I thank you.

11.50
MR MICAH LOLEM (Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will go straight to page 17 on the Uganda Wildlife Authority. In Karamoja we have over one million people but there is a very urgent issue about land, which the Government should address. It is just going to be similar to the complaint from the lost counties about the land. In the policy statement on page 28, there is a map of Uganda. As you can see, all the land in Karamoja has been taken over by the Wildlife Authority. There is community wildlife reserve, a game reserve, and a forest reserve. 

The area which hon. Lolem claims is his constituency is covered by Uganda Wild Life Authority. This is very dangerous to the people who live there because in Article 26 of our Constitution people have a right to ownership of property, including land. These people do not have land and when you go to Karamoja, where hon. Lokeris Aparite says he controls three sub-counties, everything is under the Uganda Wildlife Authority. There is not even a piece of land free for his people. Where the minister comes from, the entire place is under the Wildlife Authority. Community hunting, controlled hunting area and wild life reserve cover most of this area. Madam Speaker, the minister should tell us whether these three constituencies in Nakapiripirit District are for animals or people. When it comes to 2006, will these animals vote? It appears to me that government prefers animals to people. 

Madam Speaker, in the culture of my constituency, eating wild animals is a curse. If you eat wild animals your cows will become barren or even die. However, what is happening now is that on one side we have people eating wild animals and on the other side, people get accursed. The cultures differ. We have Karimojong and Pokots. These are different people. 

In 1982 there was a piece of land in Oporokocho, which we were cultivating. There was an MP, Hon. Mzee Edward Aziyo, in southern Karamoja who usually came from Parliament to buy maize from that place. There was an Italian who settled the Pokots from their dry land to the fertile land but I think after that Italian left the Government has again come to claim that the land belongs to them yet these people were cultivating in that very piece in 1982.  

Madam Speaker, I want government to decide on these two issues. If it says we do not eat the wild animals, then we can commercialise them. Now we have the UPDF, specifically the Arrow Boys, who come from different parts of the country. If the Government wants to take land by force, then we can commercialise the wild animals by selling to these others like the Army and schools whose culture permits them to eat these animals. 

On the whole, the issue is, why doesn’t the Government give us the land and we stay with our animals as we used to do up to 1982? The people in charge of the area are now chasing away my people and even killing them. For instance in May 2005 a 63-year old man was shot by a game ranger –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I thank you.  I am sorry to interrupt you, hon. Lolem. I had mentioned it earlier that when members make specific recommendations, it does not only help shorten the debate but it also helps us to pick those recommendations. The Budget Committee will put these together as recommendations arising out of Members of Parliament. Therefore, procedurally, I request that my honourable colleague moves on to specific recommendations so that we are able to capture it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I captured his problem. His problem is that Uganda Wildlife Authority has taken the greater part of Karamoja. He is saying they have no land. That is the basic thing he is putting across. I hope you have captured it as well.

MR LOLEM: That is exactly what I am saying, Madam Speaker. Uganda Wildlife Authority takes up 97 percent of land in Karamoja. If my brothers read this book I am sure they would believe what I am saying. I am teacher by profession and I discuss tangible issues. I do not rely on rumours.  

In Bokora we have fertile land under Mt Napak, all of which has been taken over by the Government. As you go towards Jie, we have the Matheniko Wildlife Reserve and the Karena, also taken over by government, the entire three constituencies. Therefore, does the Government value wild animal at the expense of human beings? As I already said, come 2006, we shall give you all the antelopes to vote. I request the Government to let my people be in Amingo, which is not very fertile but better than where they are now. We should resolve this issue amicably other than taking people’s land by force. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have four reports to handle today. Let us agree that you just ask specific questions. I know some things are a bit painful but just go to the point. Ask the minister, “When are you leasing our land so that we can use it?” He will have understood it.

11.58
MR BERNARD MULENGANI (Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I specifically want to raise issues on the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. We visited the Uganda National Bureau of Standards as a Committee on Science and Technology, during the last session, and noted that there was no board in place. I expected the committee to tell us how it is doing its duties without a board. 

We also noted that there are certain rights that are given to the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. However, when it comes to water meters and electricity meters, no testing by Uganda National Bureau of Standards is done. They are not allowed to do spot checks of these meters because it is UMEME’s right to govern the meters. They do not allow Uganda National Bureau of Standards to go and pluck off these meters to test whether they are of expected standards. I think the committee or the minister will tell us something about this. Why are electricity and water meters above the level of what Uganda National Bureau of Standards should test?

Madam Speaker, I am also concerned about the location of the Investment Authority and the Micro Economic Enterprises Cooperative sections under the Ministry of Finance. We shall not talk of industry and industrialisation in this country, in isolation of investment. Therefore, I feel that these two departments in the Ministry of Finance should be relocated to the Ministry of Industry to fulfill some of these objectives. 

The ministry report on the budget report talks about value addition. When we leaders go to the public we talk about value addition but there is no way we shall talk of value addition if the budget given to the Ministry of Industry is as small as this. It will simply not be consistent with what we are telling the people. How shall we transform this economy if the Ministry of Industry is getting such amounts of money?  

I request the minister to make this clear. What is the percentage allocation to Ministry of Finance on the total Budget of this country and how is it ranking? Is it No. 20 and is it consistent with what we are claiming to want to transform this country from pre-agricultural to industrial age?

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I appeal for a clarification. Last session we passed loans for the Namanve project. What is happening with these exporting processing zones and the ones like Jinja, which were commissioned for investigations? Could the committee or the ministry tell us more about this? Thank you.

12.02
MR GEORGE WILLIAM WOPUWA (Bubulo County East, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from a constituency, which neighbours Mt Elgon Park. I had the opportunity to host the minister in Bubulo and the major complaint of the people there was that the boundaries between the park and the people had been arbitrarily made. Those people who were well off influenced the officials of Wildlife Authority to bend the park in their favour. Those who did not have money had all their land taken. The minister assured the people there that the boundaries would be reopened. I would like to hear from the minister what is being done about the reopening of these boundaries.

Recently, when we hosted His Excellency the President, he assured the people that they would be compensated. He promised that those who had been displaced by the park would get some money. I do not see any provision for those compensations in the budget. I would be glad if the minister gave me information so that the people in Sona and Bumbo get to know that this government cares for them the way it does for others elsewhere. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.04
MRS IDAH MEHANGYE (Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee and the ministry for updating us on the improvement of co-operatives. Recently we were told to mobilise our people at sub-county level for the village banks that would provide savings and credit schemes. When we mobilised them we expected that the Government would provide funds, which farmers and other people can borrow to improve their small businesses. The Government instead said, “No, it is the local people to save their money and then qualify to borrow.” Government forgot that these people are so poor that they have nothing to save.  

When is government coming in to support these Savings and Credit Schemes (SACS) so that people have the money to borrow to improve their agricultural output? We are also aware that they need to do agricultural industrial work, for instance milling machines. When does the ministry expect to come in to help? Our people now think we are liars.

Madam Speaker, my second concern is on page 17, about Uganda Wildlife Authority. In Kamwenge District we have Katonga Game Reserve. I blame poor demarcation of that area on the Government. Because of this, people found themselves in the game reserve. Sometime back I went there with hon. Akaki Ayumu, the Minister, and we helped people to get out. However, these people are now suffering after being evicted. Some of them are almost homeless.

I am sad that government sometimes gives conflicting statements saying the President has said, “No, do not evict the people”, and then we get other people saying, “No, you must evict these people.” This kind of thing confuses the people. What policy do we take? How do you help people to settle and more so if it was government’s fault that demarcation was done poorly; how do you help the people who are now very bitter with the Government and especially with us their Members of Parliament? Thank you.

12.07
REV. PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on page 19 and it relates to the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. It is mandated to develop and promote standardisation as well as quality assurance. However, there is a general complaint in our market that Uganda National Bureau of Standards is not doing its work. The commodities on the market, for instance the iron sheets, iron bars, cement and sugar, leave a lot to be desired. The weights and sizes on the labels of commodities are not what one actually buys. The quality and durability are no longer what we used to know. 

For instance, when you buy iron sheets, in only one month they are rusting. As a result, our peasants in rural areas do not get value for their money. I would like to know from the honourable minister what is really being done. They have explained that Uganda National Bureau of Standards has done a lot to check on this but I still think a lot remains to be done. I thank you.

12.10
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on page 6. For the last three years or so this item of finalising and popularising the National Trade Policy has been appearing in the committee report. For all these years, we have been talking about the importance of trade, why can’t we come up with a National Trade Policy? 

Madam Speaker, there is a problem with government policy on trade in this budget. It leaves the whole trade industry to the private sector. The committee report always talks of planned activities, formulating the trade policy and putting structures in place. These concerns are always brought on the Floor of the House and nothing has been done. For example, why can’t the Government put in place a policy for intervention on important sectors, especially prices? For instance, we brought the issue of cotton prices here so many times. When Kenya’s cotton prices are high, here we buy it cheaply. Why can’t we have a price ceiling as a government interventional policy since we have a fund? 

I think this is a government strategic fund and I do not see why we cannot use such a fund to save agricultural products whose prices fluctuate. We should have some kind of fund for a ceiling within which the farmers are assured that even if their cotton, coffee or tea lost value, they would still fetch a reasonable amount, say Shs 500 per kilogram. In my opinion, if we leave our policy to the private sector driven approach, our farmers will never benefit fully from their produce.

On the same page, on the issue of bilateral and multi lateral trade agreements, the President has been talking so much about how this country is negotiating with the World Trade Organisation on double standards. The developed world will give low tariffs to agricultural products in future and yet developing countries are not doing anything to help farmers. Therefore, can we know whether your bilateral and multi lateral negotiations have considered this? How far has it gone negotiations to do with equal treatment in the world trade system? 

Traders were bitter because of URA’s increasing taxes. They wanted to strike, possibly because of the newly introduced East African Customs Union standardisation of taxes. I would like to know how URA and the Government will mitigate this increase in taxes. We should not leave it to crisis management where the Vice-President calls URA to withdraw the circular and then a negotiation is done with no institutional development put in place. What is going on with this increase of taxes and what are the mitigating factors? We are concerned that traders might close and go on strike. The negotiations between the VP and URA do not seem to yield any tangible result.

On page 14 the committee reports that there has been an increase in the registration of co-operative, savings and credit schemes. However, the issue of interest rates is bothering the population. The interest rates have not been reduced even though we have continuously talked about this issue on the Floor of this House.  These small, credit schemes target women whom they leave poorer than they found them. The interest rates a local person pays are higher than what I would pay if I borrowed from the bank. She pays between 22 to 36 percent contrary to the 15 percent that I might pay per annum. 
I think this is a disservice to this country, especially the poor. What is government doing to ensure that these interest rates reduced? These people get money from the Central Bank at between 7 to 13 percent yet when they take it to rural areas they harvest 22 to 36 percent. This is not fair and we should urgently come out with mitigation where there is a ceiling on all interest rates for these saving schemes.

Lastly, I would like to talk about their vision and objective of fighting poverty. Madam Speaker, according to the Economic Research Centre Policy Report, the poverty trend in this country has reversed. From 2000 poverty has increased from 35 to 38 percent. In Northern Uganda poverty has now increased from 67 to 77 percent. We need to look at our policy on poverty reduction, instead of just having it on paper. We need to know from the ministry what the new policy is going to be. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members please, try to be brief.  

12.17
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It hurts me that this may be our last budget debate contribution on the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. As the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Science and Technology, I take special interest in our committee because we hear government saying, “We shall industrialise”, and yet the ministry is very poorly facilitated. 

I want the committee to help me know why government should not put money aside for the promotion of Uganda as a tourist destination. What is our status in the region as far as earning from tourism is concerned? Recently we were in Tanzania and Kenya. In fact, Tanzania earns Tshs 750 million from tourism, yet tourism is their No. 2 export, gold being their No. 1. Kenya earns Kshs 500 million, because their tourists do not pay as much as those that go to Tanzania. The last record I have on Uganda’s tourism earning is about Shs 134 million.  As you can see, we are not doing well. The committee should give us specific figures if we are to make any recommendations.

Madam Speaker, the help from the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry lies outside the ministry. This is because it is a big but helpless ministry. For instance, Ministry of Public Service does the functional analysis. Surely, if you did meaningful functional analysis, how would you give an entire Cooperative Department one official, one commissioner, one secretary, one driver and one tea girl?   

The other help for this sector would come from the Ministry of Finance. When you look at the budget for this sector, it looks real but in fact it is deceptive. The Chairperson of the Budget Committee, hon. Kiraso, has rightly pointed out the same thing. The ministry is loaded with wages from Uganda Wildlife Authority, Uganda Tourist Authority, Uganda Export Promotions Board, National Bureau of Standards, Wildlife Education Centre, Industrial Research Institute and so on many others. The Ministry of Tourism is a like a starved mother with a healthy baby. Therefore, why don’t we separate salaries of these departments? It is only then that we can get a clear picture of what the ministry is getting.

The other office, which can help the ministry, is the Office of the Prime Minister and that of the Vice-President. They have been saying they want to move Uganda Investment Authority and Uganda Tourist Board to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry since 1999. Are we going to wait until the cows have come home in order for us to do this? What does it take? I think even Uganda National Council of Science and Technology rightly belongs to this ministry. Therefore, what does it take?

Finally, I am greatly concerned about the Ministry of Lands. We have been hearing people crying that they do not know the borders of Wildlife Authority. We do not know the borders of these protected reserves. We have enough surveyors in the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment. The process should no longer be as hard as it was in the past. 

The other day I went home with somebody from Kyambogo University with a small gadget of the size of a telephone. It is called the global positioning system machine, and he would just go in a place and then it tells you it is so many degrees north and so many degrees east. He goes to another, it is so many degrees north; he goes and connects it to his computer and it draws a map and there the land is surveyed. In one hour you can survey the whole piece. It depends on how fast you can walk. So, what is this? This is simple technology. Madam Speaker, we need to think outside the box.  Otherwise, we shall just be talking year in, year out. I thank you.

12.23
MR ANTHONY MUKASA (Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy to note that interventions have been made to add value to coffee, cassava, wine and rice so that farmers can get better prices. My people in Buikwe County South, the coffee having withered because of the coffee wilt, depend largely on vanilla. I would like to find out from the ministry, when are they thinking of assisting farmers to add value to vanilla? We are told vanilla from Uganda is on high demand but as I speak now, a kilogram goes for Shs 300 only. But we are told it is on high demand on the world market. When is the ministry making an intervention to see that farmers who grow vanilla add value to their crop?

Madam Speaker and honourable members, still talking about vanilla, a year or so ago I stood on the Floor of this Parliament and raised concerns about the falling prices of vanilla. The issue was referred to the Committee of Trade, Tourism and Industry. It is now a year down the road, the report has never come out. I am not blaming the committee, but I am worried. We are entering multiparty politics, people have gone to my constituency and they have to traverse the whole of Mukono. They are telling our growers that the Government is responsible for the low price that is given to vanilla growers. 

It is the duty of the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry to collect and disseminate information. My people have received very little information concerning what pertains to the world market as regards vanilla. 

I am directed by my people to find out from the ministry responsible for trade, how many kilograms of raw vanilla are required to make one kilogram of cured vanilla? What was the price at the world market of one kilogram of cured vanilla during the last harvest? How much money does a vanilla buyer inject into the business of buying, transporting, processing and exporting vanilla to the world market? How much profit does he make to warrant a vanilla grower Shs 300 per kilogram? Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members.

12.26
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking two clarifications from the committee’s report. On page 23, the committee talks of planned activity No.12, being the development of the National Food Security Strategic Plan, 2003/2005. Then when it reports the achievement, it does not tell us whether that national strategic plan was accomplished. I am wondering, is the work incomplete? Is it on going? Did it take off at all? What exactly happened?  

I consider this National Strategic Food Security Plan as a very important framework. Already for the whole of last year you know the country suffered severely. There was a threat of food insecurity in most parts of this country, the Teso region in particular. In Karamoja we had severe food shortage and I gathered the impression that we as a country had no strategic plan to address some of those issues and most of the time we seem to be taken off guard. We just gamble. 

Somehow there is no framework to mitigate the food insecurity that comes up in this nation and so I would like the committee to tell me, what happened? Why was this security plan not delivered and if it was or was not delivered really? Is the money that is given to the Uganda Industrial Research Institute sufficient to deliver a national food security strategic plan?

The second clarification I am seeking is to do with the marketing of agricultural produce. As you will recall, Madam Speaker, for the whole session of this Parliament we have been talking about marketing. Actually this morning I feared that I would repeat the very words I used last year and that had to do with marketing of maize. 

I complained last year that the farmers, particularly the maize growers in Soroti and other areas, and Busoga - I remember somebody told me Busoga last year - we are finding a lot of problems with marketing the maize. They had got a very good harvest, and after getting a good harvest, the people just go to the villages. Those who go to the villages to buy maize cheat them. They give them Ss 60 or Ss 50 per kilogram and at the end of the day they are so frustrated. In fact last year it was reported that farmers had turned the maize into mattresses and were sleeping on the maize.  

I went through my district just last week and farmers have similar complaints. Madam Speaker, from this report from the committee, I have read something on page 14, which talks about area marketing cooperatives, which have been co-ordinating. Is it the marketing of these non-traditional crops like maize? Where are these area marketing co-operatives maybe in Eastern Uganda? How do you get one going in your village? How do you get it trained? How does it access the services of the Ministry of Trade and Industry?  How will it link up with the farmers? How is this information disseminated, because it continues to be a problem? 

Actually this morning I was also feeling very shy that I would be saying the same things and too much repetition and there would be no action taken –(Interruptions)- Madam Speaker, protect me from my neighbours, they are really teasing me. Even now the farmers are producing and the first harvest was very good. The maize crop was good but they are going to just throw it away and by the end of the year there will be nothing. Can the ministry help me understand this?

Finally, we discussed so much about, and we expected a very serious on cotton pricing. I would like the ministry to tell us about cotton marketing because it continues to be a major concern in this country. Cotton is still the only crop where the ministry announces a price, which they do not intend to stick to and once they have announced it, the farmers jump into production and then they are given a worse price. I still think this is cheating the farmers and would the honourable minister like to assure us that since that time he has come up with a better position for the Ugandan cotton growers? I thank you.

12.31
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise certain items, which were either inadvertently omitted by the committee or were left out by both the minister and the committee. One, on the matter of investment policy of the Government, I think it is lopsided. It is not favouring indigenous Ugandans and the few that are benefiting must be related to the family of the President. 

To give as an example, we are trying to encourage exports and these should include the small traders. Small traders in this country have not been given any benefits whatsoever in terms of export promotion, but for the big timers - some people are challenging me that I mentioned the name of the President - yes, I have got reason. I have got my facts. Uganda Grain Traders, the daughter of the President is a major shareholder and that particular company was given facilities by Uganda Revenue Authority at almost no cost, to the tune of US $3 million. It is in the report and nobody should challenge me on what is obvious.

Two, when it comes to big time investment again we ignore our indigenous investors suffer. Take for instance Jua kali; there is not a single village or town in the country without Jua kali. These are the people who provide us with Tadooba that we need, these are the people who provide us with jiikos that we need, these are the people now providing us with slashers and yet these people are never given any kind of tax relief. Why can we not give them tax-free inputs like we give to Tri Star? Is it just because they are black like us, therefore, we ignore them? 

Madam Speaker, I call upon the Government to start giving benefits and relief to Jua kali people. It is not useful for us coming up at the last minute when they have struggled to come up to where they are and then we come up with some small money to assist them to put up an exhibition at Lugogo. Till people have arrived, why do you give them bus fare, unless you are refunding the bus fare? Initially they should be given some kind of assistance.  

Madam Speaker, on the question of beverages, again we have been dominated by multinational corporations like Pepsi Cola, Coca Cola. Why do we not go the Indian way? India made it a condition to Coca Cola and Pepsi Cola, “Until you give us the formula, we are not going to allow you into our market”. Meanwhile they were giving their own people an opportunity to develop indigenous beverages. Now Coca Cola and Pepsi Cola cannot compete against indigenous beverages. Why can we not do the same?

On the question of AGOA again, I see in the report they are saying that a particular department has not been released to the Ministry of Trade and Industry and yet as a member of the Committee on Foreign and Presidential Affairs, we were told in very categorical terms by the minister that this particular wing of Trade and Industry has been released to the line ministry. But the ministry is now denying. Who is in charge of AGOA? 

Can the hon. Minister in charge of the President’s Office tell us categorically that, “I have handed it over to Ministry of Trade and Industry,” and let the Minister in charge of Trade and Industry say, “Yes, we have received it. We are taking care of it”. I do not know whether it is provided for in the budget here.

This question of the fabrics, we have only two years left before AGOA shuts down. Let us call a spade a spade. The United States Government gave us an extension up to 2008; by 2008 we must be producing our own basic fabric. They will not allow us to bring in a fabric from abroad to make textiles marketable in the United States. What arrangements are we making to make sure that the fabric will be available in the next 18 months?  

The other day I went to see the Tri Star people. I said, “Look, you people are going to shut down. We gave you US $6 million upfront to start this industry and yet you have not paid us anything at all. In two years, do you have the capacity to refund our money?”  They said, “Only if there is a government intervention in setting up a factory to do the basic fabric, which we can use”. So, we are now again waiting until sunset then we wake up and say, “Where is our tadooba?” I am calling upon the Government to really start working on this element of basic fabrics necessary for textile.

There is also an element of – they were under pressure on a matter of GMOs. Again we have not negotiated properly our terms on GMOs.  Scientifically GMOs are unquestionable but in terms of commerce it is a big question mark. It means every time you want to plant you have to go back to the mother company to provide you with the seeds. We want an agreement, which will enable us to have unlimited access to GMO seeds, if they are going to do it here.  

World Trade Organization (WTO) negotiators - the most able Ugandan in terms of negotiations was retired the other day now we do not have anybody to negotiate for us on WTO. WTO is a continuous process, why can we not give this particular person, this ambassador a two-year extension or special contract to continue bargaining for us?  

Madam Speaker, on the question of the merger of Uganda Tourist Board (UTB) raised by hon. Kiraso; this matter has been outstanding but again some of us are saying it is not necessary for us to have a merger of Uganda Tourist Board, Export Promotions Board (EPB), Wildlife and the Uganda Investment Authority (UIA). It is absolutely unnecessary! We will be setting up a conglomerate, which will not generate the kind of products or produce that we want. Let Wildlife stay on its own, Uganda Tourist Board stay on its own, and Export Promotions Board also stay on their own. They are doing it. I do not see any advantages in the merger whatsoever. Let them continue; if they are not performing, out they should go.

On the question of CET, we discussed it partly the other day. We are not checking on our neighbours. Tanzania and Kenya are not honouring the deal. We mentioned the other day the rice - Kenya is now allowing in Pakistani rice at lower than 78 percent, which was agreed upon by all East African countries. Tanzania is doing the same; we are the only ones sticking to 78 percent. Although I commend that effort in the interest of the local farmers, but really an international agreement should be honoured by all parties concerned. And if any party in the agreement is not honouring the onus, it is on us to bring it to their attention. I call upon the minister to look into that.

On tourism, we have not come up with a clear-cut and proper policy in what we call water and sand based tourism. Kalangala is one of the best destinations and yet we are not developing it. We are now giving it to palm growers. Palm growers – the conditions of BIDCO are very questionable and yet we are ignoring Kalangala as a destination for tourism. 

As I said, water and sand are very important. Tourism should not be based on leisure alone; tourism also goes to what they call business tourism. In other words, we should be a conference destination country where people come and hold their conferences. That is the only way we can attract big time investors. We are not doing it even on a small scale. 

Now casinos are coming in. Casinos, Madam Speaker, are very tricky. We should look at them very carefully. In the tray at the back of casinos you always have Mafioso. Mafioso are very tricky. Let us look them up. 

And the aviation industry is –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR AWORI: The aviation industry is key to tourism and yet when you look at the aviation industry here, it is the most expensive form of travel. Between Mombasa and Nairobi and between Nairobi and Entebbe, the airfare between Mombasa and Nairobi is almost half of what you pay from Nairobi to Entebbe and yet we are trying to attract tourists. Tourists who go to Mombasa, when you talk to them they cannot come to Entebbe because the travel fare is double. Why do we not negotiate with the airlines so that they do it for us?  

Madam Speaker, on the question of road transport for the tourists, the majority of the tourists actually do not want to travel by road. They do not come here to waste their time travelling. They want to go by air but even the few who travel by road; those who are even in my place in Busia coming all the way to Jinja and beyond, do not have toilet facilities. The few toilets we have are at petrol stations and yet they are not useable. How do you expect a tourist to travel all the way from Mbale to Kampala without easing himself or herself? We have to be – my colleague here is saying that we have bushes; bushes are not the kind of things we want. 

Last but not least, –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, would it not make some money if we set up private toilets in that area ourselves, especially those who come from the border?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, what I meant is that a useable and convenient toilet facility must have running water, must be very clean, and must be properly perfumed. Those are things, which you cannot afford individually. I call upon the Government that really every petrol station, before it is given a license to operate, must have very clean toilets, which can be used by the people. This is a condition we can put as part of a license before you operate a petrol station.

Last but not least, with your indulgence the Eastern region has been ignored in terms of tourist development. We are not getting the sufficient support that we need but also it applies to Gulu and other places. Because of the time constraint factor, I would like to thank you.

12.43
MR PAUL LOKERIS (Pian County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My attention is drawn to page 27 where the committee has reported that many of the activities of the ministry have been taken over by the Office of the President, for example AGOA. I just want to get some clarification that what are the other activities the President’s Office has taken over from the ministry and what is now the duty of the Minister of State for Trade? (Interjection)- I want clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, he says there is something he corrected.

MR MUGAMBE: Madam Speaker, there was a correction in that statement. It is not some; I said the AGOA activity was an intervention programme, which is gradually being phased out. I did not read that one. I made a correction that AGOA is being phased out and funding has changed from Shs 800 million to Shs 600 million this year for development budget. I withdrew that statement.  

MR PAUL LOKERIS: Thank you for that correction, but I still insist on asking, what other activities have the President’s Office taken apart from AGOA, which the ministry is now lacking? 

Secondly, if most of these activities are really taken by the President’s Office, then what is the duty of the Minister of Trade? Then how are these activities being co-ordinated? May I be clarified really? What is the link between the ministry and the President’s Office over these activities of trade?

12.45
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Madam Speaker and honourable members, my concern is on the general observations. If you look at page 2, strategic orientation towards private sector, the committee observed that the ministry acknowledges the role of the private sector in poverty alleviation through increased competitiveness and that it is committed to creating a vibrant private sector to improve national competitiveness through strengthening small and medium enterprises. I want to hear from the chairperson of the committee and the minister, how are you going to do it? We are interested in seeing the steps taken to make this private sector competitive and strengthened. 

If you look at page 3, strategic emphasis on tourism, where is the emphasis? I do not see it. Botanical Gardens in Entebbe were one of the best botanical gardens in Africa but how much are they fetching now? Where is it? Half of it is going to Karim - these species are very rare. How much money has been appropriated to rehabilitate this rare asset? 

If we talk of tourism, people come here to see the animals, not the bush. If you go to Lake Mburo and some of the parks, what steps are being taken to make sure that unwanted bushes do not continue eating away the other species? It is during the dry season when they burn that you can see the animals. We want to see strategies towards this. The roads - Lake Mburo is served by one road but the other side of park towards Nakibaale, which is very beautiful, cannot be accessed. 

If you want to harvest you must invest; you must sow the right seeds. It is amazing; we have something we used to be proud of, the Uganda Equator. I went with a foreigner and when we reached at the equator line I said, “This is Wava Equator”, and he asked, “Where is the Uganda Equator?” Why did you change the name? The minister is agreeing with me. It is very interesting. These are very important things that you need to capture.  

Let me go to trade. Where is the National Chamber of Commerce in this? Why KACITA? We are now getting involved with an informal organization, sometimes of people who do not know what they want; sometimes they want the opposition and other disgruntled groups to join this group. The National Chamber of Commerce was organised but government is not paying attention to the Chamber of Commerce. Let us deal with formal groups. Much of the money has been going to the Private Sector Foundation, but the private sector foundation has no linkage with traders.

If you look at the budget for the Ministry of Tourism - I think I need to address this to the Prime Minister. If you look at the Budget, I do not know what I can say. The other time they were given only Shs 800 million non-wage, and I could not believe it. If you know that you are getting much money from Tourism and you put in Shs 800 million and you get billions of money and you dump it in consuming ministries, where are you going to get money next time to dump in those consuming ministries? We must invest in productive sectors. 

I was surprised that the committee is not actually lamenting that the ministry is starved. This is a fact. In fact at a later stage I will consult with the Chairperson of the Budget Committee. There are areas where I think money should go, absolutely.

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, you know when you sell shoes, you sell socks, you sell shoelaces, you sell polish, and you sell brushes, because these are associated. You have the Ministry of Investment in Ministry of Finance, what is it doing there? Trade and Industry, you must package things together. 

We have recommended to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development that if the Ministry of Investment be divested from the Ministry of Finance and genuinely, some of these problems would not arise. AGOA in the President’s Office, Investment in the Ministry of Finance, then Industries in the Ministry of Trade, I do not know what I can say! We must package and structure our organization according to the tasks. So, I would like the hon. Prime Minister to respond because we have recommended and genuinely we have justified it.

Uganda is endowed with animal species and very rare sites. If we do not invest in tourism we are in trouble. I went to Singapore and I went to their zoo. The animals they have - some of them were collected from Uganda and we were queuing for one hour and people were paying money.

MR ABURA PIRIR: Thank you very much, honourable member for giving way. Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of information that the honourable member has said something important about the wildlife. In 1972 Karamoja was one of the richest sources of wildlife but the exit rate of wildlife - they all went to Israel. And for me to see a lion, I saw it in Israel and they said it came from Uganda in Karamoja. 

I similarly would like to ask, how much money does the Wildlife Authority now put in place to relocate some animals into Uganda? Because Kenya has I think a lot of zoos, and we should have to relocate some animals here. They have disappeared from here, like the rhinos and so on. 

Further information is that I see a lot of signposts of wildlife, protected and controlled land, but there are no animals. What are you protecting and what are you really controlling? There are no animals. You should purchase now and start relocating animals. Thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you honourable member for that information. As I was saying, Madam Speaker, when we entered, the majority of animals were from Uganda, including the Uganda Cranes. In fact I was with the chairperson and he said, “How stupid we are? People here are paying too much money, the animals are confined, for us we have them wild and we have failed even to do that!” 

I do not know how to call it. If we are very serious, we must focus on the productive sectors and this is one of them. Look at Botanical Gardens; if people were getting in Uganda and getting out of Uganda, this is one centre where you can collect billions of money. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to ask the minister to respond because we have two other reports to deal with. Those who have not spoken to this will speak to the next one, but I just want to also ask the Government to note that in that report the chair reported that tourism has become the No. 1 earner. If it is the No. 1 earner, let us really invest in it.

12.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TOURISM (Mr Jovino Akaki Ayumu): I thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity and I thank the committee and indeed the whole House for the pertinent issues they raised in respect to this sector of Tourism, Trade and Industry. Because of the time constraint I will try to give general responses to questions, which I have tried to bring together, abstracted from your questions that I considered to be of general nature and which kept on resurfacing every time contributions were being made. Then time permitting, I might respond to some specific questions.

Madam Speaker, there has been a general outcry on the lower location of resources to this ministry, which in the opinion of many and I do share that opinion, is actually quite key. I wish to inform members that indeed the funds are not at the level we as a ministry would have required, but we also recognize that an effort has been made to try and put in more resources. From the book, we circulated a policy statement and the statement by the chairman. 

This financial year alone, some Shs 9.6 billion was allocated to this ministry. I am not saying this is enough, but I am saying this is a show of commitment. This shows that government is indeed interested in the sector, but of course we have to work against competing needs. Time will come when this money will keep building up to the level we require, and I thank members for their observations and concerns. I am sure that we shall continue bargaining together and the Government definitely has come some distance.

Another point that surfaced a lot was the issue of the low prices for cotton, vanilla, and maize.  This is not the first time this issue is being raised on the Floor of the House. We do appreciate that the prices of these commodities and others are not quite sufficiently high but we would like us to handle this subject within the general framework of the existing policy of liberalization of the economy, where prices are no longer fixed by the Government. But you also recognized that even within this, government has intervened in these following ways:

We are encouraging, through sensitization, the diversification of produce. In other words, the farmers should not only stick to one crop because when the price falls down, there should be some fall back position and for that purpose we are going in for the zoning. Government has already come up with a concrete programme on zoning and the implementation is actually underway.

Then we have been talking about value addition. We believe that if some value is put on these raw materials and produce, there is every reason to believe that we shall fetch better prices for them and members here are aware that a lot of effort has been undertaken in the area of value addition. We may not have done sufficiently but we are on our way and things have started moving.

Another intervention is for encouraging formation of associations. Most of the money that is earned tends to go to the middlemen and co-operatives and other associations were saying, “Let the producers handle their own sales as well as their own marketing.” That is why the ministry, together with other arms of government, is now encouraging formation of associations and co-operatives. That is why we have the Warehouse Receipt System, the Bill of which you have been told is already with the relevant committee of this Parliament. Really, the prices have not been sufficiently encouraging for many of the commodities but those are some of the interventions.

Of course we have also tried this stabilization fund for the case of cotton. Members will recall that last year some little money had to be injected to try and alleviate the price, and maybe it was not sufficient. It is not like government sits back and is doing nothing about it.  

Madam Speaker, some other matter of general concern was the issue of Uganda Wildlife Authority in respect to conservation areas. A member had a very stronger, let me see, this is something of a general nature because it kept coming up. Hon. Lolem talked about people who have taken away their land, the whole of Karamoja is a conservation area and so on and so forth. I can only inform as follows:

Prior to May 2002, virtually the whole of Karamoja was a conservation area but to be more accurate, more than three quarters was a conservation area as was declared by the colonial rulers. Even the Karimojong who were living there were actually living in reserves but in 2002 members will recall, we passed here certain resolutions rationalizing our conservation areas. And in that single move Karamoja was given more than 60 percent of the land back. It was released but previously it was under the Government. Now it is Karimojong land and even the community conservation area is meant for the Karimojong to try and develop the wildlife animals and things like that, in economic terms with the technical support of government. I do not think that as of now things are worse than they were. 

I have been going to this same group of persons as it was recognized by one of the contributors trying to explain this. The boundaries after May 2002 are now being marked. Actually we have done a lot of marking and boundary demarcation and clarification. We are doing it using precisely the technology that the honourable member mentioned to us. We are doing it. We have gone a long way and we think that the way we are moving is quite well.
 
The other issue of general interest has been tourism. I want to take all the comments of members here as some of the ways they would like to see tourism improving, and I welcome it. I welcome it because although we have said that tourism is now No. 1 foreign currency earner, we have not reached there yet. We need to do more and we are doing more but let us be proud of what we have been able to achieve. 

Our history put us far back compared to the rest of the region. Can you imagine that we are talking now for the first time of earning more than US $360 million coming from tourism alone? Would you not appreciate the fact that we now have a track record, into this country, of some 514,000 tourists like as of last year, from the statistics? Really, we are coming. Something is getting done. 

Are you not encouraged that government has now allocated an extra Shs 2 billion for the promotion and as I talk we have people in the country already doing some shots all over the country under the code “branding Uganda”? We are going out there more aggressively and it is now paying dividends. Areas like Kalangala –(Interruption)

MRS KAVUMA: Before the minister mentions Kalangala and I am sure he knew I was going to seek clarification from that, I just want to know whether in the Shs 2 billion there is anything invested in encouraging local tourism. We have looked at even in the report, Netherlands and wherever. We are looking for tourists but if we ourselves cannot get to Kalangala whenever we visit and talk about these nice places then I think it is not that useful. I just want to know how much has been put into encouraging local tourism so that we can go to the nice places like the falls in Kalangala, which the minister has failed to visit all this time. I thank you.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the minister what mitigation measures he has in place to handle emergencies. As we speak right from Monday afternoon, Malaba, Kenya-Uganda Road has been blocked by trailers. In fact trailers were parked up to Ngogoma from the Kenyan side because tourists could not move, the trailers were up to Tororo Girls’ School and tourists have been facing a lot of difficulties - even ordinary travelers had no route to reach Kenya. 

We have been urging the Government that there is an old road connecting Kenya to Uganda, that is, Malikisi and Rwakaka Bridge, for government to really have an alternative road built so that in case of emergencies tourists can be diverted. Tourists have been suffering, and my people of Malaba, and I do not know what action government has to expand Malaba Inland Park because the park is so small. When the trailers are parked, these tourists face a lot of difficulty. 

Besides that, Malaba town as you are aware is kind of a slum. We have urged the minister to put a tourist guide statement and signpost, to dress the money changers, to put facilities like toilets and latrines because this is the image of this country. What plans do you have really? I am aware right now that government has sorted out and the trailers are beginning to move but you can imagine for the last three days the congestion –(Interruption)

MR AKAKI: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the hon. Members of Parliament for their intervention. On the issue of domestic tourism, yes, domestic tourism is one of the areas we focus on not only through sensitization but also through special rates to Ugandans who want to visit these places. They are given much lower subsidized rates to encourage them and of course this is the kind of information that Members of Parliament would have had so that they can encourage their constituents as well as encourage themselves to visit some of these parks.

But specifically, the Shs 2 billion is not targeting domestic tourism. Domestic tourism is being promoted using other funding outside this. The Shs 2 billion is just an extra intervention aiming at foreign tourists, aiming at repairing the image of Uganda in respect to tourists, aiming at attracting the tourists here.

The issue of trailers of course is an inter-departmental concern and I am happy as hon. Ekanya Geoffrey has observed, things are already being done and the trailers have started moving. I am happy that government is aware of that and has taken action. That is why they are moving.

The issue of putting sign posts up and dressing money changers, I have discussed with hon. Ekanya for some time now and actually he has drawn our attention to it and we are looking at ways of doing it not only for Malaba but also for other places. Signposts - we want to do these things all over the country and yours is one of the areas to be addressed.

I think I was concluding on tourism. My simple answer is that, yes, we are not performing yet to the level of the neighbouring states because of the historical problems we went through, but we are now getting somewhere. I was giving these figures only to indicate that indeed something has been done and things are moving and moving in the right direction.

I would like to handle some specific issues of common interest as well. The first one was raised by you, Madam Speaker, yesterday when somebody made reference to competition law; that this country requires competition law and I am happy to report that after very intensive consultations we now have a Bill, which is on its way to Cabinet. The Bill came out on the 30th of June this year, so we have done some work on it. We have made some progress. The consultations took a bit of time but now we are on course.  

On the issue of subvention, this is something that has been coming up year after year as was observed by hon. Beatrice Kiraso. I think I will leave this one to the minister – it was actually addressed to the Minister of Finance.  

On the question of mergers, last year I did not indicate - I was the one who presented this paper of ours – I did not indicate that we were going back to Cabinet. The position is that Cabinet in principle has agreed that the merger should take place but the funding for it has not been available, I believe for competing needs. We have categorized it under unfunded priority. In other words, it is a priority but the funds for it have not been made available. They have not been sourced yet and we just have to hope that the money becomes available –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Honourable minister, would you be specific on the funding for what, exactly for what especially given that as I had said, Uganda Investment Authority has got its own money? Under your vote there is money, which is due to the Uganda Export Promotions Board and there is money, which is due to the Tourist Board. So that money that you are talking about, what exactly is it for? What are the activities for it?  

MR AKAKI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. We require restructuring the new body. The restructuring, the lay offs, and the paying of the terminal benefits, runs as follows. It is supposed to be done in phases of four years for the whole structuring to be accomplished. In the first year we require US $4.2 million, in the second year we require US $4.2 and again in the third and fourth years we require US $4.2 million.

This is not just thought about. This was as a result of a study that was commissioned. That study indicated that we would require that amount of money to have these bodies merged into one. The budget, therefore, under Uganda Investment Authority, Uganda Export Promotions Board, Uganda Tourist Board would not be sufficient to establish that body. 

In the Cabinet we are talking about not so much to seek opinion on whether to merge or not to merge, the Cabinet paper is now to say, “For some time it has not been possible to merge as a result of unavailability of funds, what do we do next”? This is an inner thing, which perhaps we should not even have mentioned in our presentation but it has come out and that is the explanation I can give.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable minister, I do not know whether you are balancing your own needs as a ministry and these other bodies? We heard here that you have a department where there is one driver, one tea girl, one commissioner and then these other bodies, which would assist you, are also scaling down. I do not know whether you are really balancing your needs as a ministry and these bodies?

MR AKAKI: Madam Speaker, in the report and in the ministerial statement we indicated that this ministry is undergoing functional analysis. The functional analysis should bring out areas of deficit and how to handle them. A body was commissioned, during the functional analysis, it completed its study, we held several discussions as a ministry with the Ministry of Public Service and other line ministries related with the restructuring and the full report should be coming out. I look at this as a scientific, systematic way of addressing the problems of this ministry and that is what I expect. 

But for somebody to have said that we have one commissioner and then a driver and then – I think it is a bit of an understatement. The staff is not sufficient but we have slightly more than that as it is indicated on page 85. We have for example a commissioner, there is an assistant commissioner, there is a principle commissioner, an officer and then in the field all the production officers in the districts are used as co-operative officers. But I am saying it is not really – you are right to say that it is not sufficient. These are not sufficient numbers and the actual numbers should come out with the structural and functional analysis of the ministry. So, you are right, Madam Speaker.

MS ALASO: I appreciate the fact that the honourable minister wants a very scientific approach to address the structural difficulties, which for a long time the House has considered part of the difficulties in the ministry. What I would like to know is, what is the time frame? We would not like to hear you come back next year, because we will definitely meet in this House. and tell us functional analysis. When is this functional analysis report of yours going to be implemented for the good of this nation? 

MR AKAKI: I take hon. Alaso’s presentation for next year partly as the good wishes that we come back all and we shall be here to present but definitely I would like to hope that we will be coming here to present -(Laughter)- really, the functional analysis report is ready but after further fine-tuning and discussions, we thought a few things have got to be put in place. 

By way of timeframe, I should see that before the year ends, it is a matter of one or two days or let us call it one or two weeks? This final functional analysis will be presented and may be the production may take one or two weeks. Let us talk about a month also. Definitely the functional analysis report will have long been with us by next year.

Madam Speaker, I am still continuing on specific issues and I now want to move to the issues raised by hon. Mulengani. Yes, the Board of Uganda National Bureau of Standards is ready. It can be announced any time now.  

The issue of micro finance being in the Ministry of Tourism, a recommendation which you have given, I think this is something that might have to be looked into but I know that micro finance institutions are right now being discussed. There is a lot of discussion and there is a paper, which is being looked at. Where it eventually ends up, I cannot say for now.  

The amount of money allocated to the Ministry of Finance - I do not have records here but since the minister is here, he will definitely help us with that.  

Export processing is on, Namanve and the rest is also on the way. Activities are going on and it is moving well.

I have already talked about opening of the boundaries raised by hon. Wopuwa.  

When is government going to support circles?  Circles are basically meant to be co-operatives formed by owners, the money they get is lent out and under Uganda Co-operative Alliance we have been giving some level of training to the people who form their co-operative unions, including the circles. The interest rate is fixed. This is to refer to a relevant question raised by hon. Betty Amongi. The interest rate for the circles is actually fixed by the members themselves and they tend to be very low. It has not really so much been derived from competitive market interest rates.

Again this paper referred to more government interventions to help set up more circles and give them the training, give them some seed money, later some money is going to be covered. We will come with this when this is out of the way.

The Reverend said Uganda National Bureau of Standards needs to do more. When you say it needs to do more, you are actually recognizing that it has done a number of things and this has been all recorded. Yes, we really need to do more not only for this one but also for many others. We are trying but we have not quite done everything and we are going to continue doing that.

Madam Speaker, some of the policies as it is in our policy book, like the trade policies, are being done as well.

Who is in charge of AGOA? That is by hon. Awori.  The Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry supervises AGOA. AGOA has a secretariat, was created as a short-term intervention in the class of presidential advisors but all the supervision, all the funding passes through the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry. But more importantly, it is not meant to be a permanent entity. They are being phased out gradually as the funding becomes less so that the capacity in the ministry will have sufficiently been built to take care of AGOA affairs.

The negotiator who was brought back to Uganda has been replaced by more than -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Minister, what I meant essentially is, who is financially accountable? Is it your ministry or the President’s Office? There must be people managing that secretariat, who are responsible. You know that at this material time we are considering a budget; we do not want to see a double entry. President’s Office, Trade and Industry - who is financially responsible? The rest will have an idea.

MR AKAKI: Every ministry has an accounting officer, as we all know, the permanent secretary. Whatever money goes to AGOA comes through the ministry, it is within the ministry budget and the accountability is done by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. The accountability is with the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, not AGOA. AGOA does not have the accounting officer of its own.

Madam Speaker, many of the questions raised really were matters of areas of improvement, and others were proposals, which we shall take care of. I wish to end my case and I thank everybody. 

MR AEL ARK LODOU: Madam Speaker, I just want clarification from the minister. We have opened new roads to Sudan through Kidepo National Park, but then the Wildlife Authority based in Kidepo does not want businessmen to travel from Sudan to Uganda and vice-versa. So it is a problem. 

At one time I talked to the minister about this but there was no answer and also Wildlife Authority says we should get environmental impact assessment studies for travelers to move from Sudan and to Uganda. I do not know how this can be managed; yet we are losing business from Sudan. There are people in Sudan now, their jobs are in Sudan, they want to do business in Uganda and they want to buy iron sheets, cement and all these things. Can I get that clarification?

MR AKAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not so sure that Uganda Wildlife Authority could have advised that you have an environmental impact assessment study for people to move across the boundary. I will have to check on that. You do not normally have to have a study for people to move. I think I need to find out more about that.

There have been some problems definitely within the Kidepo area between the movement of the nationals, the Sudanese coming across, and Ugandans moving across. We are still trying to work out with the other arm of government to see how to regulate this. You did report and we are in touch with the other arm of government because it needs setting out like some kind of border post to ensure that the trade between these two countries is regularized. Definitely we are working on that one and I would like to say it is already there because it involves a number of processes. We have taken note of your report and we are working on it.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, one of the major challenges that we face here in Uganda, if you pick international travel guides from respective countries on Uganda, you will realize that these guides discourage tourists from going to certain areas like Karamoja, Tororo, and Bwindi. So, the challenge the minister has is really to regularly look at these guides and ensure that the mistakes or misinformation in these guides are removed. If you read one of them it says, “In Tororo you have nothing to see, past Mbale, Karamoja would be good, but because of insecurity risks …” –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: These are private practitioners? Are they licensed by your ministry or they are just the tour companies?

MR AKAKI: Yes, travel advisories are normally given by embassies and foreign governments on countries where their nationals can go and visit and are safe. In the case of Uganda, we have been having very many negative but perceptual advisories, and every time this appears we as a ministry intervene. We make a correction and we give them what the status is through our websites for the Uganda Tourism Board, the ministry and even us as government. We even go further than that. We engage the ambassadors of the relevant countries issuing advice against Uganda, to give an accurate guide to their people.  

This US $2 billion, which I mentioned earlier for promotion, is going to address that as one of the things that are supposed to improve the image of this country; to intervene quickly and accurately. It has been a continuous thing but the good thing is that we have been responding and responding reasonably and effectively. That is why we have a bit of a reverse of people coming. 

If we had more time, I would have said that we have held a number of international meetings to try and tell the people to discourage other nationals, other countries, issuing false travel advisories about the sister countries, particularly the Commonwealth countries. We passed a resolution to say, “Do not try to damage the tourism of a sister country”, but these are things that are continuous and you have got to keep on putting up a fight for things like this, but that happens and we respond to them.

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, before the chairperson of the committee responds, we had questions, which were specific to the Ministry of Finance and they are to do with the budget of the ministry, which we are about to pass. In particular we talked about wage subvention. How do we save this ministry and make their budget realistic by removing all these wage subventions of semi-autonomous bodies? 

I saw the minister going out to consult with the technical people; I do not know whether he has left the answer with the Prime Minister or somebody else. We would like to have a realistic budget for this sector. I thought you said the Minister of Finance would answer the questions, which we have put to him before the chairman winds up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask the Prime Minister to tell us where the Finance Minister is?  

1.35
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): The Finance Minister wrote a note to me, he has a medical problem but in my view he should have first asked another colleague to be here. By the time I read the note he had left. So, I asked one of these people to go and look for him but he had gone. I sometimes get frustrated when dealing with people who do not know how to co-ordinate their affairs; but people have different capacities, including back benchers –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, can the Government undertake to do that? The capacities aside, if the Prime Minister promised us that government would undertake this responsibility then I think technically it could be done, maybe not for this budget but for subsequent ones in order to make this ministry budget more realistic?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I do not know whether the Prime Minister was here when you raised those matters, perhaps the National Political Commissar –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Maybe since he is a former Minister of Finance.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, before I came here I gave a directive that when ministers come here, a permanent secretary or any other relevant person who knows these issues must be seated on the staff bench. Therefore, I take it that the public servant has heard the questions and he will feed them to the minister to answer. I have no problem. Otherwise, subject to Article 173 of the Constitution, if my directives are not obeyed the public servants will be handled.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have noted with concern the Leader of Government Business in the august House persistently referring to public officers in the staff bench as our reference point. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear that the only persons we deal with in this August House are members of this House. You cannot make any reference to any person who is not a Member of the august House to provide information. They provide information ex-cathedra, not within the august House. There is no rule in our Rules of Procedure referring to that practice.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, you know we are dealing with the Budget and the reason we provided facilities for the civil servants to sit here is to advise their ministers. They do not come here most of the time but during the Budget they are expected to be here. I think we should not punish them for the sins of their ministers.  

DR NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, I would like to know, between Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, which industry is supposed to solve this problem and who is going to face the axe?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This question was specifically to the Minister of Finance who is the one who disburses the money. This ministry is just a consumer ministry and you cannot break his head for the sins of the Ministry of Finance. I do not know whether he will come back in the afternoon. We are now being made to introduce strange practices in this House where one report moves back and forth. However, let me ask the chairperson to wind up. We shall stop here and ask the Minister of Finance to answer these other queries.  

1.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Joseph Mugambe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank members for their constructive remarks. On top of the wage subvention there is this issue of function analysis that involves both the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance. The function analysis might come out well done but not implemented. It is our prayer that the recommendations in the function analysis be implemented as soon as possible.  

The warehouse receipt system is already with the committee. The committee has also received a Draft Tourism Bill and a copy of the background and the final draft of the Trade Policy. 

Honourable members, you have noted there is a trade balance of US $800 million. That means that our traders are more interested in imports than exports. Hon. Awori talked about our ambassador who was brought back. I want to inform the House that there is an Inter Institutional Trade Committee where different institutions join hands to come up with a government position on negotiations, and that ambassador has been quite useful in that committee. We asked the ministry why they had brought him back and they said it was because he had reached retirement age. Therefore, it is likely that when we reach retirement age we will also be retired. 

The report on the vanilla petition will come as soon as we are given room to present it.  

Honourable members, there were pertinent comments about Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS), but you may recall that at one time we presented a report about the staffing in UNBS. You know how many entry points there are in Uganda and how many trading centres. The staff in UNBS needs our support and people need to be sensitised on how to distinguish between quality commodities or items.  

Honourable members, you wanted the committee to explain strategic orientation towards the private sector. I think the committee was very clear on this. They observed that the ministry acknowledges the role of the private sector in poverty alleviation through increased competitiveness and that there is a law on competition that is coming. The ministry is committed to create a vibrant private sector to improve national competitiveness through strengthening small and medium enterprises, and that is elaborated on in our report. 

You may be aware that about 11 percent of our land is allocated to tourism although if you looked at the size of land in Kenya that is under national parks, it could be the same size as the whole of Uganda. It is true, therefore, that we should boost domestic tourism.

One member talked about negotiations. I think it is pertinent for us to ask the ministry to come up with a report on how we stand in as far as negotiations are concerned, especially concerning the pending World Trade Organization (WTO).  

Some time ago our committee wondered whether the Chamber of Commerce could be funded under other programmes. This is because in other ministries there could be funding of such bodies under other programmes. The Chamber of Commerce is not funded at all although it was established under an Act of Parliament. Therefore, it is functioning despite its being a bit incapacitated.  

Once again I thank you and thank the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry for taking many of our recommendations for last year seriously. There is gradual improvement and they just need more operational funds and support. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I asked the chairperson about the status of the National Food Security Strategic Plan. Maybe I did not hear his response?  

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that question not for the minister?

MR MUGAMBE: No, she wanted to know why we put it in our report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You put it there because it must have come from the ministry. She wants to know why it has not been completed, isn’t that it? I do not know whether you are able to answer that. Can the minister tell us?

MR AKAKI AYUMU: Madam Speaker, we mentioned in our ministerial statement that since as a ministry we also deal with production and considering the fact that food security is under the Ministry of Agriculture, we are saying that we should also be allowed to participate in the National Food Security Strategic Plan under the Ministry of Agriculture since we participated in this venture last financial year. I think it will come up more fully under the Ministry of –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are saying it is not fully under your hands?

MR AKAKI: Not directly, but we participate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members. I think we have unfinished business with this matter, which the Minister of Finance will have to deal with. The House is suspended until 3.00 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 1.45 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.19 p.m._)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this morning we had to stop work because the Minister of Finance was due to respond to some specific queries before we concluded the report on Trade, Tourism and Industry. Can hon. Semakula Kiwanuka come and respond to the questions raised?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: What is the problem?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are waiting for the Minister of Finance.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: The Minister of Finance is outside and they have gone to fetch him. He is just outside and he has got the answer from the relevant public servant. Therefore, I am very happy that we are highly co-ordinated.

3.21
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Joseph Mugambe): Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. I wanted to get more clarification from the minister. As you know we have three figures that the ministry was given in the policy statement. The first figure is Shs 34,002,633,000, followed by corrigenda, which has a total of Shs 32,757,743,000. No explanation was given as to why the figure changed from Shs 34 billion to Shs 32 billion. We do not know which item was left out so maybe we could get more clarification from the minister as to which figure we should pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you may have noted that we have not been dealing with the money part. We are going to do it in the Committee of Supply and I hope that by that time all the ministries will have told us exactly what they are asking for from us. Yesterday I received three different figures and now they are telling me there are others. We shall handle this in the Committee of Supply. 

3.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Madam Speaker, this is a different issue. Yesterday we saw discrepancies in figures in one sector, but at least those discrepancies had explanations. Therefore, eventually what we will be doing is to know which figure we are going to pass. However, I think hon. Mugambe’s concern is, when this figure changed by Shs 2 billion less, they were not given an explanation. 

I think the explanation we want is, what has been removed form the ministry budget? This is because this morning Madam Speaker, if you remember the honourable minister was happily reporting to this House that he has been given Shs 2 billion for Tourism. However, after we adjourned we looked at the figures again and found that actually the Shs 2 billion is not there in the final figure that we have been given. We just wanted the minister to tell this House what item they are removing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, you are the one who appropriates the money.

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, I will have to consult on the discrepancy. I cannot provide an answer now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, let us note that there is a discrepancy there and when we come to the Committee of Supply they should give us the full figures for all the ministries otherwise we are going to have a problem. Honourable minister, there was a question on subventions that we expected you to answer.

PROF. SEMAKULA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are going to consider, in fiscal year 2006/2007, creating separate votes for these bodies. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Pardon, I did not hear.

PROF. SEMAKULA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry that you did not hear what I said. I said we are going to consider, in fiscal year 2006/2007, creating separate votes or wage subventions for the semi-autonomous bodies in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry such as UNBE, UYRI, UIPB and UTD. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, Budget Committee, I hope you are satisfied with the answer.

MS KIRASO: Certainly I am not, Madam Speaker. Why? I do not know whether it is a problem with presentation but what does, “We are going to consider it” mean? I wish the minister could say that come next financial year we are going to separate these votes and create separate votes for these semi autonomous bodies. That to me would be clearer.

PROF. SEMAKULA: Madam Speaker, the answer is, yes. We are going to create separate votes for these subventions in the financial year 2006/2007.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, that becomes a government assurance. Can the chairperson of the relevant committee take note? 

MR MUGAMBE: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has left out the Uganda Wildlife Authority. I do not know whether it is included by implication, since he listed only a few bodies. Did he mean all semi-autonomous or only those he listed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was your question about all of them?

MS KIRASO: All of them, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you repeat for the Hansard?

PROF. SEMAKULA: Madam Speaker, all the semi-autonomous bodies will have their special votes in the financial year 2006/2007.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think he has said 2006/2007. I heard it, and that is what he said. (Laughter)

PROF. SEMAKULA: 2006/2007.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since we are dealing with the Budget, it is 2006/2007.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE REPORT ON COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Five minutes ago I was with the chairman in the lobby and he indicated that he was running to his office to collect his file and be here in time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay honourable members, while we wait for the chairpersons to come, may I ask the Minister of Justice to make the statement he was supposed to have made in the morning?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.30
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This statement covers the implications of the referendum on the change of the political system and the political transition. 

You are no doubt aware that on the 28th of July 2005, by 92.5 percent of those who participated, the people of Uganda voted in favour of changing the political system. The “yes” vote paved the way for an orderly transition from the Movement Political System to the Multiparty Political System.

Before I state the concrete plans government has drawn to address the changes required to operationalise the new political system, allow me, Madam Speaker and honourable members, to clarify on the legal status of the current Government following the change of political system. 

The current Government under the Movement Political System was re-elected for a term of five years and, therefore, the Movement Government elected under the Movement Political System will remain in place until the expiry of the current Government.  

The Constitution in Article 74 prescribes that resolutions and petitions for purposes of changing the political system shall be taken only in the fourth year of Parliament. This provision was deliberate. The Constituent Assembly reserved the fifth year of Parliament for the transition period from the existing political system to the newly adopted political system.

Section 18(1) of the Referendum and Other Provisions Act states, “Where the result of a referendum held under this Act or a resolution of Parliament passed in accordance with clause 2 of Article 74 of the Constitution determines that a change shall be made in the existing political system, then subject to the Constitution, subsequent Presidential, Parliamentary, Local Governments and other public elections shall be held under the new political system adopted.” 

Sub-section 2 makes the following exception; “This section does not apply to a by-election held before the expiration of the term of Parliament under Article 77 of the Constitution.” 

Section 18 of the Movement (Amendment) Act, 2003, which amends section 36 of the principle Act provides that, “If a decision is made under Article 74 of the Constitution to the effect that another political system is chosen as the political system to operate in Uganda in place of the Movement Political System, then all offices in all Movement organs shall, in accordance with section 39 of this Act, be deemed from the date mentioned in subsection 5(a) to have been vacated.” 

Sub-section 5(a) provides that; “The current office bearers in the Movement organs shall continue in office until the date of expiry of the term of Parliament in 2006.”   

Clause 95 of the Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill, 2005, which has been adopted by this Parliament, provides in a similar provision as follows: “Until the first Parliamentary elections for the purposes of the multiparty political system are held, the organs under the Movement political system as referred to in clause (2) of the Constitution shall remain in force and thereafter will be subject to clause (3) of Article 70 and Article 73.” 

In summary, therefore, the following is the legal position with regard to the transition period:
i.	The organs of the Movement will remain in force until the next elections are held on or before 12 March 2006. This is the position following the adoption of clause 95 in the Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill, 2005. Therefore, Movement organs will cease to exist or operate not later than 12 March 2006.
ii.	Any Parliamentary by-elections held before the next general election should be held under the Movement political system. It should be noted though that Article 81(3) of the Constitution provides that, “… A by-election shall not be held within six months before the holding of a general election of Parliament.” As pointed out above, the Constitution has been amended to provide that the term of the organs of the Movement political system will end upon the holding of the next Parliamentary elections in March 2006. The six months period will begin to run in October 2005. Thus from October 2005 no more elections will be held under the Movement political system.

I now address the transition period of 20 July 2005 to 12 May 2006. It should be noted that we have been under a transition of sorts since the National Executive Committee of the Movement resolved to open political space in March 2003. However, that was a “political transition” whereby the political leadership presumed a change of political system and began making preparations. Right now, we are in the formal transition period as envisaged by the Referendum and Other Provisions Act where the procedures under the law are followed for the outgoing political system to cease operation and for the incoming political system to begin operation. 

Despite the continuation of the Movement system until the next Parliamentary elections, there is need for a transition. This is because the incoming political system cannot just take off only with the coming into office of the next Parliament. Since the next elections should be held under the new political system, it means that by the time of the elections, rules of the new system should be in application. Therefore, there will be a period of co-existence of the two systems in the run-up to the elections.  

This situation will necessitate rules governing the brief period of co-existence for the two systems so that a smooth transition is achieved. For that purpose, the Referendum and Other Provisions Act made the provision in section 18(4), which reads, “The minister may, with prior approval of Parliament, make such regulations as maybe necessary for ensuring a smooth transition from the previous political system to the newly adopted political system.” 

This provision further illustrates that the current political system continues and a transition period is needed to a new system. The new political system is not expected to have immediate effect but there should be a transition period between the old and the new systems  

This is necessary because the Secretariat is a large, government establishment with a wide range of public assets, a large body of staff and oversees the countrywide structures of Movement conferences. Winding up the activities of the Secretariat will entail assembly of numerous documents for storage or disposal, handover of assets and management of staff who include political leaders and public servants. Most of the staff have meritoriously served the country for a long time and will have to be appropriately provided for.

Proposed way forward (Plans):
1.	The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs will exercise his powers under section 18(4) of the Referendum and Other Provisions Act and make regulations for the smooth transition from the Movement political system to the next political system. The regulations should be aimed at minimising a clash between the existence of the outgoing Movement Political System and the application of the rules and features of the multi-party political system.
2.	In exercise of his mandate to make regulations for the transition, the minister will soon introduce amendments the Political Parties and Organizations Act 2002 in accordance with Articles 71 and 72 of the Constitution to pave the way for holding of proper multi-party elections in the next general elections.
3.	In further exercise of the mandate to make transitional regulations, the minister will exercise supervisory powers to ensure that the Electoral Commission and Human Rights Commission, both of which have the mandate to conduct civic education, sensitise the people on the operation of the Multi-party political system.
4.	Government will, in this month of September, introduce amendments to the following Electoral laws: 
a)	The Presidential Elections Bill 
b)	The Parliamentary Elections Bill 
c)	The Local Government Act (Amendment) Bill 
d)	The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill 

The purpose of the above amendments will be to bring the electoral laws into conformity with the new political system. The laws will make it clear that the next presidential, parliamentary and local council elections to be held in March 2006 will be held under the Multi-party arrangement.

Government will also introduce amendments to the Movement Act to achieve the following:
a)	In keeping with the Constitution as amended to reduce the terms of the organs of the Movement from 2 July 2006 (as is the current position in the law), to 12 March 2006.
b)	To mandate the Movement National Conference to work out a policy framework of winding up the organs of the Movement.
c)	Provide an opportunity to the National Conference of the Movement to make provision for retirement benefits for the leaders and staff of the system and/or placement to other sectors of the public service where appropriate.
d)	To enable the Secretariat and its staff to prepare the public to come to terms with the new system.

It is my expectation that the above amendments will be passed by this August House in September, six months ahead of the next general elections. This will allow political parties and organisations sufficient time and space to:
a)	Open and operate branches
b)	Hold delegates conferences
c)	Hold public rallies at all levels
d)	Identify a candidate for general elections
e)	Carry on other lawful activities

Finally if all stakeholders take the above steps, the next general elections will take place before 12 March 2006. A new government will be sworn in on 12 of May 2006, marking the beginning of Multi-party Government in Uganda. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this statement came in response to a question and it is clear that laws are going to come, which will handle this area specifically. Let us comment for about 15 minutes, since you are going to say the same things when the laws come.

3.44
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for this statement to the House. The statement is about the implications of the referendum on the change of political systems. I would have wanted the minister to tell us the lessons that he has learnt from this referendum exercise because I find the lessons very crucial to some of the things he has pointed out. For instance, the minister points out the need to regulate or minimize a clash between the Movement system and the Multi-party system. I expected him to have drawn some lessons from the referendum exercise that could be employed to minimize future clashes.  

As regards the question of civic education, we have called on the Ministry of Justice twice or thrice to explain to us how civic education was progressing before we passed their money. Therefore, my expectation was that one would go to the countryside and find civic education going on. It is true that if you moved around the countryside prior to the referendum exercise, you would not find anybody educating the masses. 

This went on to the extent that by the time of the referendum exercise people were still discussing the merits of a house as in being a house and a tree as in being a plant and not what these two symbols were representing. I found that a disadvantage to the political system in this country because at the end of the day the voters did not exercise their rights fully.

Secondly, I expected the minister to draw lessons from the voter turn up. How was it? It is important to this country and especially to stakeholders like Parliament that you tell us what the voter turn up was like. We have heard conflicting reports because the DEM group claim that only 18 percent of the voters turned up while the Electoral Commission claims the percentage was 48 or 49 percent. Is this satisfactory and is this the percentage that you would like to have in the forthcoming elections that will determine the future of this country?

Assuming the voter turn up was very miserable, Madam Speaker, what is the minister planning to do to realize a better voter turn up next time? Assuming it stays miserable, wouldn’t it portray elections in this country as a fraud process? This is because if you end up with discrepancies of 18 percent and 48 percent, somebody could think the exercise was manipulated.

Madam Speaker, the third and final issue is the question of updating voter registers. Then we were told that the voter registers would be updated when children were on holiday, which was supposed to be in August. I have toured the whole of Soroti and not found any voter register update going on.  Could the honourable minister clarify those issues? Thank you. 

3.50
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for bringing up this timely statement to this august House. My concern is on No. 7 of the minister’s statement to the effect that if the steps taken by the stakeholders are taken in time then the general elections will take place on March 12th, 2006. It is as though these steps are the ones going to determine the election date yet I would have expected the minister to unequivocally state that since the elections are on 12 March 2006, we need such steps to be in place and to go further and show how soon these steps are going to be put in place.  

But for him to condition the elections to the steps and only if they are followed is to me evidence of laxity on the part of the ministry and government. If the date is 12th March, the minister should make this clear to all Ugandans and this should be the determining factor. 

Furthermore, I would like the minister to tell us the concrete steps he is taking to ensure that we have a successful transition. For instance, where are the Bills that he is talking of? He is simply promising us while at the same telling us that parties shall be free to open and operate branches, hold delegates conferences and hold public rallies after the amendment of the Movement Act yet we know that the elections are just around the corner. We would have expected the minister to come up with concrete terms, since the referendum is over. This should not be a matter of debate so let us have the amendments now.

If anything I would have expected these Bills to have gone through the first readings as we continue debating the Budget but the minister seems to be dragging his feet. Ugandans are not prepared to have a transition that is not transparent, not on time and that is not conducted properly.

Madam Speaker, on the proposed way forward, the minister says that the Electoral Commission and Human Rights Commission have the mandate to conduct civic education. Since the referendum of 2000, that fact has been well known but he may be aware that in the just concluded referendum we still had problems because voters were not fully educated and sensitised about this. 

I think that instead of leaving all the responsibility to these two organs or commissions, it is high time the sensitisation exercise started immediately after the referendum. That is to say it should be ongoing rather than waiting for when an exercise is round the corner before swinging into action. At the end of the day we shall have a pseudo or a semi sensitised population and the end result will be voter’s apathy and the whole exercise becoming a sham. 

Therefore, Mr Minister, could you give Ugandans a concrete answer about how soon you intend to set off instead of making promises while we get caught by time? I can assure you that there is a lot of work to be done in this Parliament, which means that it is incumbent upon the minister to slot in these amendments. 

I also expected the minister to include the Police Act, to stop the police from harassing the opposition whenever they assemble. We should have the entire spectrum of laws that need to be amended and put in place such that all parties in this political transition are favoured and see this exercise as being free and transparent. This will help us avoid last minute ditches that government is likely to come up with. I thank you.

3.57
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry because I thought that initially you had said I would be next after my honourable colleague. Nevertheless, my honourable colleagues and I are the same.  

Once again the Government, with due respect to the President and his Cabinet, is pulling wool over our eyes and especially for those of us who for many years thought we were equal under the Movement political system. Apparently we are outside the Movement. 

Madam Speaker, I am raising this issue of the transition basically because there is no transition. If I asked the minister what the basic characteristics of a transition are, the only thing he would do is present operative laws such as the parliamentary election law. Those are not characteristics of a transition. A transition essentially means that period when you are moving from one system to another and the management of that transition period is a joint effort of all parties, not only the existing one.  

Therefore, there is no way you or anybody else can come and pull wool over me. I was born before independence and I recall that before independence there was a transition period between the Protectorate Government and Independent Government. At that time there was joint administration by Ugandans and the colonial officers like the Colonial Secretary and the Governor General, and that is what we call a transition. It was a joint effort between Africans of Ugandan origin, others who were born here, and the outgoing colonial administration. 

Now I assume that the outgoing administration is the Movement political system and that we are going into a new political dispensation. There is no way the incumbent system can pretend to be the arbiter and the referee during that period of transition. When you look at arbitrary situations in place that the Movement system has left in place to govern local administration on the ground, all the people appointed to be answerable and accountable to the Movement are trying to get rid of it. How can you tell me that such people could be the ones to foster or deliver the new baby? Definitely they will try to kill or maim it. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I do not buy this proposal by the honourable minister that these guidelines will apply since we are in a state of transition.

On page 4 my friend the Minister of Constitutional Affairs talks about a period of co-existence. Who are you co-existing with? You are still by yourselves. How do I co-exist when I am still here and they are over there? We want to be there so you sit on this side and I will sit on that side. That is what I call a transition.

If for instance the minister belonged to DP or UPC, I would at least be able to say I have got somebody there who will look after my interests during the transition. But even as we speak, there are certain provisions that are missing in the transition. For example as my honourable colleague put it, you have not mentioned the Police Act. You have simply been amending it in your favour and you think these people are going to act with transparency? Nothing could be further from the truth.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, nobody should come here and tell me that we are going to experience transition. The real transition I see here will be between March 12th and May 12 of next year and that is when you can say we got rid of that system on March 11th. Now –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I do not want to interrupt hon. Awori but is he in order to suggest that there is no other business we are supposed to do until March 12th when he knows that we are actually going to debate Bills such as the one for parliamentary and presidential elections? Is he in order to mislead this House and drag us into discussing issues that are completely irrelevant?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I do not know whether you are saying that there is no Movement System at the moment from which we must transit. I do not know how you propose to have a joint Government without having some kind of transition or without debating the law. If you have proposals for a joint government or a coalition may be we will consider them when we have the laws here. Otherwise, what do you want the minister to do? Do you want the Government to close Parliament and wait for March 12th?

MR AWORI: Thank you Madam Speaker for your guidance actually, because you did not make a ruling -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are out of order. (Laughter)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I cannot challenge your ruling and I abide by it. My position is that if it is a matter of first making the laws, this should have been done a long time ago. You are cheating those of us who belong to a different school of thought but have graciously accepted you by virtue of the transition. I believe that there is a role for Multi-party politics in this country notwithstanding the low turn up during the referendum.  

Although this has been challenged by my colleague, looking at other members of the Commonwealth and beyond I still hold it to be true that during the transition period the outgoing government has to hand over reports to the incoming government. That is how we have been running the show and our recommendations continue along these lines.  It is on these grounds that I was giving the example of the pre-independence transition of government because I was already an adult when this place was opened.

PROF. SEMAKULA: I thank my honourable colleague for giving way. The transition period after independence was characterised by an interim administration of the DP Government and, therefore, it was by political parties. It was not the colonial government that handed over but the DP Government, which was later defeated by another political party. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my honourable colleague, the history professor. May I add that there is a blank in your history book because you may have noticed the fact that the person who was heading that transition period was still the colonial governor and the late Benedict Kiwanuka was only a chief minister whose responsibility was looking after small administration while the person answerable was the governor? I hope you see the difference between what I am saying and your historical interpretation. That is why I am saying you need to add that page in your history book, or amend it.  

However, Madam Speaker -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up hon. Awori. There are other members who want to speak.

MR AWORI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am wondering that in the event of difficulties, I do not see any provision for the position generally called force majeure in legal terminology. In the event of difficulties how do we make up for lost time? I have lived through four administrations and in each of those administrations there was never a provision for force majeure. Are we not preparing for this again? 

There could be difficulties and in the event of this, how are you going to adjust? Maybe Parliament could close these doors thereby creating no room for making laws? It is not the first time this Parliament has been closed; it can still happen. There are several unorthodox methods of bringing about new regimes but I am not suggesting we resort to any of those. 

I am simply saying that we need to provide for a system within the law to deal with any difficulties that may arise thereby creating a fall back position. Right now I do not see that. If you claim that there is no need for it, wait and you will see one day. I have said that I have lived through four regimes. Furthermore, we need to know the difference between NRM and the Movement so that we can know that the transition is for real and not the mere resemblance of a transition formed in order to fool us.  

I know some of you are thinking that you are coming back but let me inform you that you are not going back. It has already been said that parties have to identify their candidates for the general elections. In ordinary language it is called “primaries”. You will see. There are already 52 ministers who want to come back here and you are all in the Movement. Do you think they are going to allow you to come back? These ministers are going to be on the preferred list. You are joking, they are not going to sit down and let you come back. (Laughter)

You better face it, I am telling you. In UPC we are lucky that we are not in a government so we are all equal. But for you who are in the Movement, you are very unlucky. For you to move from there to here, they will have to be either politically or physically dead. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.10
MR JOHN WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the hon. Minister and Attorney-General for his statement. I am particularly happy about the statement because it has cleared the air about the fate of the Movement Secretariat.  I take consolation in the fact that the Movement Secretariat will be in existence for only three quarters of the financial year. Therefore, if we are looking for savings, I think we have savings of one quarter from the Vote of the Movement Secretariat and I am sure that the Chairperson of the Budget Committee will take note of that so that such savings are appropriately taken care of. 

I would, however, like to get clarification from the minister because we have heard a lot about the success of the referendum. As he was talking he quoted the figure of 92.5 percent of those who voted as having voted for the “yes” side. However, in his statement, it says, “The people of Uganda on 28th July, 2005 by 92.5 percent voted in favour of changing the political system”. 

Madam Speaker, the two statements are different. The one on paper that I am quoting gives the impression that 92.5 percent of the people of Uganda voted in favour of the referendum. If he wanted to amend this statement he should have stated to this House that he was amending the statement that has been circulated and I would appreciate that this be corrected for the record so that whoever reads the Hansard in future will be able to come to the same conclusion as the one that the minister wished to convey to this House.

Reference has been made to making appropriate provisions to compensate the staff of the Movement Secretariat. To the best of my knowledge, the majority of the staff of the Movement are political leaders and their terms and conditions of service were mainly contractual. They have been receiving gratuities on an annual basis and this is already inbuilt in the wage bill of the Secretariat. As far as regular civil servants who are working with the Secretariat are concerned, they are already provided for under the existing provisions for purposes of pension, gratuity and restructuring.  

I hope that the minister will be more specific when he comes up with this information so that we do not generalise these people and give the impression that every mobiliser or RDC who has been harassing members of the opposition qualifies for a pension of some sort; because those are not pensionable posts. I urge this House not to be persuaded in making provisions for pensions for people whose appointments were not to permanent and pensionable offices.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, how do we expect the staff of the Movement Secretariat to be the ones to sensitise the public on the new dispensation when these are the key people who have been decampaigning parties? How can a lecturer in Kyakwanzi who has blamed all the wars of this country on political parties be the one to go out tomorrow and tell the people of Uganda that now political parties are very good, the Movement system has also become a political party and that, therefore, we should change our thinking? That is not possible because you have seen people like Kakooza Mutale crying over the Movement System and even mobilizing people to fight the “yes” vote.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Wagonda, I am not following you. What is the matter that you are addressing? Who are these people who are going to be out in the field?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, if I may quote page 6, under 5(c) and I read: “Provide an opportunity to the National Conference of the Movement to make provision for retirement benefits for the leaders and staff of the system and placement to other sectors of the Public Service where appropriate”; and 5(d), which says: “To enable the Secretariat and its staff to prepare the public to come to terms with the new system”. How can they prepare the public for the new system when they themselves have not yet come to terms with it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are speculating. You can handle this matter and give guidance on how they are going to operate when the Bill comes, because from your arguments you are beginning to speculate. 

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Wagonda Muguli for giving way. I wanted to give hon. Wagonda an analogy. For example a parent might tell his daughter not to play with boys or tell a boy that girls are dangerous. However, when that person becomes of age, that parent might even look for either a husband or a wife for that child. This is the same parent who was telling the child not to play around with the opposite sex. Therefore, when a child becomes of age, I think the parents can offer counselling.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I wish to thank hon. Mugambe for the information. One thing that we both appreciate is that there is time from childhood to puberty and maturity. However, the staff of the Secretariat will not have that time to grow to maturity or be in position to bring this country to appreciate the change within the remaining few months. That would actually tantamount to defilement since they will not have achieved maturity age yet.

Finally, I recall when we raised issues of lack of civic education, the inappropriate arrangements made for voter registration and the checking of voters’ registers that the minister stated on this Floor that he was also helpless and that he could not make the Electoral Commission move the way Parliament wanted. Today he is assuring this House that he will exercise supervisory roles over the Electoral Commission and Human Rights Commission in ensuring that people are sensitised. What has changed since the last time that we asked him to take action? Isn’t he still using the same powers the law conferred upon him? Was he chickening out of his responsibility the other time or he was just avoiding the pressure that Parliament was putting upon him? 

Since the Chairman of the Government Assurance Committee has stated that he will exercise supervision over both the Electoral Commission and the Human Rights Commission, I would like him to assure us that he will actually do so to the satisfaction of not only Parliament but also the people out there who are looking forward to a smooth transition. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

4.20
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Attorney-General for this difficult presentation, difficult because it is like a relative who has lost another relative and is preparing for that relative’s burial. I know the Movement Government has lost the Movement system and must stand up and bury it. It is a difficult time and I sympathize with the Movement Government. This is what some of us have been saying all along. Do not mix the state with politics but rather do politics outside the state. 

The minister is saying on page 4 that, “This will be necessary because the Secretariat is a large Government establishment with a wide range of public assets, a large body of staff and oversees countrywide structures of the Movement.” However, to make the secretariat a large government establishment was not necessary from the beginning and now we are facing the consequences. Is it possible that you are now saying that a large government establishment should go and prepare the public to come to terms with its own burial?  

It is not possible and you are even going further to suggest that we, “Provide an opportunity to the National Conference of the Movement to make provision for the retirement benefits for its leaders and staff, and placement to other sectors of the Public Service.” How does one enter the Public Service? Is it not on the basis of individual application? Each individual must apply to the Public Service. You do not make large placements to sectors of the Public Service. 

Which law will you be using to move the entire flock from the Movement Secretariat to the Public Service? These people should be able to enter Public Service or find other forms of employment on their own. Did you ever prepare placement for the UPC Secretariat when the Movement System was adopted? They had to find their own accommodation. Why are we burdening this country to place these fossils –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwondha, can you explain to me what a fossil is and whether it is a human being? Is your language parliamentary?

MR MWONDHA: A fossil is an antiquity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwondha, can you please withdraw that statement if you are referring to human beings?  

MR MWONDHA: The people of Uganda have voted to adopt a multi-party system in preference to fossils.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Mwondha, who are you calling fossils in this country?  

MR MWONDHA: Madam Speaker, you have made it abundantly clear. I withdraw the statement. Now in the papers today we are seeing that Kasirye Gwanga is coming back to the Army, possibly to replace Kakooza Mutale.  

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The honourable minister has furnished us with a statement that he presented and read very well. Hon. Mwondha, who is holding the Floor, is talking about reports in newspapers and is going ahead to give us his imaginations and speculations. Given the limited time we have to handle the Budget and the fact that the minister’s statement was very specific, is the honourable colleague in order to debate the way he is?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members I told you in the beginning that this document is for information. The Bills are coming here and you will have an opportunity to debate them. Hon. Mwondha you are anticipating and thereby operating against rule 60.

MR MWONDHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. However, that is the manner of debate and I feel that if I do not draw the wide attention of the House to the issues that face them I will be failing in my duty. One of the issues facing us that we discussed for a long time in this House was the Kalangala Action Plan that is going to affect the transition. If we are discussing a paper from the minister regarding transition, we must be sure that everything concerning Kalangala Action Plan has been taken care of. 

When I say that Kasirye Gwanga’s return to the Army is suspicious, I am just drawing the attention of the House to it. Let me also say that one of the issues that should have attracted the attention of the minister is the code of conduct for political parties. That must be agreed upon in time so that when parties start operation, they know how to relate to each other. However, this has not been mentioned here. 

The Political Parties Act is slightly different from the code of conduct and probably that is where the issue raised by hon. Awori of who is taking part in this transition comes in? As parties we should sit with government and agree on the way forward. It should not be a role for government alone after all this government has been the one campaigning against parties. The one thing that made me happy about the referendum is that for once His Excellency President Museveni was also a Multi-partyist after having fought against them for 20 years. I thank you.

4.28
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Great scholars have said that government can make laws but if there is no will in the heart of man to live according to the norms and morals that he or she found, the laws will rust on the shelves. 

Madam Speaker that can be taken to be Ekanya’s saying as we move from Movement to Multi-party system. What I am attempting to say is that the Attorney-General’s statement is short in terms of legal interpretation. The Constitution is very clear in Article 74(1), which talks about referendum for purposes of changing political system. As we are all aware, the people of Uganda on 28 July 2005, by 92 percent, voted in favour of change of political system. Therefore, the legal method of representing the implications of the results should have been that the people of Uganda voted to change the political system. 

Therefore, the minister should have stated the results of each side, how many voters took part, what the percentage was on each side, from what and to what we were changing. I do not want to use the words “full of fraud” but may I add that the question that was used by Electoral Commission to organize the last referendum was not clear and explicit according to the resolution of Parliament? The question was, “Do you agree to allow those who want to join different organisations to do so?” The Constitution is very clear in Article 69 that says that the people of Uganda will decide what system they will be ruled under. The Constitution talks of two systems, the Movement political system and the Multi-party system. Those who want the Movement system can vote for it and likewise those who want the Multi-party system can vote for it. 

However, some people have described the last referendum as fraudulent because the question was not talking about systeMs If you say the “yes” side got 92 percent of the total votes, what was the “yes” side and what was the “no” side? This is because the question was about organisations. It did not mention the Movement political system or the Multi-party political system as per the resolution that was passed by this Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, what do we really need to note this? Should we leave it in the record for our grand children or for the world to notice yet we have learned lawyers in this country? You are one of the respected lawyers in this country. Will you allow fraud to continue like this in broad daylight? This is because it conflicts with the resolution of Parliament, the Referendum Act and the Constitution. Why do we accept this? I did some investigations and discovered that the Electoral Commission was having difficulty presenting a report because the question totally fell short of the constitutional provisions. 

I would like to challenge the Attorney-General to put it on record that the question that was framed by the Electoral Commission was totally in conformity with the Constitution and the resolution of Parliament and that the manner you have used to make your statement here without stating the number of votes attained on either side and what percentages were got was the right one. 

Madam Speaker, I do not want to talk much and I know that one cannot go to court and change much since sometimes, with all due respect, the courts also have their legal technicalities while handling these issues. The people of this country want to move forward and we are calling upon government to be honest. We can sit here and make laws but if there is no honesty in the hearts of men and women it will all be a waste of time. I want to end here by calling upon government to be honest and the Attorney-General to come out honestly and put this on record for the sake of our grand children. Thank you and may God bless Uganda.

4.30
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, let me also start on this note of the Minister’s statement that the people of Uganda voted 92.5 percent in favour of changing the political system.  You know very well that we took a lot of time in this House to pass this law of the referendum. It would have been implicit and necessary for the Minister to have formally brought the result of the referendum, laid it before Parliament and that report could have gone on the record of Parliament and we would have debated it.  

However, it borders on deception for the Minister to come here and say that – as Madam Speaker and honourable members are aware the people of Uganda on the 28 July 2005 by 92.5 Parliament voted in favour.  

Now as my colleagues have already said, this is absolutely wrong. It was not 25 million Ugandans who voted, neither was it those who were registered.  What we want on record here is, what was the result of the referendum?  How many people of Uganda voted, those who were on the “yes” side and those who were on the “No” side?  We voted a lot of money in this Parliament to have that referendum carried out and for this Parliament to be denied the opportunity formally to know the result of that referendum, and even to debate it is totally unacceptable.  

I would like, Madam Speaker, since the Minister has brought your name here that, Madam Speaker, you are aware. I would like you to tell the Minister that you are aware that the Minister should actually formally lay before Parliament this report of the referendum without further delay, and that this Parliament should be given an opportunity to debate that report, because the Minister cannot just assume that this house is aware.  

Madam Speaker, of all people, you are aware. I know you are informed by the Minister formally outside this House, but I would have known if you are informed about it formally in this House.

Secondly, it is in the interest of this House and of the country as a whole that the transition should be smooth and peaceful.  And really I want this Parliament to participate fully to ensure that the transition from Movement to multiparty system is smooth and peaceful for the good of this country, politically, socially, economically and in whatever way you think of.  

However, if you look at page 4, the Minister seems to reduce the smooth transition to merely the Movement Secretariat.  If you look at page 4, the Minister is saying in the first paragraph on top, the last sentence, “Therefore, there will be a period of co-existence of the two systems in the run up to the elections. It goes on to say, “The Minister may with the approval of Parliament” and so on.  And it goes on, “This is necessary because the secretariat is a large Government establishment with a wide range of public assets” and so on.  

Mr Minister, the transition is simply not the Movement Secretariat, the transition is movement from one system to another system. Therefore, you are talking of issues of the state; you are talking of matters of governance in which you are changing the mode and the modality of governance from one to another. It is not just a matter of personalities in the Movement Secretariat.  This is what I would love to see that the Minister should bear in mind and the country when you are looking at the smooth and peaceful transition period.  

You know we who are involved in the transition from the President to Parliament and downward should change our attitudes completely.  You know we are at the moment living in this house of the Movement and therefore, we are beginning to take strides or steps towards another system.  Therefore, one of the things it calls is total change of our attitudes and language. 

We must prepare the people of Uganda because for the last 20 years you know what you have been telling the people of Uganda about political parties.  It is you and me now to prepare the minds and attitudes of these people that we are leaving this institution of the movement into the other institution and that, that institution which possibly some of us have had a terribly negative attitude about is not as bad as we have told you.  So it is a complete change of attitude.

The second one is reconciliatory.  I have not seen in this statement the issue of our brothers and sisters who are in exile?  Some of these people were forced out; others went on their own.  Now, we are moving from Movement to Multiparty system. We may have to extent a lot of hand of friendship and reconciliation.  

I am happy I am hearing from the Frontbench that they are going to do that in the name of Professor Kiwanuka.  If this is true, then the Government may come even with the law on amnesty, the law on forgiveness, the law on reconciliation, the law of saying, well, we in Uganda since independence have seen these terrible things happening. Is it possible for us to start afresh, to forgive and say, those of you who are in exile for whatever reasons, it happened, please come back. This is one of the things I would like to say.

MR KAKOOZA:  Thank you, honourable member, for giving me the way.  At least one of the laws, which have been forwarded by Government and the East African Customs Union- any member with the Finance Act here, we passed it- one is exempted when he is coming back in Uganda to have a vehicle free of charge, his property and everything.  I think that is a beginning, which shows that the Government is really creating friendship to those who want to come back to Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please conclude.

MR ATUBO:  Thank you very much.  I would also like to see this extended to, if possible, other issues including political crimes.  Another thing is, at what stage are you going to involve political parties in the law making?  

Honourable Minister, the Attorney-General and the Prime Minister, I would not like you just to introduce these laws in the House, a House which is basically a Movement house, a Movement Parliament and possibly you have a self interest in the making of that law. I would love to see you actively involving political parties in some of these laws on the transition.

Finally, I would like to see that you dismantle totally all those institutions, which were created to support the Movement Political System, as a system not as a state.  You have agreed to dismantle one called the Movement Secretariat. 

I would like you to dismantle others, which may still be a hindrance to the multi-party political system.  I would also like to see you demilitarise. This is very important; you must demilitarize the politics of this country.  The Movement came to power using the gun; it has had a military wing of its movement.  The time has come if you want us really to go into a peaceful and smooth multi-party political system in which political parties are purely civilian, not military, for you to demilitarize the Movement Political System.  

Even individuals who had failed to get power using the civilian system and had gone to the bush and picked up guns, those people if they are retained within the Movement System, they may still be a danger to the future of this country in the political system.  

I am happy with the President retiring Kakooza Mutale and others. There are many others like Kakooza Mutale by the way in the system. I would like most of them, those generals, some of them are generals, some of them are very high ranking people, they are not good for the future of the Multi-Party political system. 

I would like to see more of the Kakooza Mutale’s retired from the army so that when we go into the field to campaign for the smooth transition, we know that I am campaigning for a colleague in the Movement System who is not a militarised politicians but a civilian with whom I am going to compete on equal foundation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, this statement came in just to update you and we are – yes, business for today is Budget, it is not these things.  So, you can continue pondering over this matter and when the bill comes, you can improve on it.  Yes, for now I want the Minister to respond and we go back to our business. 

4.44
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi):  Madam Speaker, Article 61 of the Constitution reads, “The Electoral Commission shall have the following functions- I refer to (d) to ascertain, publish and declare in writing under its seal the results of the elections and referenda.”  Therefore, the Electoral Commission has performed this function. 

I wonder why the Minister should be asked to table the results here.  The Electoral Commission has already done this. Hon. Omara Atubo wondered whether the Speaker was aware. It is common knowledge that the Electoral commission has declared the results of the elections.  So, I want to submit that unless honourable members would like to amend Article 61 of the Constitution in a very abnormal manner, it is not necessary for the learned Attorney General to repeat what the Commission has done in fulfilment of Article 61. I thank you.

4.45
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I thank you and I would like to thank my honourable colleagues for their contribution. May I amend the second line of my statement after “percent”. Please add, “of those who participated,” that is what I said actually, but it does not appear in the text. So let us enter it. Thank you.

Now the question of lessons, let me undertake to table the report of the Electoral Commission on the referendum. I think when I have tabled these issues can be taken up.  Well, I do not agree that transition and handover are the same thing. 

Please, hon. Aggrey Awori is not here, but the impression he gave was that you have to hand over now. No, there is a system in place; there is a Government on the basis of that system. These 92.5 percent of those who participated in the referendum said we should open up and you do not just open anyhow. No, you have to do it in an orderly manner. I am here to state that it is going to be done to give you a work frame under which it is going to be done.  There must be a transition from one system to the next and we should distinguish between transition and handing over Government power.

It is actually necessary for the very people who are giving a different philosophy, they are the people best situated to go and inform the country that we have changed our thinking.  Oh, yes, otherwise I cannot see how it works; the best person to clear the record is that one who has been de-campaigning the opposite system.

What surprises me when we are talking about this, is that it is the Movement Government which decided that political space be opened up, and it is the Movement Government which said the people of Uganda should be asked to approve this. The Government campaigned massively for a yes Vote. What surprises me is that some members of the very opposition de-campaigned the referendum; not only did they de-campaign the very idea, they even told voters to stay away. Now who is being honest?

Hon. Ekanya Geoffrey when you ask that Government should be honest, who is being honest? Actually it is the Government that is being honest. How can you be a member of a political party, they are telling the people of Uganda to sanction the opening up of political space and then you stand up and you say, “Do not go.” 

I think the Government was honest throughout this exercise. To stand up here and accuse us of dishonesty, what is it that we did not do as Government?  You are saying, you know Government should be honest and call upon everybody to be honest, especially in light of the duplicity of a person saying, “I am a member of a political party”, and then standing up and saying people do not go to Vote.  How can you disenfranchise your own voters? This is terrible! Fortunately, that one is not on record.

I did not say that I was helpless to deal with the Electoral Commission.  I came here, what I remember- I do not have the Hansard before me but people were almost asking me to direct the Electoral Commission to do a, b, c. I said under the Constitution the Minister does not have power to direct the Electoral Commission.  But I obtained answers from them and produced them here. I have some supervisory role definitely but directing the Electoral Commission is unconstitutional.   

Let us hope that when Government creates opportunities for all stakeholders to participate in matters of transition, we will not have the same people who are demanding this right to participate staying away.  There is this culture of staying away. I hope that on this occasion this culture will not be practiced in matters of transition.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICE.

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Okumu-Ringa): Madam Speaker, the report for the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government is ready and has been distributed and the Chairperson of the committee is around, he should be coming in any time.  We are ready to proceed, Madam Speaker, Thank you. 

MR HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I was proposing that social services take on. Our report is ready for circulation –(Interjection)- I was moving to the Minister of Public Service but now that hon. Okumu-Ringa has been overtaken by the chairperson, let us hear from him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, all of you will be given an opportunity to be heard.

MRS MEHANGYE:	Madam Speaker, I do not have a report. I understand some reports were distributed.  Thank you very much.  

4.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Ignatius Besisira): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Article 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution and provisions of Rules of Procedure 124 and 154 of Parliament mandate the committee to: - 
1. 	Examine and comment on policy matters affecting ministries and the departments under its jurisdiction; and 

2. 	Discuss and review the Government’s recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them.  

In line with this mandate, I now have the pleasure of presenting to the House’s consideration and adoption of the report of the committee in respect of the policy statements and budgetary provisions for fiscal year 2005/2006 covering the following votes: Vote 005- Ministry of Public Service, Vote 011- Ministry of Local Government, Vote 146- the Public Service Commission, Vote 147- the Local Government Finance Commission, Vote 501 up to 764- these are votes of Local Governments of Uganda.  

The committee recognises and appreciates the value input into the discussions of respective policy statements by the honourable ministers and their technical teams, officials of Local Government Finance Commission, the Public Service Commission and those whose opinions in one way or another enriched our discussions.  

For purposes of saving on time, I will not go through some of these-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you do not have to read everything.

MR BESISIRA: Method of work: We considered the policy statements, those activities, which were planned by the Ministry. They are in the Ministerial Policy Statements. I hope members read them.  

Then we go to the planned activities for 2004/2005; these are there on page 4.  There is money that was appropriated in the 2004/2005 budget and what was availed.  

I would like to go on the achievements of this Ministry of Public Service for the fiscal year 2004/2005.  Specific achievements registered are as follows: - 
a)	Salary circulars were issued to reflect the pay increases for fiscal year 2004/2005. 
b) 	The payrolls for Line Ministries in 25 Local Governments were monitored, 
c) 	A strategy for converting the present pension scheme to a contributory scheme was developed and submitted to Cabinet for consideration. 
d) 	The restructuring report of the Uganda Police Force was also produced. 
e) The structuring report setting up the Co-operative department in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry was also produced. 
f) 	A report reviewing the pensions management system was produced. 
h) 	The reorganization of Kampala City Council was approved and the new organizational structure is due for implementation as with other local governments. 
i) 	Customisation of model structures to the specific needs of each local government was completed. 
J) 	Nine out of the targeted 12 Central Government institutions were inspected. 
k) 	Eight of the targeted 10 Local Government institutions were inspected. 
l) 	Payroll inspection for primary schools in Mukono and Mubende districts were carried out.  
m) 	The search room at the national archives at Entebbe was re-organized.  
n) 	The technical support on records management was provided to 11 out of the 12 central governments and four local governments.

On pending or ongoing activities and programmes for the 2004/2005: The committee was informed that all the pending activities and programmes were integrated in the 2005/2006 planned activities.  

The planned activities for financial year 2005/2006: This Ministry’s recurrent activities are shown, I do not know if Madam Speaker, I have to go through all of them.  They are there, the recurrent activities, the planned development and capital activities and the projects/other programmes.

I would like to go to page 29.  These are committee observations and recommendations. 

It was observed that the Government was not adequately addressing matters pertaining to compensation and payment of terminal benefits to retired civil servants or what we call senior civil servants. The overall figure due to pensioners and former employees of the defunct East African Community continues to grow.

Delays in processing claims were also noted as a result of the ministry’s delay to customize the computer software. What we mean here is that the computers of the ministry are able to know someone when he is 60 years of age and delete him.  But they have not been customized so that when someone is 60, he is removed from one payroll and taken to the pension payroll. This is what we are urging the ministry to do. So that software should be customized immediately someone is 60 years old, from the usual payroll to pension payroll and all the gratuities calculated alongside so that these senior citizens do not come and queue in Wandegeya every time they have come to claim their money.

It was also noted that offsetting the pension arrears due to retired civil servant or senior citizens as pension is a constitutional right enshrined in objective 14(b) of the objectives and directive principles of state policy and article 254 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

The committee therefore recommends as follows. Government should consider using promissory notes to secure a loan or grant to offset all the outstanding pension claiMs (Applause)

Another recommendation is that the ministry should implement the contributory scheme for both public servants and Members of Parliament as soon as consultations are concluded.

The ministry should harmonize the liaison between the human resource and compensation departments to ensure that every civil servant who is struck off the payroll accesses the pension roll on retirement.  The funds availed in this years’ budget should be used to compensate gratuity claims which have been outstanding for a long time.  The procedure for payments should be streamlined.

The committee notes that although it has been the recommendation for years that His Excellency the Vice President gets an official residence, no serious effort has been put in to conclude the procurement or construction of a residence for His Excellency the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda.  

The ministry reported to the committee that the ministry would commit funds to procure a residence for His Excellency, the Vice President at Munyonyo.

It was noted that the continued failure to establish a national records and archives centre and its structures puts the country, especially Government, in a critical situation and in danger of losing its records although records through destruction or poor management. It is therefore, recommended that Government initiates the establishment of a full-fledged national records and archives centre as per the requirement of the National Records and Archives Act, 2000.  

It was noted that several ministries and departments continue to spend substantial amounts of money in rent payments in the absence of their own office structures or office accommodation of complexes. It is, therefore recommended that the ministry and the President’s office decide on a cost effective policy to enhance the establishment of homes for each ministry and department as offices.  The ministry should carry out a cost benefit analysis on the idea of Government building their own offices instead of renting within this financial year and recommend possible action.

It was noted that not much attention is being paid to in- service training to promote the competence of civil servants.  Institutions such as Uganda Management Institute that used to provide such training have been turned into commercial entities. It is therefore recommended that this be revamped.

Ministry of Local Government

I now move to Ministry of Local Government.  The recurrent activities for the financial year 2004/2005, there are very many. The money that had been appropriated and what was given is also shown on page 13.  I would like to invite honourable members on the achievements of the sector during the fiscal year 2004/2005 on page 13. 

The major achievements during this year were a Joint Annual Review of Decentralization: This was carried out in November 2004 with the objective of assessing the implementation of the decentralization policy after 10 years.

Annual assessment of local governments

A comprehensive assessment of all local governments was undertaken. As a result, a number of performance enhancement measures, including the rewards/sanctions system, capacity building, mentoring and others are being implemented.

Inspection, support and monitoring of local governments

This was the core function of the ministry in a bid to enforce compliance with national policies, laws and regulations.

Local Governments Procurement

A bill was developed and presented to Parliament to perform and consolidate procurement in local governments and it is before the committee.

Restructuring of local governments

The new model structures were disseminated to local governments to choose from. The process of implementing the new structures is currently ongoing.

Urban management

Five trading centres or urban areas were upgraded into town councils. These are Budaka in Palisa, Kagadi in Kibaale, Kihihi in Kanungu, Malaba in Tororo and Nansana in Wakiso. The new town councils took effect at the beginning of this financial year.

Capacity Building for Local Management

The National Capacity Building policy for local governments has been disseminated across all local governments.  Furthermore, in a bid to harmonize capacity building interventions and initiatives for local governments, the 29 generic modules covering the spectrum of local government functions was rolled out to all local governments across the country.

The Local Government Information System

The computerized database system (LoGics/LoGFIAS) to facilitate local decision making, and a better flow of information within local governments was rolled out to 20 higher local governments.  To date, the LoGICS has been introduced in 50 local governments. 

Participatory planning

To harmonize participatory planning guide for lower local governments and councils which provides an enabling framework for community based planning, was rolled out to 16 local governments.

Financial Management and Accountability

Progress was registered in the areas of financial management and accountability.  To date over 95 per cent of the local governments have in conformity with Section 85 of the Local Government Act, produced and submitted statements of final accounts for fiscal year 2003/2004 to the Auditor General.  Considering what was obtaining six years ago, this is a phenomenal achievement.

Strengthening the Legal Framework for Decentralization

The Constitution was amended in a bid to strengthen the local government system and the decentralization policy.  Besides, the ministry developed a bill to amend the Local Government Act. 

There are pending or ongoing activities for the year 2004/2005, which include new structures for local governments.  Support will be given to local governments during the implementation of the new structures.

New procurement regulations will be developed and introduced.  

The Local Government (Rating) Act will be enforced in all local governments.  Madam Speaker, you are aware it was passed by this House.

The Local councils Courts Bill, when passed, will address the weaknesses in the Executive Committees, (Judicial Powers) Act (Cap.8) to promote the dispensation of local justice.

Madam Speaker, 13 new districts have come into force while seven others are expected to become effective in the fiscal year 2006/2007.  There should be a gradual improvement in service delivery for otherwise marginalized communities.

Fiscal Decentralization Strategy

Further progress will be realized and the Fiscal Decentralization Strategy will be introduced to lower local governments in the course of fiscal year 2005/2006.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the purpose of the Hansard, maybe you need to tell us the full name, because somebody reading this ten years from today will not know what FDS is.

MR BESISIRA: It is Fiscal Decentralization Strategy; it is not FDC, it is FDS.  

There are planned activities for the fiscal year 2005/2006 which include: - 
a) 	Continuing to provide technical and political guidance to Local Governments.  
b) 	Provision of technical support and guidance to Local Governments in the implementation of the new structures. 
c) 	Assist local governments to resolve operational conflicts that may negatively impact on the implementation of the decentralization policy.  
d) 	Mentoring and training of additional Local government technical and elected officials.
e) 	Continued provision of technical guidance and support in urban development planning and management for local governments.
f) 	Strengthening the implementation of Result Oriented Management in local governments.
g) 	Policy advocacy and coordination.
h) 	Inspection of local governments for compliance to laws, regulations, procedures and guidelines, inspection and monitoring of projects and programmes implemented by local governments, inspection and monitoring of PAF activities and utilization of funding by the local governments.  
i) 	Roll-out manuals and guidelines developed in the various functional areas of Local Governments operations.
j) 	Implementation of the capacity building plans that have been developed by the respective local governments.
k) 	Continued arbitration or conflict resolution in local governments.
i) 	Conduct a National Assessment of local governments.
m) 	Continue to implement the key recommendations of the Joint Annual Review of Decentralization held in November 2004.
n) 	Conduct the 2005 Joint Annual Review of Decentralization.
o) 	Implement reforms in the local government procurement processes once the relevant laws on orientation of new councillors following the local council elections in 2006.

Development Activities

Relocation and resettlement of Jua Kalis.  Two billion shillings has been earmarked to locate them to Nalukolongo.  If successful, this will be replicated to other districts.

Government has decided to redevelop Naguru-Nakawa Housing Estate, which was built in the 1950s into new human settlements with modern facilities and amenities.  Private developers or investors will be invited to develop the estate because Government does not have the resources to fund a project of this magnitude.  

In doing this, high-rise flats will be constructed for purposes of resettling the sitting tenants on the two housing estates and the rest of the area will be developed satellite city with commercial centres and recreation facilities. Construction will commence in November/December this year and the project is expected to take about three years to complete.

It is estimated that the developer/investor will invest about US$100 million in the project and will recover this money by selling the properties through various mortgage schemes and financial institutions.

It is recommended that because of internal capacity constraints within the relevant ministries, a team of consultants should be contracted to supervise this project in order to ensure the developer executives the project according to the re-development plan and specifications.  The consultants shall be paid consultancy fees and for this purpose, the Ministry of Local Government will require Ugshs 500 million for this financial year.

There are projects that are ongoing under the Ministry of Local Government, these are: Local Government Development Programme, District Development Programme, Area Based Agricultural Modernization Programme and Agricultural Sector Programme Support.  

I want to move to 3.9, which is Local Government Finance Commission.  Their key programmes and activities for fiscal year 2004/2005. The monies that were appropriated and they have got how much money was appropriated and how much was given.  They got I think 100 per cent of all the money that had been budgeted for this Commission.

I am on 3.9.5 – Planned output/ priorities for fiscal year 2005/2006.  Madam Speaker, I do not know if I have to read through all them.  They are many.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

MR BESISIRA: Madam Speaker, I want to move to the observations and recommendations from my committee.

Value for money audit.
A specific format for presenting “value for money” has never been provided to ministries by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should urgently design the form.  

The Ugshs 30 billion meant for compensation for loss of Graduated Tax to the local governments will not be realized since Ugshs 7.3 billion is being diverted to the payment of local government political leaders. Ugshs 2.7 billion is to be diverted as a start-up fund for new districts and the balance to be diverted to meet the wage bill of these other districts.  As a result, local governments will not meet the 10 per cent co-funding requirement for donor projects as well as failing to remit the 65 per cent due to lower local governments, which may put to a hold their operations.

It was noted that local revenue continues to decline in all local governments.  

It is recommended that all the funds meant for compensating local governments should be granted to local governments.  

Remuneration of Local Government political leaders

In the budget Cabinet took a decision to implement this with funds of Ugshs 12 billion from the consolidated fund.  It is absurd to note that the positions continue to shift with the funds being earmarked for Graduated Tax compensation.  It is, therefore, recommended that the Ministry of Finance implement the Cabinet decision.

Creation of new districts

At the time of considering the policy statement, the funds for six of the 13 new districts had not yet been provided for.  It is recommended that they be considered.  But, by this afternoon they had provided for them, only 13 districts have been provided for and they are in the budget.

Start-up capital for newly created Town Councils

The committee was informed that Cabinet had approved the creation of these Town Councils as I have said before, and that each of the Town Councils requires Ugshs 41 million as a start-up capital.  Capacity for the new Town Councils and districts should be enhanced and all the budgeted funds availed.

Presidential pledges

Ugshs 8.6 billion, which have not been provided for in the budget for financial year 2005/2006.  It is recommended that these funds be availed.

Restructuring of local governments
 
Following irregularities in implementing the restructuring exercise, the Public Service Commission suspended the exercise pending the issuance of guidelines.  It is recommended that the exercise be expedited so that local governments can begin normal operations.

Funds returned to the Treasury from insurgency area especially the North. 
It was noted that funds voted for insurgency areas are returned at the end of every financial year.  However, these funds are usually not reflected in the subsequent budget.  It is, therefore, recommended that such funds be returned to these areas as special grants for the following financial year.

Local Government inspections

As a result of being under funded and understaffed, the Inspectorate Department of the Ministry operates below the required capacity and yet it undertakes the inspection of local government, which take a third of the national budget.  It is, therefore, recommended that Government increase on the staffing and funding to enable this Inspectorate team in the Ministry to carry out its duties effectively.

The Regional Tier

Ugshs 3.7 billion to operationalise the regional tier has been availed.  However, these funds cannot be utilised, as the structures are not yet in place. We are saying that the Minister should find a way of putting a structure in place. So see how these funds will be utilized.  

It was noted that standards and performance indicators, which form the criteria for grants to local governments, have not yet been developed by the line ministries except for a few components of SFG and health units at sub-counties. Line ministries are therefore encouraged or urged to develop these so that the services they provide can be costed.

It was noted that physical planning is a local government function as we said before, but it is currently under the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment.  The committee, therefore, reiterates its previous recommendation as we recommended when we were presenting the bill on Property Tax, that the function be transferred to the Ministry of Local Government to ensure harmonized planning in local governments.  

The Public Service Commission

I am moving to Public Service Commission:  They have recurrent activities for financial year 2004/2005, development activities for financial year 2004/2005, the money that they spent. They had many achievements, as you will realize, Madam Speaker and honourable members in 4.5.  they are many and they have got ongoing policies and programmes in 4.6 and in 4.7 they have got recurrent activities, which is mainly their mandate.  

I would like to urge the House to turn to 4.8 on observations and recommendations on the Public Service Commission.

a)	It was noted that the legal framework for the Commission, the Public Service Commission Bill was developed and copies availed to the Commission for review. 
 
	Being the oldest constitutional Commission, it is absurd to note that the commission has not yet been regularized through the enactment of the Public Service Commission Act and its independence and operations have therefore not yet been streamlined.  We hence recommend that the Public Service Commission be brought to Parliament preferably before the next budget.

b) 	It was observed that Article 166(1) compels the Commission to guide and coordinate the work of District Service Commissions.  However, some District Service Commissions abrogate the set standards on rules, procedures and regulations developed by the Public Service Commission to guide their work.  It is, therefore, recommended that the various laws be studied with a view to amending them in respect of empowering the Commission.

c) 	It was noted that a number of uncoordinated capacity building programmes in districts are being developed by Government agencies, including the Commission. If these are not harmonized, it is possible that they shall lead to wastage of funds. We are hence calling for a harmonization of these capacity building programmes in all ministries in this country.  

d) 	Following last year’s recommendations, note was taken that the Commission has dealt with a considerable number of the outstanding cases, but some others have not yet been completed.  The Commission is urged to expedite its actions to conclude the remaining cases.

I would like to turn to the budgetary provisions before the Ministry of Public Service, the Ministry of Local Government, the Public Service Commission and Local Government Finance Commission.  

I beg to move that the House considers and approves the committee’s report together with the respective budgets for the financial year 2005/2006 covering: Vote 005- Ministry of Public Service.  Recurrent expenditure- 3,523,669,000 – I am reading what I have corrected. I request members to correct what they have. What I am reading here is what will be passed – Recurrent Expenditure is- Ugshs 3,523,669,000.  

What appears as projects is what is the developments budget for the Ministry of Public Service, which is Ugshs 8,855,935,000. We are leaving because these are statutory and they fall under other votes.

Vote 011- Ministry of Local Government. Recurrent expenditure is Ugshs 12,429,679,000 and the development expenditure for Ministry of Local Government is Ugshs 33,292,994,000.  Madam Speaker as you will note there is required additional funding for the Ministry of Local Government as has been explained in 2:1, 2:2 and 2:3. I hope the House will consider them and see how best we can get these funds.

I want to move to vote 126- Public Service Commission.  Recurrent expenditure for Public Service Commission is Ugshs 2,225,315,000 and the development expenditure for Public Service Commission is Ugshs 277,500,000.  

Vote 147- Local Government Finance Commission: The recurrent expenditure is Ugshs 1,242,480,000 and the development expenditure is 117,500,000.  

We have votes 501– 764, which are votes for local governments; the details are attached. They give us a total under this vote of – Madam Speaker, you know people have been changing figures and the new districts that come on board. So I am being advised that the grand total for local governments, we shall provide it at a later opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have said that we received the corrigendum yesterday, which was different from the figures you had in the statements.  So, we shall do all the figures at the same time so do not worry now about the figures.

MR BESISIRA: Okay, Madam Speaker.  The Ministry had provided for all the 13 new districts. All the 13 new districts are provided for and all the municipalities have got money for recurrent expenditure and development expenditure.  Madam Speaker, I beg to report.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson.  Honourable members, I have perused the report and I have established that 10 members out of 25 appended their signatures to the report. Therefore, it is eligible for debate.  

5.34
REV. DR KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru county South, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, I have a few points for clarification.  The first one is on the directives, which are given to ministries to have more workers or employers to be employed in various sections.  

In our Sessional Committee I have noticed that some ministries have a problem with shortfalls and when you ask what is happening there does not seem to be a good harmonization between the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance consequently some ministries do experience these shortfalls.  

I do not know what solution the Ministry of Public Service in this area – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have not mentioned your committee and the ministries.  If you want the Minister to answer, you mention the ministries that are of concern to you and where you have discovered that problem so that they can answer.  

REV. SSEMPANGI: I have discovered that the Ministry of Judiciary more especially because I serve on the Ministry of Local Government Committee –(Interruptions) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is right, he says that in his committee they have established that some ministries have a problem with staffing. So they want the Minister to explain why some ministries do not have adequate staff.  I asked you, can you name the ministries so that they can respond?

REV. SSEMPANGI: Judiciary; that could be the same as other ministries where you exercise shortfalls. 

Another clarification that I am seeking for: I appreciate the recommendations of the committee and I want to thank them for the good work being done and well presented. But on the question of ministries having offices, there is this concept of the booths, under which ministry does it fall?  Is it under the Ministry of Public Service or under the Ministry of Finance to provide funds for offices with different ministries?  Is there any money that is earmarked for the various ministries to have their offices because it is very expensive and Government spends so much money on rent?

In some ministries we found that the money spent in one year could actually be enough to provide land to put their own offices.

Another clarification is on the reconstructing exercise.  Now we are told that this restructuring in districts has been cold, because there were no sufficient guidelines.  In Kayunga this has brought a lot of confusion, because already people have been stopped from work and are they going to be recalled those who have been retired?  So, what happens between now and when the guidelines are being provided? What happens, because it is a real concern of those who have been retired, they go to the districts and hang in the air?  It would be very good to get from the Local Government the clarification for this and for the various districts where the exercise had already taken place. Those are the areas of clarification I wanted.

5.39
MR GEORGE WOPUWA (Bubulo County East, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for the report. I just wanted to note that on page 10 of the report the committee recommends the implementation of a contributory scheme of both Public Service and Members of Parliament.  I want to seek a clarification, because this appears to be a contradiction from the pension. We approved in the constitutional amendment that Members of Parliament shall be entitled to emoluments and pensions.  These appear to be a different approach.  

I also want to appreciate the question of the new districts. But I wanted to urge the ministry to speed up the operationalisation, because up to now many districts have not got Accounting Officers. This is going to delay the disbursement of funds and the key staff have not been posted and yet it is one month after.  It means that we are ending the first quarter and the districts have not touched even their first disbursement of funds.  

I also want to mention something on restructuring which was done.  When the restructuring was being done we had one district in some areas. We now have two districts or four like in Mbarara.  What is the position of the results of that restructuring in view of the change in the entities, because from one we have moved to four?  But the other underlying factor is that, many of the civil servants who we suspect maybe they have been affected by the restructuring have lost morale and are redundant, because they do not know whether they have the jobs or they do not have the jobs.  Are there arrangements for the immediate terminal benefits?  

Lastly, on the issue of procurement:  Under the guidelines given in the new districts, the statutory bodies in the mother districts ceased to have jurisdiction over the new districts.  Now, we have, for example, the district tender boards, they advertised work, they were in the process of pre-qualifying, but their mandate now does not seem to extend to the new districts.  

We have the procurement committees where the interim executives with the standing committees constitute a procurement committee.  Now, the implication is that, these ones are going to start form point zero so that the procurement process also takes long.  

I wanted to appeal to the ministry responsible to give guidance so that these new districts are able to know how to proceed without having funds remaining unabsorbed at the end of the financial year.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.43
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (Kakuuto County, Rakai):  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like also to thank the committee for the elaborate report they have put across.  I have a few observations and considerations which I would like clarification from both the Ministry and the committee.  

On page 22, observations and recommendations:  The scraping of the Graduated Tax from the local governments, which we did this financial year created a big gap in financing of local governments.  Government has agreed to compensate the loss of Graduated Tax by Ugshs 30 billion.  But according to the local authorities, I think they have a shortfall by almost Ugshs 30 billion. How is Government going to bridge the so many activities, which have been ongoing by the Local Government out of the local revenue, mobilized from this local revenue, which is lost? 

 For instance, currently so many districts have local development funds on their funds. But both sub counties and districts are lacking their contributions towards local development programmes and the quarter is already elapsing, they have not implemented those activities and there is a major, major outcry out there in the local authorities to ensure that Government facilitates local governments to the tune of the revenue they lost.  Could the minister and the committee brief us on what is going to be done?  

Secondly, the aspect of paying the Executive from the centre together with the chairman.  Originally they had stated that the centre will be paying six executive members, but currently according to the communication sent to the districts, it is only three executive members of the district councils who are going to be catered for under the current arrangements.  Could we know how the districts are going to be facilitated to ensure that at least they have the mandatory six Executive members they are supposed to have in the current local government executive composition?

Lastly, the emoluments of the councillors in the local authorities:  For instance, in Rakai District, a councillor has been earning something like Ugshs 300,000 whenever they attend a council, between Ugshs 300,000 as a facilitation of transport. Those who come from maybe Kabula they have a night out.  

But currently, the centre has said every councillor will earn Ugshs 25,000 to attend a council meeting and this has created a loss of motivation.  Actually they are facing a problem, they have already passed their budget, but the problem is that the remittances from the centre are so different, they have to adjust their budgets and they are unable currently to even invite councils to ensure that they adjust their budget. Can I get an explanation as far as revenue mobilization and communication to this matter to streamline governance is concerned?  I thank you very much.

5.46
REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA (Mukono County North, Mukono):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to begin by thanking the committee for this wonderful presentation.  I have about two or three concerns. 

One, beginning with restructuring of local governments:  We have experienced a lot of problems in our district. For example in Mukono we have lost about 530 workers. As I speak some have started petitioning saying that maybe the way the exercise was conducted was either political or it was not done perfectly. 

We have also faced problems with some of the technical officers, drivers of bulldozers, road graders, excavators, wheel loaders and ferries, whom you cannot do away with immediately.  Even if you bring a graduate from Makerere University, he is not going to man this ferry. 

We need a ferry to transport travellers going across to the islands. So we would like to get some assurance from the honourable Minister to know what exactly we are going to do. We also have a problem with some of the officers working with the land office who are handling land titles.  In this situation when they know that they are leaving, they can disappear with some of the land titles of some people. This is a big worry.

Secondly, we thank the Minister of Local Government for the consistent money they continue to send to our districts. However, we lost about Ugshs 500m, which was put to our accounts and it was frozen by the Revenue Authority. As I speak the Ministry of Local Government has not come in to assist us, teachers have not been paid and other workers. This puts our situation in a very bad state if people are not working because of problems from either Local Government or from the ministry. I think the Minister of Local Government needs to intervene.

Lastly, it’s on inspectorate. It is good; it was well developed in this report. But we are urging the ministry to think seriously about it.  A lot of millions and billions of shillings are being sent to our districts, but if we lack inspectors or the inspectorate to come down to trace this money, it becomes a problem.  

It looks bad after some months or years when you send your auditors to make reports when this money has been misused or has been eaten. It does not help our beneficiaries at the grassroots at all.  I would be very grateful if those three are addressed. I thank you.

5.49
MS GRACE TUBWITA (Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for a well-elaborated report and the Ministry for its work.  I have two issues where I need clarification.  

First of all, I would like talk about the restructuring. This restructuring exercise has really caused a lot of problems in the district. I would like to know from the ministry responsible whether there is a time frame put for this restructuring exercise because the more it delays or it drags before the results are out, the more work is paralysed in the district. Some people want to know what will come out of the restructuring. Civil servants do not know their fate. They don’t have morale of working because they think maybe they will not go through the exercise; and even the more it delays, the more it is politicised. Some civil servants think that there are some politicians behind it, that is why it is dragging. 

So, Madam Speaker, I would like the honourable Minister to clarify to me whether there is a time framework because even when it drags they feel there is someone cheating somewhere and some people might be left out.

Secondly, I appreciate the committee report for the proposal they made of changing the fiscal planning department to go under local government.  I think this can be the best way to go because most of the planning is done under local authorities in town councils and urban centres. Most of these town councils lack fiscal planners and I do not think there is any guideline where they are being encouraged to recruit fiscal planners. 

Madam Speaker, you know very well that in this country we are facing a problem of unplanned towns and that is why we are having mushrooming slums coming up throughout the country. I would like to know from the ministry responsible what procedure they are using to make sure that these towns get a fiscal planner, so that we do not get these towns growing haphazardly without being planned very well. I think this would be the best way to run our country. 

Another thing, Madam Speaker, in this country fiscal planning has not been given priority. I think its transfer from the Ministry of Lands would help because the fiscal planner might raise a point, which might not be considered in that ministry. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.57
MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank the Chairperson and members of this committee for a good report.  

I have two major issues: The first one is an appreciation.  I want to use this opportunity on behalf of the 13 newly created districts to appreciate the work of Local Government -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you appreciate also the committee, not Local Government, but the committee as well.

MRS HYUHA: Certainly, Madam Speaker, I appreciate your guidance. I was coming to that but I know there was a lot of paper work by the Ministry of Local Government. But that notwithstanding, I want to appreciate the support of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service and the entire Parliament.  

As we talk right now, I hail from Butaleja district, which is one of them, which was curved out of Tororo. I want to inform this august House that already the interim government has been elected in Butaleja district. I am happy when I look at this report that the new votes have been created for these local governments, which means that money is going to go directly to these newly created districts. I would only wish that the Minister- (Interruption)

MR OCHIENG: Madam Speaker, the clarification I would like to get from you is basing on what the honourable member has just said. She says, she now hails from Butaleja district; we have known her to be from Tororo. It appears there is a missing representation of the Tororo people. We would request to know what is going to happen to Tororo district without a woman member of Parliament. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as far as I am concerned all the Members of Parliament here represent their constituencies until March next year when new ones are elected. So you are responsible for Tororo and Butaleja. 

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, thank you for that clarification.  I want to inform him that in the Sixth Parliament when Busia was created, I continued running Tororo and Busia. I am capable of running both Tororo and Butaleja. But that does not limit me to indicate that this new district, which has been curved out was part of Tororo. 

As an MP who hails originally from this new district, I wish to put on record that people of Butaleja are very happy that Government supported them in order for the new district to be created.

Madam Speaker, I wanted the Minister to clarify when I looked at these new votes, the last schedule attached probably for us to understand the criteria which was used for the allocation, because when we look at others, the figures, especially when you look at the development, what was the rational of these allocations; what is the arithmetic of these allocations?  What did we base on and also the new town councils of these new districts whether their vote is embedded within this allocation?  

Madam Speaker, when I look at page 14, the ministry and the committee are informing us about urban management and the five trading centers which have been upgraded. I am happy to note that Budaka and Malaba are part of them, among others, but I want to make a special request that come next financial year, Busolwe also be upgraded to a town council.  

Lastly, what I want to say, is a question of procedure. A few minutes ago I was indicating and we had earlier on indicated - probably this one would come in future.  

You see when we pass votes of the Local Government and Public Service Committee, before we listen to issues emerging from social services, much of the funds under social services are decentralised.  When you talk of the wage bill of primary school teachers and salaries of health workers in districts, then we pass the Local Government budget, which we are going to discuss under social services, when it comes to voting, the votes directly fall under local governments.  But also issues of management of the wage bill directly fall under the Ministry of Public Service.  So, when we have a crisis probably falling under the Social Services Sector we would have wanted to draw to the attention of Parliament before we make a final decision on voting. 

But we could have discussed this one maybe as chairpersons in our meeting under the Budget Committee and we had thought logically that we would first listen to social services and then later on when we come with the committee responsible for Local Government and Public Service, the line ministers would help us amplify and then we probably make a better decision. This is a question of procedure but maybe specific questions to Public Service –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I have not understood your problem; you want to speak before these other ministries, what are they going to change when they speak after you, can you explain to me again?

MS HYUHA:  Did I get your question, Madam?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter you have said, that you would have wanted your committee to report first before the Ministries of Local Government and Public Service report.

MRS HYUHA: For example, under Education when we discuss the wage bill of primary schools, wage bill of Health Workers, whereas we discuss them under the parent ministries, when it comes to voting, those monies are not voted under Social Services; we vote them under this code which is appended here to the Ministry of Local Government. When we discuss issues of shortage in the wage bill either for primary or secondary school teachers, the rightful Ministry to give us answers is that of Public Service, because they are the controllers.  

For example, when teachers of secondary schools are posted or deployed, those who prepare their salaries are between the CAO and Ministry of Public Service; it is not between the CAO and the Ministry of Education and Sports.  Therefore, our interest in the near future would be that we draw these issues to the attention of Parliament so that by the time we come to discuss a comprehensive report concerning that sector; some of these matters will take a better view of the position.  But some of these matters are already in our report; they will be reflected tomorrow.  Like these votes we are going to pass which are attached here, you will find that the salaries of teachers and health workers at the district level except probably at regional level are voted under here, not in their respective Ministries of Education and Health respectively. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have understood, but maybe that issomething the Budget Committee used to take up because it is a fundamental departure from what has been happening. Perhaps they need to undertake it, is it part of your recommendations, the Budget Committee ought to take that up?

MS HYUHA: You know, this has been my dilemma when I come here at the time of voting - reading figures, I am told by the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, “Do not read these figures, they are going to be read under the Committee of Local Government.” When I raise issues of the wage bill, when we vote these monies of recruitment of primary school teachers and invite the Ministry of Education they say, “No. Whereas we gave you the framework but those who implemented to recruit if there is any balance of money we are not responsible, it is the Ministry of Local Government.”  They do not directly tell us that you voted 200 millions, we recruited so many teachers, so much money was used, after we have discussed the framework the implementers are those two ministries. But in the Budget Committee we had raised it and we had agreed on an arrangement that we would first listen to the report of the Committee of Social Services and then that of Local Government later. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what we can do is to ask the Budget Committee formally to take up this matter, the next budgeting cycle beginning in October.  I think you should start from there so that by the time they come to report in the next Parliament, the Government and the Ministry of Finance will have been engaged in this matter.

MRS HYUHA: For example tomorrow I will draw your attention that we have a big shortfall of the wage bill primary and we are going to pass these figures of Local Government - it is in our report. We are not going to vote on the wage bill of primary school teacher’s salaries under the Ministry of Education, it will come under Vote 056.

MR BESISIRA: Madam Speaker, funds for the wage bill of teachers is not in the vote of Local Government it is not there. The money you see there is money for grants, conditional grants, and equalisation grants that is the money you see. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where are the salaries passing, let us hear from the former CAO?

MS ANGUPALE: Before the CAO answers, there is another clarification related to the wage bill. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tell us and then we go there.

MS ANGUPALE: Madam Speaker, about the salaries of the RDCs, the salaries of RDCs have appeared in the budget of the Local Government, are we going to pass them under this vote, will it not appear again although you stated that they are under presidential? The salaries for RDC’s are on page 31; you stated that the RDCs fund be under President’s office and it is already in this report.  Are we going to pass it in this report or you have just reflected it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Wopuwa, let us go back to education, health workers and their salaries. Let us hear where they pass so that we can assist the Chairman.

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I am not a former CAO but I am here as a Member of Parliament –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but you have some experience; if you have no experience to give us then –(Interruption)

MR BESISIRA: Madam Speaker, the money for primary school teachers comes to a district as a conditional grant.  It is sent to a district on condition that it can only be paid to primary school teachers.  The owner of that money is the Ministry of Education and Sports and if the Chief Administrative Officer or the district council wanted to use that money, they need to get special permission from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development through the Ministry of Education and Sports. So that money does not belong to the Ministry of Local Government but to the Ministry of Education and Sports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But what she is saying is that the vote remains with the Ministry of Local Government and when they have shortages in their sector, they are unable to adjust because they have passed it here already.

MR BESISIRA:  I think the problem there is coordination between the Ministry of Education and Sports and that of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is the Ministry of Education that advises through the Ministry of Public Service on how much money should be sent to them following the staffing they have.  

So even if the money that goes to the Ministry of Local Government for primary teachers is less, the district council can neither change, increase nor reduce it.  The coordination effect is the Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  Local governments are only helping to execute the function, which is delegated to them.

MRS HYUHA:  Madam Speaker, I want to put it clear, I have been a chairperson all these years, I am the one who reads these figures: salaries - Wage Bills for primary and secondary school teachers, medical workers and district community development workers which go under code 056 and right now, even tomorrow, when I read after discussing all these matters, they are not voted under education neither do they control what we have discussed because the disbursement from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development goes directly to districts;  therefore, when it comes to accountability we discuss the modern ties but do not get a direct feed back.  In most cases the Ministry of Education and Sports washes their hands, that whereas they recommended that so much be passed, how it has been utilised and what remained from what was passed, they are not aware.

My report is ready for tomorrow or for today if you give me time; it is not including Wage Bill; it goes as conditional under these votes as attached by the chairperson.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So now hon. Member, are you suggesting that, that conduit does not deliver in full! That conduit of local government does not deliver these salaries? 

MRS HYUHA:  My report will clearly indicate tomorrow that we have a big shortfall of 13 billion in the Wage Bill.  We have a big shortfall in the Wage Bill for secondary, 3.56 billions and it is voted under local government.

MR OKUMU RINGA:  Madam Speaker, I would have ordinarily answered at the very end of the discussion. But to enable us understand issues being raised by hon. Dorothy Hyuha, Chairperson for the Social Services Committee, I would like to make the following statement:

My ministry is responsible for human resource management and for payment of salaries in the service.  Whether one is in the Ministry of Education and Sports, Health or Local Government, the moment the Wage Bill status is established for a given establishment or for a position in place, such a Wage Bill will be made available and my ministry will ensure that those people concerned access their salaries or wages.  

But the issue being raised by the chairperson is more or less an issue of non-availability of resources to be allocated appropriately at the time of passing a budget; and that function is a function for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  So changing the modus operandi or the method of work of Parliament as to which committee reports first and the other one follows really does not matter.  Principally it does not matter.

But if that should be the wish of the Parliamentary Commission under your chairperson, Madam Speaker, then that could be worked out and brought out later. I beg to make this brief statement; the substantive issues we shall answer as we respond to the issues raised by the hon. Members.  Thank you.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to draw to your attention that before we pass these figures of local government, let us be aware that our report, which is coming after this, has serious implications over these figures we are passing.  We are going to pass them less what we expect for the Wage Bill and we shall have a crisis in the near future.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, hon. Members, do not worry about the figures I have repeatedly said since we started this debate we are not handling figures today; let us deal with the principles, we shall have a day when we shall deal with all the figures. Let us have a general debate.

MS ANGUPALE:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to join the rest of my colleagues by thanking the committee for the work well done, particularly when the chairperson stated that the audit report for all decentralised districts were already in the office of the Auditor General. I think the failure of the local government system was due to lack of audit reports getting into the office of the Auditor General in time.

Madam Speaker, I would like to straight away start with page 31. I wanted to get a clarification from the chairperson of the committee and the minister in charge about the salary schedule of the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs).  We are passing a report, which is presented to us with a complete budget of the local government and Public Service; and in this report, the committee has already included the salaries of the RDCs.  How are we going to reflect it under the office of the President, are we not going to duplicate the salary of the RDC?  

I would like to get clear clarification on that because on page 31, political leaders’ salaries which according to the report was got from the 30 billion which was so allocated to counteract against the graduated tax which was withdrawn and then the statutory bodies impounded together with other salaries.  Are we transferring RDCs to Local Government?  Or - I do not know, you need to give me the clarification.

Madam Speaker, in the 2004/2005 financial year implementation of activities on page 12, the committee stated that the work, which was done by the sector, particularly when they lamented on the support on implementation of multi-sectoral programmes and the particular example under local government was under the project of MPA and NAADS.  I would like to caution the committee that PMA/NAADS is a complete sector with full budgetary support.  If local government is going to make support in the implementation of this project, is the sector having a special budget to support that, or it was just an oversight?  I would like that clarification.

Another observation here is under local government, you find after passing of the budget in the mid budgetary implementation programmes like capacity building tends not to exist.  But towards the end of the financial year, right now there is rampant capacity building, rampant workshops even in my district; they are running one workshop after another, day after day and you know that kind of thing!

I would like to support the committee particularly where they have stated that they need to come up with a clear policy on capacity building in local governments. I think it will help us on some of these rampant workshops which seem to be used to account for funds which were not properly utilised but for purposes of Parliament to pass the budgets that exist in the decentralised governments.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to make an observation on page 22.  I would like to join my colleague who really commended the 30 billion, which was earmarked for the local government and it is now diverted.  Following the activities of the decentralised districts and knowing the fact that sub-counties have been contributing, actually 100 percent on graduated tax, and all the local councilors coming to support the implementation of the activities at sub-county level depend on the graduated tax.  That is the 65; I stand to be corrected if the percentage is wrong, 65 percent of the graduated tax, which they retained for the implementation of the sub-county activities.  

Now that the country has abolished the graduated tax, and the sub-counties are still existent, I want to know how the programmes at the sub-counties are going to be operationalised?  Most of the projects are going to come to a standstill because the sub-counties will not be in position to co-fund the donor funds, which are going to be decentralised there.  

I want to cite an example. When we went to most of the sub-counties during our tour of the Health Sector, we found that the Early Child Nutrition Project had stopped construction because the sub-counties failed to co-fund the projects and by that time, graduated tax had not yet abolished.  How are we going solve the problem of co-funding such that the sub-counties and the districts can run?  How are we going to sort out the issue of councilors at the district level not convening council sessions due to lack of funds to facilitate the council transactions?  

I want to get proper clarification because we are going to pass this document, which is going to enable the districts’ work.

Madam Speaker, I want to comment on the issue of funds, which are returned to the Treasury on Page 24 of the report.  It is not only funds from insurgent areas; it is actually funds from all the districts.  As I am talking here, in Local Government Accounts Committee, most districts presented the case that the funds which accumulated as a result of arrears, may be from dead teachers, mostly project funds, because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development makes releases a little bit late towards the end of the financial year for which most of these programmes are planned for.  When they demand that the Ministry of Finance accepts the district to utilise those funds, they are more often than not allowed.  

You find that in other districts, it is over Ug Shs 800 million, others Ug Shs 500 million, which the districts request to utilise for other programmes, or for the programmes, which were planned in line but the districts are being forced to be remit the funds back to the centre.  I do support the committee’s report that such funds should be remitted back to the districts for further implementation of other projects.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to clearly state to this House, how much is being received by the districts as a return fund, not only from the districts which are affected by war but by all the districts in this country.  

Finally, I thank the committee, they have my support because the work is well done and they have made implementation of the local governments activities easier.  Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

6.12
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to join the others to thank the Committee for the report.  But I have a few observations or clarifications to seek, first from Public Service.  When we were looking at the report from the Budget Committee last week, we saw the total arrears were Ug Shs 325 billion.  

I have looked at Vote 005, I do not seem to see anything towards settling even a quarter of that money, and yet when you go to page 10, people especially those of the defunct East African Community still have to be paid their monies and each year they are not paid, the money attracts an interest of about seven to eight percent.  So it is always becoming bigger and bigger.  

I would suggest to the Ministry of Local Government, like they have borrowed from somewhere before, that this type of monies which attract interest be borrowed from somewhere, you clear and then perhaps continue with an interest of 0.007 percent, borrowing could even be from the World Bank.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I do not support that the Department of Physical Planning or that function be transferred from the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment to that of Local Government, because they will be doing two things at ago.  Demanding, looking for money, evaluating and that kind of thing might be very dangerous to the users.  Let the two ministries coordinate, but each ministry should continue doing what they have been doing.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I need to seek clarification from the Ministry of Local Government, concerning the new districts.  I have seen a new district on the appendix, given by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, called explanatory notes to appendix 1, a recurrent expenditure.  The schedule at the back, I see there, Bududa District and the money is allocated as Ugshs 8billion.  I want to know where this district is and if it is an error, I want to know where you got the name Bududa before so that we stay settled.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, before we proceed, can I make a correction that the name should be “Manafwa District” because this is what we officially have here, there is a resolution of Parliament declaring that district in that part of the country as Manafwa District.  So please, kindly make that correction.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.25
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank the committee for the report.  One is, I also want to thank the ministry for the monthly update they give us as Members of Parliament to ease our oversight role.  I want to know from the Minister of Public Service the amount of money involved in the bill, the outstanding pension arrears for the record of this Parliament? 

I have seen on page 10 the committee trying to painfully come up with a way forward to address the pension question; this issue of terminal benefits.  I would want also to know from the Government and the Ministry of Public Service in particular, what do they have in specific terms, a corporate plan to dispose of these outstanding problems?  

I am particularly pained by two categories of civil servants, of course plus others, but these are teachers and soldiers.  Teachers have taught all of us, but at their retirement age they cannot educate their children, it is very painful.  So I would want to see the minister coming up with a corporate plan either in the short, medium or long-term, what do they intend to do in order to dispose of this poisonous situation?

About graduated tax, hon. Kasamba has read out something, but as a rejoinder, there is also some nasty situation that is cropping up among the civil servants; I think they are called the traditional civil servants, the local staff, let alone those who are paid from the center, but there are those from the districts, the majority of whom used to be paid from graduated tax collections plus a top-up from the unconditional grant.  What those people would want to know is whether the Government and the ministry are aware of their plight, they have accumulated arrears down there; no graduated tax, how are they being paid?  I want to know from the minister. 

The other one is about creation of town councils.  It is a welcome development; we are talking about service delivery.  I would want to know the procedure of getting a town council because those you are creating, like Kalisizo in Rakai district are not getting leadership. Kalisizo was put in place last year but up to now it is only the Town Clerk in place.  So I do not know how he is transacting business there, I do not know whether our funds are safe.  So the leadership question of these town councils, and in particular reference to that one of Kalisizo leaves us concerned.

The other one to the Ministry of Local Government in line with town councils, there is a place called Mutukula, a border town bordering with Tanzania in Rakai district.  It is a fast-growing town collecting over Ug shs three billion, so you can imagine the amount of traffic activities involving almost 10,000 people.  

We would want to see a town council there to guide development, the parking and all those transactions and the infrastructure, now that we do not have sub-counties. When you look at this shortage caused by lack of graduated tax collections, in essence there are no sub-counties, they are not getting the 65 percent. So you better tell them to wind up.  So I would want Mutukula to be declared a town council to guide development.  

Return of funds; we have heard several times, Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament from the North talking about marginalisation, they are being marginalised by Government.  I think this is one point we could look at critically.  Why should funds in the North come back; money for water, money for schools, money for Universal Primary Education (UPE), because of regulations? No, this is I think very bad, somebody should tell us. 

I have been to Lira in an Internally Displaced People’s (IDP) camp, I had gone to attend a Northern Uganda Region Education Forum; they have a forum, which brings all teachers and district officers together.  They told us, “Look at the IDP children, school structures are tree shades with 2000 pupils in a class.”  Money for UPE is there, there is no chalk; there is no paper, why? Because these children maybe ran away from Pader, they are in Lira so they are nobody’s children there.  Money goes to Pader but the children are in Lira in an IDP camp, and we are not solving it as Government.  We are talking about policies of Government, financial regulations; money is coming back.  

You find in an IDP camp there is only one borehole with women lining up from morning to close in the night to fetch 20,000 jerry cans of water.  Money is going to Lira, but the IDP camp is in Masindi!  So why can’t we sort this out, why should there be prisoners of war of our own policies as Government?  This is really criminal, I do not know who we should hang about this?  So I think I am about to join those people when they say we are marginalising them.  

We are in a critical period as you all know, and I am not party to keeping apologising about Presidential pledges each time, each year before the people.  This financial year budget is a political budget; we cannot afford to see a change of system and also a change of leadership.  We want to come back, we want the President back, so let this money be paid by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so that we can have a happy country and our leaders come back.  

On page 21 of the report, there is something they have talked about the way they are going to survey, which services are being decentralised, and how they could compensate the local governments for the delivery of services.  I have a case in point in Rakai; we have what they call a decentralised payroll.  So that means Rakai district is helping the Ministry of Public Service to print a payroll, print pay slips, so it is a decentralised service; well and good, but we do not have the money.  We want to see that this aspect is looked at critically so that those services are paid for; the line ministry compensates them for.  

Lastly, Madam Speaker, there was something, which appeared in today’s papers, I think in The New Vision, there is some rope pulling in the Ministry of Education and Sports about the Assistant Commissioner, Construction Unit, and I think the Minister of Public Service should tell us; you advertised the job, people applied, sat interviews, and gave them appointment letters.  

Now what is the problem, what is that rope pulling about?  Now there is bargaining, now there are two people in one post, which is working outside the establishment, you are causing double payment.  So we want to know, what is the problem?  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.32
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much.  Madam Speaker, the committee says that pension is a right according to our Constitution, and I know that we have spoken a lot about this subject. But I also know that we shall not stop talking about it because this is a subject, which concerns people we represent.  

I know that we do not have funds at the present time to pay whatever is due in the field of pension, and the Committee is making a proposal, which I think has the support of many people, we have said this once before in this House.  But, Madam Speaker, I think we need to do a little bit more. 

I would like to request our colleagues, the political leaders in the Ministry of Public Service, to take measures to reform the pension department because I witnessed a very prominent Ugandan, once upon a time a very respectable Permanent Secretary, now haggard, in the Pension Department trying to sort out pension issues; and those chaps there could have been his grandchildren, but because they never knew him during his heydays, they never had any respect for him and I felt so sad.  

This gentleman served this country with loyalty and distinction, and here he was trying to get his pension but got younger people who have no notion of customer care - you know - being cautious to this person! So, while we know that we shall not afford the money to pay all the pensioners, I think we are duty bound to treat these senior citizens with respect and dignity. 

By the way, let me appeal to the public servants today, because one day, they may be in the position of that man and if they do not reform the pension system now, to provide for courtesy, proper keeping of records and so on and so forth, they will be victims of what will catch up with them. I think it is important to do something fundamental in the pension department.
 
Madam Speaker, in 1987, I was engaged in a World Bank project to try and do something in order to reform the public service but we had a lot of problems with the pension department. So, when I went there recently and found this gentleman suffering, I realised that there was no change. In spite of the various recommendations we made that time, nothing had happened. 

I want to make a passionate appeal to Government and particularly to people in leadership in this ministry to do whatever it can to make sure that people who go there are treated humanely.  Since it is a right, a person needs to be given respect because his documents could have got lost but at times you wonder whether they are deliberately hidden or stolen! You cannot have a pension system where records cannot be properly kept, even letters originating from the Ministry of Public Service itself cannot be traced anywhere! 

When the Ministry of Public Service is actually the author of a letter, you cannot get a copy, you can even go as high up the ladder as to the permanent secretary and you do not get a copy!  Is it feasible in a Government to fail to get a copy of something written less than 10 years back?  (Interjection)- yes, it is possible I agree, but should those circumstances really be there in modern management systems, which we expect in our governance system? So, that is my first point. 
Madam Speaker, the committee talks about pension for Members of Parliament, I am aware that the commission has done everything that is required to establish a pension scheme. I am equally aware that this matter was discussed with none other than the Head of State and I was present when he, himself said, “Look, honourable members, for me I support the idea of Members of Parliament having a pension scheme.”  He was telling us, “ You see, men and women vying for political representation in Parliament and when they go they are looking good, maybe, they are heads of departments, they are in business; they are well fed.  

Now, if for unfortunate reasons this person loses the elections next round; you look at him six months down the road you really get worried whether this is the same person who campaigned five years back.”  Therefore, in his view he was saying we must have this pension to at least enable one to maintain his car or make a telephone call.  He was telling us, people who support him were going to him saying, “Sir, I was in Parliament and I campaigned for you but see what I am looking like, nobody can employ me.  Not because I am not qualified but once you have been in this Parliament you know.” 

In spite of a name “A” or whatever degree you may have, employers will be very skeptical about taking you on so you will literally end up on the street. In modern societies, pension is important, social security is important. If you cannot guarantee social security for political leaders, are you likely to attract good people to join politics? You are not likely to do so.

Madam Speaker, you know very well that according to the research I have seen which the commission did, the Parliament of Uganda is probably the only national Parliament without a pension scheme for Members in the Commonwealth. (Interjections)- oh! Yes, our neighbours in Kenya have had it for more than 20 years; Tanzania have it, everybody including smaller countries, poorer countries, every Member of Parliament has a pension scheme. 

Some of these pension schemes are so lavish, but the pension scheme of which I was party to designing because the Commission set up a special committee to do this, is a down-to-earth one.  But for some reason, our friends in the Ministry of Public Service have not done their part as if this matter will not benefit them as well. As if this is only for other Members of Parliament other than the Ministers in the Ministry of Public Service.  

It appears as though Government has grown cold feet because there was some kind of uprising from civil society, but civil society does not know that in the Commonwealth, Uganda is the only country with a national parliament without a pension scheme. In fact, it is only one regional parliament in Nigeria, which does not have one. 

So, Madam Speaker, I just do not understand the statement given here that civil servants and Members of Parliament – the Ministry should implement the contributor scheme for both public servants and Members of Parliament as soon as consultations are concluded.  

On the issue of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme, consultations went as far as the Head of State and he approved it in the presence of hon. Benigna Mukiibi and hon. Okumu Ringa and all the people that matter in the Ministry of Public Service.

MR KATURAMU:  Point of information.  I thank you, my colleague hon. Mwandha for giving way.  I wish to emphasise what hon. Mwandha is trying to bring forward, the significance of a pension scheme for Members of Parliament.  While in Cameroon, I witnessed that through the scheme, which Members of Parliament there contribute to, they have managed to construct a very magnificent hotel, which belongs to the subscribers.  So, for you as a Member of Parliament from Uganda while in Yaunde, it would be better to sleep in this hotel, which belongs to the Parliament of Cameroon.  I thank you, hon. James Mwandha.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Mwandha, please try to wind up.

MR MWANDHA: So, Madam Speaker, something that I do not understand, somehow I think the Ministry of Public Service is coming up with a scheme for Members of Parliament similar to that of Public Service. That cannot work, because the two groups of people serve in different circumstances.  You need a separate scheme and a separate law to set up a scheme for Parliament, this is what other Parliaments have done; and you know I have been a member of Parliament for not very few years, so I have been able to interact with many Members of Parliament.  So, to attempt to come up with a law, which will bring a pension scheme for Members of Parliament and also public servants does not make sense.
 
Finally, Madam Speaker, under Local Government and Public Service Committee, we passed a law here providing for inclusion of disabled people on various structures of local government.  Disabled people had to sit on various structures with their committees; I think the Appointments Committee and other Committees, but many local governments have refused to implement this law; we have brought this matter to the Minister of Local Government but it seems we have been talking to deaf ears.  

The Minister of Local Government is taking no action, even his private secretary is taking no action and yet this is what we passed here as a law.  I mean, why do you continue to marginalise disabled people in spite of the presence of a law?  And I know that some people were saying, “Oh, you don’t have enough disabled people who can sit on this.” Can that be correct? We are 10 percent of the population!  So Madam Speaker, with these comments, thank you for the opportunity.

6.47
MR BRUNO PAJOBO (Workers Representative):  Thank you, very much Madam Speaker.  I wish to join my friends in thanking the committee for doing a good job.  But allow me to comment on a few issues.  First, the restructuring of civil servants; I think we started hearing about restructuring by reducing our civil service.  By then I think we had 380,000 civil servants, this was reduced to 165,000 and up to now restructuring is going on.  

In the past, people used to go and work in the civil service because they had job security despite the little salary they were paid, they accepted to work because there was security and there was pension.  Gradually, job security has been removed; they do not have job security now.  You go for duty in the morning, if you are lucky, you receive a termination letter, but if you are not, you hear a radio announcement telling you to go home without a salary, no payment, no benefit but to go and wait.

MR OKUMU RINGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I did not want to interrupt my colleague while articulating his point.  But the statements he is making are misleading and so I thought I would give some information.  It is not true that the Ministry of Public Service or the service as such terminates people on the radio.  I think that used to happen during Amin’s time, I remember.  

Also it is not true that we do not pay salaries or wages or remunerations to workers. As a matter of fact, my ministry has a consistent policy to pay staff by the 28th of every month and this is very consistent.  Even at the district level, where there is delay, such delays are basically on logistical matters, which have nothing to do with the policy of the Public Service.  Delays in the district could be because of transfers of funds or the banking system has not been well developed or inefficiencies by the chief administrative officers.  I thought I should make those points.  Thank you.

MR PAJOBO:  Thank you very much for that information. I do not think if I go further and bring to your notice some of the people who are demanding their arrears since the 1980s, you would be ashamed but I do not want to bring it; let me continue with my contribution.  It is true what we are saying is that, if you wanted to select people for reform, give them knowledge, prepare them to go to the next destination, do not take them unaware.  Many people do not know when they are going to retire.  

So, I think, Mr Minister, it is not true to say that our people are really prepared for retirement.  I stay with people and that is my constituency.  I think there should be a time to give to people – we do not refuse to restructure the service, people continue to grow old and in Uganda, once you become old, it seems to be a mistake, because the pension which we are talking about is taking too long time.  It is not their mistake to be old, I do not want to grow old, but look, slowly by slowly I am growing old every year!  

All of us are going there, and it is unfair to torture somebody, an old man who worked for 60 years coming from Katakwi to Kampala and now it is 15 years without him getting pension, he dies with nothing. So I think we should take the issue of paying pension and respecting ourselves seriously because when you are a minister and you don’t get pension, where are you going?  

Some of our former ministers are now suffering to the extent of borrowing cigarettes due to lack of pension.  Growing old is something good, but then when we are in the chair today, we do not respect the old people which is very unfortunate.

On page 11, there is this issue of saying that ministries- I used to think when I went to visit other places, I found that the Minister of Industry could be based in an industrial town like Jinja and that of Animal Industry in Mbarara or Karamoja because that is where animals are most.  Why do we keep all these people in Kampala? Why don’t we decentralise these ministries’ headquarters at districts and regions so that these regions can continue to develop?

The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs can be here around Kampala, no problem. So, I think since it is becoming costly in Kampala to hire offices, let us have them in the regions so that we distribute these ministries and their homes in other areas as well.  I think we should seriously look into this matter.

MR KUBEKETERYA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to seek clarification from hon. Pajobo how a minister say from Kotido or Jinja would run for a Cabinet meeting and maybe it ends at 3.00a.m how does he get home?  I would think because previously we used to have these headquarters in Entebbe but most of them now are here and I think it is convenient.

MS ALISEMERA: The Government ministers of Uganda are Members of Parliament and so, they are always here with us, how will they be running from Karamoja and Mbarara to come and deliberate on some of these issues everyday?

MR PAJOBO: I am happy with that information and that is why we say technology is there, why should I be here all the time for Parliament, why can’t I follow it and when I want to contribute or vote come here? All the time we run here; why? Why can’t they monitor them through new technology, they are not even here, where are they? We have ministers of state –(Interruption)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know whether the matter you are submitting on really arose from the report of the committee, did it?  Where is it?

MR PAJOBO: Page 8, “it is therefore recommended that the ministry and the President decide on the cost effective policy to enhance the establishment of homes for each ministry.”  So, I said, homes should be established in any corner of Uganda, not necessarily in Kampala.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL HUSBANDRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Madam Speaker, the Member is suggesting that ministers do not have to be in Parliament and yet quite often when the minister is not here to represent a sector, Members of Parliament complain that there is no one to answer about that sector ministry. So, is there no contradiction that you want us to be here, and now you are suggesting that we should not be here; which way should we go?

Secondly, where would the Ministry of Local Government be located in your framework, thank you?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Pajobo, I have seen the paragraph you are referring to, it is a debate about renting or owning, I think you focus on that, you will distribute them another day, because we want to finish this Budget. You will distribute another day, I do not know where you will distribute the Ministry of Finance, all the others, but focus should be on whether they should rent or own, I think that was the issue.

MS PAJOBO: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I will follow your advice seriously but I just comment that it will not only be here in Uganda, but in other countries, for example, in Germany you find that one minister is in Bonn and another in another city in the country, so it is not only that –(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like hon. Pajobo to clarify to me because I was in Germany when I was doing the local government set up for decentralisation purposes of local governments.  The minister is talking about the federal ministers but not central government ministers.  Can you clarify to me which ministers you are referring to and if anyhow you can mention one name, thank you?

MR PAJOBO: You went for local government so I think you are only for local government. For me, I went for labour where my ministry was stationed in Bonn, therefore, I think that is where you can get the correct information. Anyway, let me continue to finish my contribution.

I wanted also to comment about the issue of contributory pension of civil servants.  There are civil servants who have worked for over 25 years and are now 54 to 56 years old, and you are now reforming the pension scheme to be contributory, what is the fate of those people who worked and had an early retirement? I think that we should be given more time to think about these contributory pension schemes.

Last but not least, I just wanted to talk about the role of district labour officers at the districts.  These people services are completely neglected by the district chairpersons and RDCs and yet the Ministry of Labour is the one responsible for the conditions of service of workers and the employers at the district. Therefore, these Ministry of Labour officials in the district are usually marginalised, they do not have anything to do. I do not know whether they are even budgeted for since they are not recognised and these workers cannot complain to the district officials, their duty is only to sign dismissal and suspension letters, they are not able to perform their duties as required of the ministry. They should therefore be returned to the mother ministry so that they are able to perform their duties of serving the public effectively.  Thank you very much.

7.00
MR OCHIENG PETER (Bukooli County South, Bugiri): Madam Speaker I thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I will try to be very brief.  I would as well like to thank the committee for the report and ask the minister a few questions.  

Madam Speaker, I have several times found out and indeed to be serious, monies from various ministries go to local government departments in various districts in block form. When this money reaches them, we have for quite a number of times found out that the planning units in some districts do disburse these monies in a manner that does not reflect the national distributory system. 

You find that in one sub-county, let us say money for water or for the Local Government Development Programme (LGDP) does not basically reflect the amount that they are supposed to get, not once, not twice, not thrice. You hear that a sub-county which is supposed to get around Ug shs 50 million getting either Ug shs 20 or 17 million and another sub-county with a similar parameter gets three or four times as much. I would like to get clarification from the minister on why we have such a phenomenon?

The biggest problem here is that when we go to the area of water, Madam Speaker, water is known to be life as we are told that the policy at ministry level is water for all. But some of these things are not taken seriously, they are basically slogans that are there on paper and do not work.

Let me talk about my own area, Madam Speaker. Up to now, my district has been getting money but we are still below 5 percent coverage as a constituency.  In other areas, the national coverage for example is around 65 percent, and in other areas they have gone as far as 85 to 92 percent.  My major concern here is that suppose it is an anomaly like I may possibly assume, what is done to such kind of acute neglect that exhibits a high level of marginalisation in this form?

There is a problem in some of our villages; some people are elected at the sub counties – you know in those areas basically it is to whom it may concern. We have found out that some LCs and councillors apart from having the interest of helping the people, they do not even know how they are supposed to conduct the affairs and procedures of this calling.  

Madam Speaker, the problem becomes even worse when the sub county chief who is supposed to be the technical officer at that level has an interest in something, to the extent of saying that the Local Governments Act does not allow - Now, what you call the Local Governments Act at sub-county level is really news, it is like the Bible, nobody even knows it, so they try to imagine what it is and what it says and it becomes a problem.  I am really calling upon the minister to try and strengthen the capacity building, monitoring, and supervisory roles.  

We have lost a lot of money; I will give you one example.  I was at one of the sub counties where they had a poor road network. These people were given a lot of money to do whatever they wanted under the guidelines of LGDP and PMA, of course they are components of the road.  These people went ahead and agreed that the major problem they had was the road network. They decided to put close to Ug shs 30 million on the road sector.  All this money was put down to open a stretch of around 3 kilometers only. 

I would like to draw the attention of the minister that this Government went ahead to buy road equipment for every district.  There are tippers, graders, and all sorts of things but some technical officers have gone ahead to say that those equipments were not supposed to be there.  We don’t understand this Government because they bring us all these equipments and at the end of the day say you must tender everything.  It took me long to say, fine, if we are to tender, what should we tender, now that we have all these equipments, must we go ahead and tender road construction?  

To make matters worse, even when they tender the road construction they still go back and use the district equipment to do this road construction.  One kilometer of the road, two, three, and four cannot even take a grader one day and no grader on this earth can use more than Ug shs 300,000 on fuel for one kilometer! I have witnessed a road that has been graded and has been worked on to a tune of five million shillings.

I would like to request that the minister intensifies, first of all, awareness; secondly, follow ups and make sure the public understands some of these things.  We are grateful that to some extent Government has come in to rescue a number of probleMs  The truth about the matter is that monies are being wasted left and right at those levels.  Procurement has to be guided and worked on well –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR OCHIENG: There is also this element of capacity building and amongst the monies there are some components of equalisation and non-conditional grants.  Madam Speaker, to be sincere I have seen a situation where all these monies are not even known to the sub counties.  What you call equalisation has been retained at a higher level of possibly the district area alone.  Really, the situation needs to be addressed.  

I thank you for giving me time to air out these issues. I would request that this Government focuses much, they have tried to do a lot but maybe something needs to be put in place in order to enable some of these issues be addressed properly.  Thank you. 

MR MUZOORA: Thank you very much Madam Speaker and hon. Members.  I also thank the chairman and the committee for this good work and the minister and his technical staff for such interactions.

The first question is on the regional tier funds.  The amount of Ug shs 3.7 billion on page 24 in this report has been earmarked to kick off or to kick start the regional tiers.  My question is what index or yardstick did the minister use to arrive at Ug shs 3.7 billion?  Have you already imagined how many regional governments we shall have or how long the system will take to put the regional governments in place such that you become prepared enough with Ug shs 3.7 billion?

Madam Speaker, the second question goes to the chairman of the committee - on page 22 he mentions that the funds have been diverted which would rather go down to compensate the former graduated tax.  The moment you mention the word “divert”, it calls for the intervention of the Auditor General because it means it has been done inadvertently.  Did you intend to do that or you meant reallocation?  

If you meant re-allocation the Government has promised to pay the political leaders as a separate entity not necessarily using money culminating from the amount supposed to be replacing the graduated tax functions.  

So I do not know why that money is re-allocated when you know very well the functions of the sub counties, the 65 percent, and the 10 percent for the parish the 25 percent for the LC1.  Have you moved away from the Local Governments Act using this scenario?

On the issue of the graduated tax, Government has not stated properly how much money was being collected from graduated tax.  By the time it was first mentioned that graduated tax is likely to be removed, it was actually Shs 50 billion shillings.  On that Shs 50 billion, it was the budgeting factor raised it. Otherwise, the real collection was Shs 32 billion.  By the time that tax was removed, the figures that could be picked from the districts had come to Shs 80 billion. How then did it rush to jump by Shs 30 billion to go to 80 billion?

The political leaders shall be paid directly from the consolidated fund.  Who are these local leaders, because at first, they mentioned the chairman LCV later alone. The executive was added on, then all those occupying permanent offices including the LC111.  Is it still like that?

Madam Speaker, there is a question on page 10 where we are talking about the official residence of the Vice President.  I thought that it would be much easier for the residence of the Vice President to be considered under the vote of the President’s office.  But when you begin taking it to the local government and Public Service that is the reason why it has never been constructed because this issue started in the 6th Parliament. It failed; it went now 7th Parliament, it has not taken off. In the 8th Parliament I understand it might fail. 

The reasons are that, it is misallocated because there is no way a local government or Public Service can begin handling the matters of the Vice President. Very soon, you want them to handle the President, or whatever.  

So, I do not know how the minister can explain to me, how he started handling this matter of the Vice President.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Member, the question of housing public officers is a function of the Public Service ministry. That is how – I do not think he just decided to bring it to himself. It is a function of the Public Service. Is it not?  

MR OKUMU RINGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  You were very right when you stated that accommodation and other facilitation of public officers is a function of the ministry of public service.

Traditionally the ministry of public service used to be called Ministry of public service and Cabinet affairs.  Now, the functions of Cabinet are in the Presidency and the role of providing for all these facilitations has remained the function of the ministry of public service.  Thank you.

MR MUZOORA:  Thank you very much for your guidance, Madam Speaker to the minister responsible for the housing.  Maybe, in his budget he will also show us how much he budgeted for State House reconstructed at Entebbe, and he should be prepared for that question.

Finally, I have seen townships, which have been promoted to town councils.  Some of these are far smaller than my Nyeihanga township and they are supposed to be – in future there might be Rwampara district headquarters, Nyeihanga Township.  So, may I request that you notice so that in the next financial year, we can handle that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Members, we should also assist the minister because, now you are telling him you put this town, put that town but there are procedures to be followed to apply for these things.  There are resolutions from the wards, resolutions from the Gombololas, resolutions from – so you are going to give the poor man a heart attack because that is the third request that I have heard this afternoon.  

MR MUZOORA:  Finally, I was with hon. Nayiga Sekabira in Rwampara. There was presentation by the elders complaining about their representation. I do not know whether any budgeting system has organized for these elders to be represented in future in the next political system because they say that they are only represented up to LC111 level - the elderly.  So, I do not know whether there is any arrangement by local government to organize them a little higher than that. The minister responsible can help us. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, I now invite the Ministers to respond.  Local Government, are you ready or you are still organizing yourself?  Okay, let us hear from General Duties, Public Service.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES) Mr Okumu Ringa): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The issues raised by my colleagues are quite a few in respect of the Ministry of Public Service, and I will be very brief on them.

Hon Kefa Sempangi raised the issue of employment policy and asked why there are shortfalls in salaries and wages in some sectors and he referred to one sector that is the ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, if got him well.  

It is true that my ministry is responsible for this sector in terms of paying salaries in the service and we pay salaries based on the establishment and in the case of the ministry of education for secondary school teachers. We pay them in terms of staff in post.  So, if there is any shortfall in a ministry, that can only arise if there is recruitment within the financial year or towards the end of the financial year, whereby funding will be made available to pay such staff as arrears in the immediate fourth quarter of the financial year.  So there cannot be a situation where there would be a shortfall in terms of salaries for those who are in post.

Secondly, we have a system in my ministry where we receive pension report before the 15th day of every month to enable us clean the payroll. Cleaning the payroll here means either you are adding new people on the payroll, either to access their remuneration or you are reducing in case a staff member has resigned or passed away or as the case may be.  This is both for the central government ministries and the local governments.

The issue of accommodation has been raised by many Members, they asked why Government is spending a lot of money to rent office accommodation. 

This issue was also raised by hon. Pajobo, who brought a new concept of decentralizing ministries.  We are not in that business yet.  But I would like to state, that the responsibility of housing government ministries is the function of the office of the President as it is now.  

The office of the President handles that, and there is a committee, which is instituted in the office of the President, which looks at all these matters.  It is true that the cost of accommodation is very high.  For example, if you take where the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is, I am sure the rent there is quite high.

Hon. Wopuwa raised the issue of contributory pensions. This is on page 10 –(Interruptions).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable Minister, you have said that there is a committee, which handles that. But what is your view as a minister responsible for accommodation?  You may say that the rent is high, but how are you going to stop the haemorrhage of rent?  Do you participate in that committee as a ministry?  Are you happy about the money being spent on rent?

MR RINGA: Madam Speaker, the lead Ministry in this function is the office of the President and Ministry of Public Service is a member of that committee. Ministry of Works and Housing is a member and I agree with your view, Madam Speaker, that renting at the moment, if compared with the cost benefit analysis, naturally the long-term benefit would be there if Government owns its own premises.  There is already a policy, which will soon come to Cabinet and also to Parliament.  

There is a Cabinet sub-committee on this matter, where I serve as a member and the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs is the Chairperson of that Committee. I would like to assure the House that the matter is receiving very active attention.

Hon. Wopuwa raised the issue of contributory pension scheme, which is contained in our Policy Statement.  I will leave this to my colleague, who is responsible for the sector to handle it.  But with regard to the overall policy, yes, my Ministry is working on a comprehensive policy on pension reform.

Hon. Wopuwa also raised the issue of restructuring of districts –(Interruptions)

MR KAKOOZA:  Madam Speaker, I am finding it a problem that everybody has been commenting on handling that scheme, and to me, when this budget is passed through the Executive, the handling of that item, it has got an economic impact that a government benefits even more by the time you make that item proper and systematic; because the demand and consumption of the utilities becomes much.  

Therefore, the turn over, even in the treasury - but the Cabinet- I am finding a problem with that item. They are leaving it to hang and it has got an economic impact within the budget itself, whereby the country cannot move like that.  What is the problem that Parliament can help, so that we want to achieve our mission, and even in our budgeting process? Nobody is coming out clearly about it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When the Minister for Pensions comes, she will be able to tell us.  Let us conclude on general duties.

MR RINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the concern of my colleague, hon. Kakooza. My colleague responsible for the sector will articulate that.  But in general terms, as I said, we are looking at the overall pension reform and to go by what hon. Mwandha raised, the pension for Members of Parliament is definitely going to be something separate, not as part of the overall reform.  

I remember leading a delegation from my ministry, which was a fairly powerful delegation to meet the President in Mbale.  Hon. Mwandha was part of the team. Madam Speaker, you were also part of that team. So, as far as this issue is concerned, I would like to believe that it is as good as concluded; it is before the Parliamentary Commission.

Madam Speaker, the issue of restructuring of districts and terminal benefits to staff who would be laid off was raised by many Members. I would like also to state that we are responsible for restructuring of institutions in the Government and the Local Government systems was reviewed and districts were restructured. Three models were presented and approved by Cabinet and a given district will approve each model wherever the component of a human resource is affected.  

My ministry has money, readily available to compensate or pay for any loss of office and terminal benefits as the case may be.  The money is available through a donor-funded project.

I think what hon. Kasamba raised are more to do with the Local Government. I will leave that for my Colleague.

Hon. Mukasa raised a very important issue of the inspectorate; that the Department of Inspectorate in my Ministry should do more in order to work towards value for money.  I would like to agree with that concern and my Ministry has continued to consistently work towards inspectorates in all government ministries where funding is available, and Local Government, and in one case for example, where inspectorate was done, we were able to serve shs.300m/= due to measures, which were put in place.  

Hon. Tubwita again raised the issue for down-sizing. I think I have answered this- the restructuring of districts.

Hon. Dorothy Hyuha, the Chairperson of Social Services Committee, also raised the issue of creation of new districts and I congratulate her for getting another constituency. 
 
Hon. Angupale raised the issue as to why RDCs are paid in local government or elsewhere.  I answered this generally.  For us as a ministry responsible for paying people in the service, so long as funding is made available, we have no quarrel with where the funds are located.  

For example, my Ministry is responsible for the payment of pensions for the armed Forces and the Military. All payment of gratuities and survivor’s benefits are prepared in Bombo. Funds are brought in my Ministry and funding is made available through a budget. We pay such and we believe this is a good way of solving some of these issues, where one sector may be seen to having plotted a budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think what she was saying was that she understands that the same salaries of the same people are provided for under the presidency; that was her problem. That why is it that the budget of the presidency includes salaries of Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) and she has seen the budget of Local Government also providing for the same?  That was her problem.

MR RINGA: Madam Speaker, I did not understand it that way.  If that is what it is, then it will be double payment. If it is what it is, it will amount to double payment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you need to clarify it for the Hansard, because I want to know whether it is in his office or in Dr Wabudeya’s office.  

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, this issue of the RDCs is only indicated in this report as an issue, which would require additional funding. But otherwise, it is understood very clearly that RDCs are catered for under the Office of the President.  We are only indicating – we have created new districts, these new districts will require RDCs. We are only indicating the figure here. This is not a figure that we have voted for under the Ministry of Local Government.  We are only indicating that this is a requirement of the creation of additional districts –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But why does it not go to the other budget, where they belong, because the presidency knows that they have 13 new districts?  I think that is the concern of the Members.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (VICE PRESIDENT’S OFFICE) (Dr Byaruhanga Phillip): Madam Speaker, we have not yet concluded with creating these districts.  This indication was made here on the Floor. We have not concluded creating these districts and it was not possible to budget for them under the Office of the President. Under normal circumstances, these RDCs in particular, are going to be catered for under the Office of the President.  

But we have not concluded the matter of the debate here in the House.  It was not possible to budget for them in the Office of the President for this Financial Year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, are you are saying that the funds are there in Local Government for custody?  I think we have understood, please conclude.

MR RINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Wakikona and Capt. Matovu raised the issue of pensions; I leave that for my colleague.  But the issue raised by hon. Capt. Matovu regarding wrangles in the Ministry of Education for a post of Commissioner in Construction Department- what he referred to appeared in the papers today. It has been an issue in my Ministry and the Ministry of Education has been handling. 

A delegation from Busoga went and met His Excellency, the President, on this very matter. And the matter is receiving active attention within the framework of Public Service employment process.  The last –(Interruption)

MR MUZOORA: Madam Speaker, the Minister has mentioned on what hon. Capt. Matovu raised about one post but two people. The Minister has now mentioned that there was a delegation from Busoga – on the Civil Service?  Can I get clarification about this delegation?

MR RINGA: Well, this matter was brought to the Floor of this House by one of our colleagues, hon. Dr Frank Nabwiso, and my Ministry and that of Education were put in the spotlight.  We discussed the issue and indeed the entire leadership of Local Government in Busoga headed by the Chairperson, LC5, and the Local Governments in Busoga.  He wrote a letter to His Excellency the President who gave my Ministry a copy. This matter is being looked at critically.  

As I said, it is still a matter we are looking at within the process of Public Service employment, and if there is need for me to restructure this department to create positions, that will be handled and will be reported.  So I would like to propose that this matter be left at this stage.

Madam Speaker, hon. Mwandha raised the issue of pension for Members of Parliament.  I have already stated that my colleague will amplify on it.

Hon. Pajobo was very dramatic and I would like to confirm again that what is contained on page 11, item (d), in the Report of the Chairperson only refers to issues, which do not require decentralization of Central Government Ministries.  We have discussed it and left it at that.  

Hon. Pajobo also raised the issue asking how the retirees who are serving in Government perceive retirements.  We have a system whereby, six months before a civil servant retires, such a civil servant is notified, and six months is very adequate. Again, it is incumbent upon one who is in employment, whose age is known, who is responsible enough to be able to prepare within the six months’ period when the letter comes so that the person can leave peacefully.

Lastly, hon. Muzoora raised the issue of the residence of the Vice President. Again, I would like to state, that the residence of the Vice President is being considered under the Ministry of Public Service because historically the Ministry of public service has been the one responsible for providing for the Vice President, the Prime Minister and all members of the Executive.  

But since the function of Cabinet affairs was removed from the Ministry of Public Service, Cabinet affairs is under President’s Office, and State House is responsible for all matters relating to the accommodation and welfare of His Excellency, the President.  In terms of accommodation, the Vice President is catered for through my Ministry but other -(Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, we have been raising an issue persistently here about certain Ministries, which are specifically tied to a geographical area.  The Minister for Karamoja Affairs is supposed to be in Karamoja but he is pitching camp here. My good sister from Luweero is supposed to be in the villages of Luweero, but she is pitching camp here. There is a Ministry for Northern Uganda, overseeing NUSAF, but she is here in Kampala.  The Minister for Public Service should get accommodation for these Ministers to enable them stay in those respective geographical areas because they are meant for those areas, not Kampala.  Thank you.  

MR RINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Arumadri, who is my neighbour - Madi-Okolo - for his concern.  Central Government Ministries are coordinating Ministries. They are not localized the way these other local government Ministers - in the district. 

So, I would like to clarify again that Central Government Ministries are responsible for coordinating national matters, even though those national matters may be localized or regionalized. For instance, now hon. Akello has an office in Gulu, but because of Parliamentary functions and resource mobilization, she has to be here.  My sister hon. Magoola is also having a contact office in her operational area but she has to be here to perform those functions.  

So, in short, these are matters, which we can look at effectively and with modern administrative machineries. We can do better if we have resources.  

With these remarks, I would like to thank the Chairperson of the committee and the entire membership of the committee and colleagues for staying all this late because you have interest in these matters.  I would like to thank you and the Madam Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, PENSIONS (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Honourable members, I would like to thank you for the interest you continue to express in the matters of pension in this country.  

I would like to thank my colleague for the general observation on the pension sector and I will go specifically to hon. Wopuwa’s question. He was wondering whether there is no contradiction between what we passed in the amendment of the Constitution and what we have stated in the report or in our Ministry policy.  

I would like to say that there is no contradiction, the word “pension” means retirement benefits. They can be in form of contributory pension schemes or non-contributory pension schemes. So, there is no contradiction. It remains pension, whether it is contributory or not. That is how I understood his question.  

As for hon. Wakikona, he was worried about the pension arrears for the former workers in the East African Community, which attract interest.  

I wish to agree with him that it is true that this pension for the former workers of the East African Community does attract interest every year of 7 percent.  Government is trying to address or clear these pension arrears as much as possible and I would like to report that during this Financial Year 2005/2006, Government has almost cleared this debt by the allocation of 4 billion.  

What remains now is the unclear status of the compensation for the former East African workers who were working in the East African Airways. That remains outstanding because we are still consulting, but this year we got 4 billion to clear the outstanding areas on the provident funds.

Hon. Matovu was interested in the current total amount of arrears –(Interjection)- okay, I am going to answer that.  With the allocation, which we got in this Financial Year, the total arrears amount has reduced to Shs 288.6 billion shillings.  

So, the strategy is that we have to clear this amount first of all. The Government is committed to allocate more funds in the budget and this financial year, we got Shs 25 billion to clear pension arrears.  So, one of the strategies is to allocate more money in the budget and the second one is to find a loan.  

But I must inform you that getting a loan is not very easy because the development partners want Government to show that they will not incur any more arrears.  The proposal of Government to stop getting more arrears is by reforming the sector. 

So, until we reform the sector, we may not access the loan to clear pension arrears.  But the good news is that we have moved very fast on that and as I speak now, there is a Bill for the pension reform, which is ready and is being discussed. It will soon be in cabinet and it is now in the Ministry of Justice.  So, when we show cause that we are determined to stop creating more arrears, I am sure that we shall access a loan to clear the outstanding arrears.

Hon. Mwandha, of course, I have answered the question on Pension Reform, which we are working on, and have gone along way. Thank you, hon. Mwandha, for your observation. I have noted and I must tell you that we are continuously addressing that issue. I agree that there is still more to be done. I thank you. We shall continue to address that issue of customer care.

There is also a problem of poor record keeping, which we are trying to improve by computerizing every record.  Pensions for Members of Parliament- my colleague has assured the House that the Government has agreed on the principle of Members of Parliament getting pension.  But I would like to say that it is not entirely correct that there was no arrangement for retirement benefits for the Members of Parliament in Uganda as hon. Mwandha has stated. Instead of having a pension scheme, we had a provision for gratuity, which is equivalent. 

Now, in Uganda, when you get pension, you do not get gratuity. When you get gratuity, you do not get pension. That is the arrangement that we were operating on.

MR PAJOBO: I would like the honourable Minister to clarify to me between pension and gratuity, because I am getting lost. I do not know which gratuity she is referring to and what is pension.  I do not know the difference between the two. Can she help me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, let us not jump the gun. The Bill is coming. We shall debate that and agree on what pension is and what gratuity is. For now, let us not handle it. (Interjections)- honourable members, you know that we have had a long argument with the Minister of Finance on the question of pension and gratuity.  So, I am saying, wait until we get the Bill. Because provisions are there; then we can discuss them and make a decision. Yes, we cannot do it now.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable representing Workers to come and openly declare that he does not know the difference between gratuity and pension? Then how does he push for their case? I think he should resign –(Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think you should educate yourself better on those issues.  Let us move.

MRS MUKIIBI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance.  I just wanted to clarify that there was an arrangement for retirement benefits, which is pension in general terMs  So it is not for everyone, as we are working on the pension arrangement.

MR MWANDHA:  Madam Speaker, why, in spite of your advise, does the House continue persuading her that she is not quite right.  You see, either we allow this matter to be debated at the right time and she abandons her stands or you allow us to try and persuade her.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, the question of whether members are entitled to gratuity and pension will be settled when you bring the bill and the sooner you bring it the better.  So now, please leave that side.

MRS MUKIIBI:  Obliged, Madam Speaker; we shall debate that matter when I bring the bill.  I am not disputing that we shall have our Parliamentary pension, but I just wanted to give this information, because honourable Mwandha –(Interruption)- It is very vital that the honourable members know that what we had was an equivalent.  That is the policy. Yes, it is very important that you know that.

MR MWANDHA:  Madam Speaker, since the honourable minister is referring to me and she is not taking your advice, she must understand that the two things are different. We in this Parliament have been receiving gratuity for a long time. In addition, we have made arrangements for pension.  We are not the only Parliament, which will get a gratuity.  The issue of gratuity comes from gratitude.  “Thank you”.  Okay?  And this gratuity is paid to Members month per month.  We are talking about social security for people after they have actually left the service of Parliament.  

The two concepts are different and I do not expect the Minister in charge of pension to totally confuse the two issues.  The two issues are very different and by the way, even in our Constitution, once you have had a benefit, nobody can take it away from you.  So the argument of the Minister is very difficult to appreciate.

MS MUKIIBI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Katuramu for his observation.  I think it was in a certain country where the Members of Parliament through their contributory scheme have put up a building and this is the kind of thing I would wish to see in Uganda. Lets get a pension contributory scheme where our money will be invested effectively like it is done in the country, which hon. Katuramu mentioned.  

So, we should know that this is a practice and that is why I am saying that, the contributory scheme, when it comes on board is even going to help us to put up similar investments as it is done in other countries.

Hon. Pajobo is worried about what will happen to those who were currently employed in the old system that when we reform the sector? I would like to allay his fears that we are moving very carefully to see that nobody is disadvantaged and in the bill, we have proposed that we shall reserve whatever has accrued for the current civil servants. But of course, as I said, the bill is in the making and we welcome more ideas on this issue.

Madam Speaker, these are the observations I noted and I would like to thank the Members and the Members of the Committee for the good report and for their guidance in the deliberations of our ministry.  Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura):  Madam Speaker, I would like to begin by thanking all colleagues who raised concerns about Ministry of Local Government.  Some of the issues especially those to do with restructuring have been adequately responded to by my colleague, the Minister of State for Public Service.  I am therefore not trying to answer them again.

Hon. Wopuwa requested that the ministry of Local Government should give guidelines to the new districts, especially in the area of procurement and in the area of recruiting officers.  Madam Speaker, I would like to report that we have already done so. The new districts created are now in the process of recruiting officers. They also know how to go about the procurement matters and we shall continue to guide them until such a time – actually we guide them forever, I should not put a limit.

Hon. Kasamba was concerned about the little money or the little funds we voted as compensation for loss of revenue as a result of abolition of graduated tax. I would like to respond as follows: how did we arrive at the figure of Shs 30 billion?  It is true that at one time and specifically in the Financial Year 1995/6, local governments raised a total of Shs 80 billion.  But ever since Shs 80 billion- that was in the Financial Year 1995/6. But ever since, these figures have been falling to the extent that in the year 2001/02, the total amount collected in terms of graduated tax was Shs 36 billion.  So, in order to arrive at Shs 30 billion, we were really guided by this figure of Shs 36 billion.  

Now, why did we not go to 40 or why did we not go to 36?  Madam Speaker, you recall that in the budget speech of the Minister of Finance this year, he was very clear and I will quote what he said, “ A provision of shillings Shs 30 billion has been made to compensation for the suspension of graduated tax.  This amount includes provision of shillings 2.7 billion to cater for the new districts, a further Shs 4 billion has also been provided to cater for the regional tier. 

Additionally, in every district, Government will pay the wages of LC V chairpersons and the executive committee members, the speaker at council and the LC III chairpersons.”  

So, when he said additionally, this meant that on top of the Shs 30 billion.  That is what it meant.  So, the payment for the political leaders in the local governments amounts to just over Shs 7 billion. It is additional to Shs 30 billion. It means the total amount now compensated is the Shs 30 billion, plus the Shs 7.27 billion, which is just over the 36 billion that was collected in the financial year 2001-2002.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable Minister.  I do not want to interrupt the Minister, but the problem, which I have observed, is that, as much as he said that the deficit, the last collection of graduated tax was Shs 36 billion and the allocation is Shs 30 billion for a regional tier, that means that the cost of the infrastructure, which you are going to phase is going to increase to the district.  

The projection of the last census was 24 million people, but according to the recurrent projection, population increases to the ratio you are providing, which is going to consume the service; we are in 27 million. I do not know whether the Minister has put that into account so that the people you are trying to cater for are within those services, because as much as you equate, people will not be able to get the service. 

So he has to go down on the drawing board. The point is to go down to the drawing board to know that the amount allocated to cover the deficit when you abolished the graduated tax, will it be enough to cater for it and will you be able?  The regional tier for new districts is creating even more costs and need for new infrastructure.

MR KABAREEBE: When we were passing the law for the regional tier, it was clearly indicated that the services to be transferred were from the Central Government to the regional tier. But now, when you begin transferring funds from the district to the regional tier, you are making a mistake. So, because we are transferring the services from the centre, services which had remained at the centre, are the ones being transferred to the regional tier.  We are not transferring any responsibility from the district to the regional tier.  Therefore, you need to clarify why you are transferring funds to start the regional tiers.

MR KASAMBA: On Monday, I was in Rakai and I had a thorough interaction with the district team. They have a communication to the effect that the transferred funds, which are compensating for the local graduated tax is equally the same, which is going to cater for the payment of political leaders.  

Relative communication; the Minister of Finance has already communicated to the district chairman that the funds, which have been transferred and allocated as compensation for graduated tax are the one which are equally going to –that is what the committee said. That of the Shs. 30 billion point seven something is going to be utilized to pay for the political leadership. That is the communication, which the Minister of Finance is now telling the local authorities. So, you need to clarify that.

MRS KASULE: Madam Speaker, the very communication my colleague is talking about from the Ministry of Local Government to the districts actually spells out that they are going to pay only the Chairpersons of the districts, three members of the executive and the speaker.  So, if you are taking up the responsibility, why do you pay only a few members of the executive?

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, colleagues, for those clarifications. I would like to begin by responding to the issue raised by hon. Muzoora. I think he did not get me right when I quoted the Budget speech. I said that a further Shs. 4 billion has also been provided to cater for the regional tier. 

Madam Speaker, I wish Muzoora would be attentive enough to follow what is happening.  When the Minister said that a further Shs. 4 billion would be provided, it could be provided by the Central Government and the creation of the regional tier is not affecting the decentralization system. There are no functions and no resources, which are going to be taken away from the districts to the regional tier; this should be made very clear.

Now, on the circular that has gone to the districts, I have also seen this circular but I have written to the Minister of Finance to complain because his budget speech was very clear that the payment of the local leaders was in addition to the compensation of the Shs. 30 billion. This is very clear here.  I hope, when he comes to the floor of the House, he will be able to answer and put this record straight.  

Now, the payment of the three secretaries of the districts in addition to the chairman and vice chairman, you are not mentioning the vice chairman, the vice chairman is also paid from the consolidated fund, so it the chairman, vice chairman, plus three secretaries. Why, three secretaries; this is what we could afford and we are going further to amend the Local Government Act, so that we provide for the election of the chairman, vice chairman and three secretaries for the districts. In addition to the secretaries, the chairman and vice chairman, we cater for the speaker, the chairman of the municipality and the chairmen of LC III.  

Hon. Bakaluba was complaining about the freezing of accounts by the Uganda Revenue Authority in Mukono. I think this clearly means that Mukono has not been paying taxes as they are expected to. So, this is not a matter relating to my ministry. It should be sorted out between URA and Mukono district. 

He also went on to say that a lot of money is sent to the districts but there is no inspection. The inspection department in the ministry is not adequately funded. However, they try as much as possible to visit the local governments and carry out inspection work.  We hope that in this Budget, they will do better; that there will be more funds so that the inspection department can also increase on its activities in the field.  

Hon. Tubwita was talking about the mushrooming of towns and that there is need for fiscal planners. Good enough, the new structures in the local government are providing for fiscal planners and we think that these, when recruited will handle this problem of planning better for the emerging urban centres.

We are also thinking along the lines of re-establishing town boards, because when they were in place, there was at least some planning and we think that if we have town boards, these emerging urban centres can be better planned.  

Hon. Hyuha is very happy about Butaleja and she wants Buswole elevated to a town council status.  There is a procedure to follow and this is in the Local Governments Act. Under section (8), sub section (3), Madam Speaker, please allow me to read it. It says, “subject to Town and Country Planning Act, the minister may in consultation with the district, with the approval of cabinet after satisfying himself or herself, and the requirements under paragraph 32 of the third schedule are met, declare an area to be a town.” And the third schedule, section (32), says-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minster, the Members should go and do their homework, just tell them to read the Act.

DR NDUHUURA: Most obliged Madam Speaker. Hon. Aanimu Angupale is concerned that most of the money that is sent to the districts goes into capacity building.  I think it is very important, to build capacity in these districts because elsewhere a Member was complaining – I think it was hon. Peter Ochieng, that the district councils do not know what to do; they do not even demand for projects and that is why there is a low water coverage in his district and specifically in his constituency.  So, it is very important that the LCs and even the workers out there in the local government have their capacity built through training.  So, there is a component of capacity building in the local government development program funds and this exactly addresses that problem.

Hon. Aanimu Angupale was also concerned about the survival of the sub counties, wondering what will happen, even after we have compensated the districts, whether money is going to trickle down to the sub counties.  I am saying, yes. We have already guided the districts that the sub counties will still get their 65 percent and 35 percent of the funds will remain at the district.  So, there is no cause for alarm.

How about the funds that are returned to the centre as a result of late releases by the Ministry of Finance or in the case of the disturbed areas where the funds cannot be utilized? The recommendations that these funds should be returned is a very good one, but I leave this to the Minister of Finance to answer because he is the person with the funds, he is the one who records the funds so he can answer that better.  

On the query of hon. Mwandha James, yes, there may be marginalisation of the disabled in as far as their appointment on the statutory commissions is concerned.  I know of some districts where this is being done, where the disabled people are given positions according to the law on the statutory commissions.  

Now, if this is not done in some districts, this is a point I have noted. We shall follow it up to ensure that the law is followed.  

Hon. Pajobo, you wanted Ministers out there in the regions. But as you very well know, these secretaries to the districts are called “Ministers”. At the regional level, we are going to have regional ministers; so, they will be there.

Hon. Ochieng Patrick, I have partly answered the question of capacity.  He was also concerned that distribution of funds is not done equitably.  Now, the distribution of resources to the sub counties is done according to plans. So, if a sub county is sleeping and does not plan, then it becomes very difficult for it to have its own share adequately.  

But otherwise, there is a formula, which is also reflected in the Constitution and this question was also raised by hon. Dorothy Hyuha. You wanted to know how we determine how much money goes to which districts.  There is a formula to follow and this is reflected in the Constitution. So it should not be a big problem.  

But the guidance is very clear for projects out there in the sub counties; there is planning. These plans start at as low as LCI level. So it should not be a problem.  If there is no water in a particular part of your constituency, then it means that there is a problem with the local leadership in every area and this is why I was talking about capacity building among the local leadership and the workers in the field.  

My Ministry has tried as much as possible to guide the local councils. We have produced quite a number of manuals and those utilizing them must be in a good schedule.

Hon. Peter Ochieng raised quite a number of problems and I have taken a special interest, not only in his district but also in others as well, but specifically in his constituency.  I pledge to visit his constituency together with my technical team and make sure that all that is not going well is corrected.

Hon. Muzoora Amon-Reeves wanted to know whether we were aware of how many regional governments we would have in order to arrive at the figure of Shs 3.7 billion.  Initially, we did not know that this idea of regional governments would generate a lot of interest. So, we had put that figure of Shs 3.7 billion to cater for about two or three regional governments.  But since the idea of regional governments has generated a lot of interest and fortunately the regional governments will not commence this financial year, we shall be in position by the budget of 2006/2007, to plan better, and by that time, we hope to have known how many regions we will be catering for. So that this too will not be a big problem.  

Hon. Muzoora Amon-Reeves was also applying for Nihanga Township to be elevated to a town council status. But I have already explained this. You now know the procedure.  

About Elder representatives, is something that we are to look into. Thank you very much for brining that up.  

That is all that was raised, Madam Speaker, and without wasting time, I beg to thank the Committee, the Chairman, the Members of Parliament and the colleagues who stayed up to this late. This really shows concern in our sectors.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  The chairperson, I am sure you will be brief. 

MR BESISIRA: Madam Speaker, I am going to be very brief, just as brief as I am.  I would like to thank the Members for their concern and the Ministers for the responses.

We have raised most of these concerns because we have interest in this country. We want to see progress because up to today, there are very few Ministries that are housed.  We are saying that can we not start? We have got loans to do many things. Can’t we get a loan, would it not be cheaper at the end of the day? Because that is how we are looking at it.  

For example the pension of the East African Community attracts an interest of 7 percent. Can’t we get a loan and pay it off?  So, that is why we are raising all these issues.

Madam Speaker, I would like to be put on record straight, that possibly we might have mentioned diversion, but we meant that some of this money is being reallocated from compensating graduated tax to paying political leaders and I think the Minister has accepted; it is not a diversion.  

The RDCs appeared; we were just speculating that after all this, there would be this additional expenditure for paying the political leaders and the rest.

This compensation of G. tax we promised it. I would like to urge my colleagues that Government should come out and specifically say, what is going to happen, because we should not hear a different thing in the budget speech and then a get a different thing through circulars from the Ministry. This is really not how Government should operate.  

Let Government come here and tell us that we are going to compensate local governments Shs 30 billion and we know that it is Shs 30 billion that is going to compensate G tax.  But when you say Shs 30 billion, then you begin to say 7 for political leaders, I do not think we are moving in the right direction.

Madam Speaker, I would like request my colleagues to get interested in local governments. Local governments consume a third of our budget.  I happen to come out of a local Government and I know what it means when you are a Member of Parliament and you do not know what is happening in your constituency; it is very dangerous. Very dangerous because if you do not know what is happening in your constituency, if you do not know which school is being put up, or sub county is in NAADS, which project is going on; because I have seen experience in the time we have been visiting projects in local governments.  You find that a Member of Parliament is not aware of what projects are going on. This is really dangerous. 

I would like to urge my Colleagues, that we should all get interested, let us also supervise; let us not wait for the ministry all the time.  Lets also get involved in budgeting for the districts, and budget for the districts and the local governments, so that they can move. Then, you will be able to know what impact the money from the centre has on the whole country, especially your constituencies.

Madam Speaker, with that, I would like to request my colleagues to support our report.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, Chairperson and your committee; I want to thank the Ministers and all the Members, especially for their staying power. I am sorry to keep you late, but we are a bit off schedule. But now, since you have worked so hard, I would like to encourage you to descend to the Parliamentary gardens where I understand there is some kyamucation. It will cool your nerves and soothe you and you will have a very good night. So, we shall meet tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock to deal with the social services, defence and internal affairs. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.20 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 2 September 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)



