Wednesday, 22 September 2010 

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you, but I want to remind you that we still have a lot of business to handle and I would prefer we handle it now before the coming month. So, I urge you to find time to come and attend to Parliamentary work. I thank you.

2.40
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative): I thank you, Mr Speaker. My statement is very brief and I present it on behalf of the disabled community in this country. Copies of the statement are being circulated for Members.

The statement relates to the International Disability Awareness Week that was declared by the United Nations in 1958. The aim of the International Disability Week is to enable member states of the United Nations to take stock of the achievements and challenges in relation to empowerment of their populations who are affected by hearing impairment and disability. 

This week is usually celebrated in the third week of September. I remind Members that we are now in the third week of September of 2010.

I take this opportunity to remind this Parliament that this is not the first time we have debated issues of concern for People With Disabilities in this country. All I am saying is to remind you and to repeat some of the concerns and challenges, and to call upon you to work with us and the Executive arm of the State in addressing these concerns. 

I would like to remind you of three challenges; in 2006, we enacted a law called the Disability Act. However, up to now, it has not been implemented or even operationalised. We, therefore, use this opportunity to call upon the Executive arm of the State to ensure that this law is operationalised and implemented for the benefit of People With Disabilities in this country.

Secondly, in 2005, the people with disabilities in this country petitioned Parliament, among other things demanding that the law relating to sign language interpretation on televisions be operationalised. They all also demanded that a sign language policy be put in place and implemented. I regret to inform this august House that despite your very good recommendations relating to the sign language policy and the interpretation on televisions, the Executive arm of the State has deliberately failed or refused to enable our deaf brothers and sisters to access information on television. 

I also regret to let you know that the Executive arm of the State has made it difficult for our brothers and sisters to have the sign language policy in place from which they access information and other opportunities available in society.

A special request goes to our Minister of Information and Communication Technology. When hon. Aggrey Awori, a great friend of the disability movement was appointed the Minister of Information and Communication Technology, we thought all things were going to work out well -(laughter)- but as the saying goes, “Great expectations always end in great disappointments.” We are very disappointed. Hon. Awori has failed to implement the guidance provided by Government and by the Prime Minister. He has failed to influence the policy in relation to provision of sign language interpretation on television. 

I hope you will not take today’s comments as being personal. I know today’s comments are going to encourage you to do the needful. 

Lastly, we appeal to the relevant agencies involved in implementation of the policy on disability to do the needful. I thank you. We depend on you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

I) REQUEST FOR GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SDR 79.5 MILLION AND ANOTHER SDR 9.3 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP AND THE INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT (IFAD) RESPECTIVELY, FOR FINANCING THE UGANDA AGRICULTURAL TECHNOLOGY AND AGRIBUSINESS ADVISORY SERVICES (ATAAS) PROJECT

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Investment) (Mr Aston Kajara): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, I beg to present to the House the proposal to borrow up to SDR 79.5 million and another SDR 9.3 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) respectively, for financing The Uganda Agricultural Technology and Agribusiness Advisory Services (ATAAS) Project. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the committee in charge of the business handle it.
 
II)	REQUEST FOR GOVERNMENT TO BORROW THE EQUIVALENT IN KOREAN WON OF UP TO US$ 26.8 MILLION FROM THE EXPORT – IMPORT BANK OF SOUTH KOREA (EDCF) TO SUPPORT 5 BUSINESS, TECHNICAL AND VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING INSTITUTIONS (BTVET) AS COMPLEMENTARY FINANCING FOR ADB EDUCATION IV – POST PRIMARY EDUCATION AND TRAINING EXPANSION AND IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Investment) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I would like to present the proposal to borrow the equivalent in Korean Won of up to US$ 26.8 million from the Export – Import Bank of South Korea (EDCF) to support five Business, Technical and Vocational Education And Training Institutions (BTVET) as complementary financing for ADB Education IV – Post Primary Education and Training Expansion and Improvement Project. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee handle and report promptly. 

TORORO DISTRICT PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT FOR MALABA TOWN COUNCIL ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2008

2.48
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Public Accounts Committee report on the Auditor General’s report for the year ending 30 June 2008 for the districts of Tororo, Gulu, Wakiso, Katakwi, Kamuli, Butaleja, Kibaale, Mpigi and Adjumani for the consideration of this House. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee pick up the documents and report to the House.

MOTION FOR A RESOULTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER SECTION 186(1) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACT PROVIDING FOR EXTENSION OF THE TERM OF OFFICE OF INTERIM DISTRICT COUNCILS

2.49
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (MR Adolf Mwesige):Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament under Section 186(1) of the Local Government Act to provide for the extension of the term of office of the interim district councils. 

“WHEREAS under Article 179 of the Constitution, on the 22nd day of December, 2009, this Parliament approved the creation of 17 new districts, seven of which retrospectively become effective on the 1st of July, 2009 and 10 became operational on 1st July, 2010;

AND WHEREAS section 186(1) of the Local Government Act empowers this Parliament to extend the term of office of interim councils;

I, THEREFORE, move that this Parliament resolves that the term of office of the following seven new districts, which become operational on the 1st of July, 2009 be extended up to the end of the term of office of the current local government councils in May, 2011; Amudat, Buikwe, Buyende, Kyegegwa, Lamwo, Otuke and Zombo districts.”  

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Could you read us the reason this motion is moved so that we understand?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, Section 186(1) of the Local Government Act deals with the term of office of interim councils. It reads, “Unless approved by Parliament, an interim council shall exercise the powers conferred on it for a period not exceeding six months”.

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to justify that?

MR MWESIGE: As I said in my motion, this Parliament created the districts which I mentioned on December 22nd last year. And in the resolution of Parliament, the effective date was back-dated to 1 July, 2009. So, in keeping with Section 186, the Electoral Commission should have organised elections six months after these councils came in effect. From the practical point of view, since the motion was approved on 22 December, 2009, after that the Electoral Commission organised for elections of interim councils in January 2010. Six months elapse at the end of June this year. 

So, naturally, after the elapse of the six months, the Electoral Commission should have organised for the election of the leadership of these district councils; election of the chairpersons and election of the district councillors. 

When we contacted the Electoral Commission, they expressed inability to organise these elections. In any case, the general elections are in February next year; so we agreed that it is more prudent to have the elections in these new districts together with the rest of the councils in the country. That is why I have come back here to request this Parliament to allow these councils continue until the general election which will take place in February and until the term of office of all the district councils expires sometime in May next year. 

2.54
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I have one remark to make. I would have been very happy if the minister tells us how these new districts and their executives are performing. For example, I would like to know how many councillors Amudat has and Buyende for that matter, and whether they actually sit and transact business. And if so, on how many occasions?

I would want to know whether these districts have been able to constitute any of the statutory committees that should be helping them out, like district service commissions, district land boards and whether Government has been able to remit money to these districts and whether they have the capability to handle the finances and  how well they are doing it. 

The minister is just asking us to extend the terms without even giving an indication on whether he is satisfied with the way these districts are run. I am raising this matter because even some of our areas which have just received district status – apart from getting the chairperson and maybe the vice chairperson; the councils are so small that it does not make sense talking about any district councils there. It looks like a district was created, a chairperson is appointed and a few others and the rest of the things remain as if nothing has happened. So, let the minister tell us what the situation is like in those new districts. 

2.56
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. From 1st July this year up to now, these councils have been doing business; they have been entering into contracts and other things when actually their term had expired. This matter was known from when the districts were created. I want to know why the minister did not come in time, before the end of June, to extend the terms so that these people are not left in office illegally. 

Two, I would like to know from the minister, if there are legal issues that arise out of the work done by these councils between 1st July this year and now, what will happen? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your guidance on whether the numbers sitting in this Parliament can be in position to transact the business the minister is requesting for.

MR DOMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the minister. The intention of this motion is to give legitimacy to the existence of these interim councils and to legitimise their actions. But I need clarification because I do not have the law under which we are operating now. Before putting up these districts, there were also sub-counties which were created, and at one time a question was raised as to when the elections would be done in those respective areas. 

The Electoral Commission organised and conducted elections in those respective sub-counties, creating interim councils and interim executives. I want to find out whether this resolution, too, would retrospectively affect those sub-counties or the decisions that we take or if they are not affected by the expiry of that date. This is because those specific sub-counties are not mentioned here. Can the minister clarify on that one? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the problem is that we have to look at the provision under which these councils can be in formation. It seems the law provides that when you create a district out of another district; the administration of the new district will be carried out by the councillors who were on the district from which the new district has been formed. That is the law we made many, many years ago. I think that is what is causing the problem. Yes, some 10 councillors who went with the new district, formed the government of the new district, but this was supposed to be over a period of time, which when it expires you have to conduct the normal elections for a district so that you get new councillors, you get chairmen, and so on and so forth.  I thought this is the problem. Isn’t that the problem that the provision allowed five councillors to go and create a council in a new district? Isn’t that the problem? 

You see, the law is; if you have district A whose executive is elected during the general elections, but we create it before the general elections, the councillors originating from the parts that have formed the new district will constitute the council and from among them, they will get a chairman, unless the chairman of the original district is in the new district. Therefore, he takes over. That is for a period of time. It must not be for years and so forth. Now, in these particular councils, I think the period expired and the Electoral Commission is unable to conduct elections because of the coming elections. That is the reason. I do not know. 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, what you have stated is exactly the reason I have come here. First of all, for example, the Electoral Commission has been displaying the Voters’ Register and it is now over. This is August. We have roughly six months before the general elections. So, when we met, they presented this practical problem and we understood it. You cannot hold a general election in these seven new districts and then hold another election in other districts and the same districts in February. So, it only made sense that we wait for the general elections and hold the entire elections together, including those for the new districts. 

Hon. Kawanga, regarding the performance of the new districts; I am afraid I do not have the performance record here, but I can avail it. I do not have the entire performance of the new districts and the number of the councillors per district but it can also be availed because these are figures that can be ascertained.

Have these councils constituted statutory bodies? The answer is no, because they do not have powers to do so in the interim. When a council is in the interim period, there are certain things they cannot do. They cannot constitute a new district service commission, they cannot constitute a new district land board, but for purposes of recruitment, they use the commissions of the mother districts until a properly-elected council is put in place. So, after February next year when new councils are elected, these district councils will have power to constitute their own statutory bodies.

As I said, these councils were formally created by Parliament on 22 December last year. That is about seven months ago. That means we should have come here by the end of July or early August, but as you know, this Parliament has not been in session because of the primaries and other political activities. That is why I came to ask for this authority today. If this authority is given, it will of course validate all the actions which were done by these councils between the time their term expired and now when their term is extended. That is my understanding of this request.

On the question of whether this House with the numbers that are present now is able to do this work, I leave it to the Speaker to rule. 

THE SPEAKER: The answer is yes.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Now on the question of –

THE SPEAKER: Because if you look at the changes we made in our rules, yes, we can discuss matters. Then it will come at another stage; but now we can. It is proper.

MR MWESIGE: For the new sub-counties; as you know this Parliament does not approve them. New sub-counties are created by district councils with the approval of the minister. Therefore, for those sub-counties whose term has expired, the district councils and the minister will attend to them. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kyanjo, you were not clear as to what you wanted to say. You said, “Can we transact business with these numbers?” Yes we can. If you can look at the changes we made on this issue – maybe I will give you a break so that I can show you, and so that you become clearly aware of those provisions. Any further debate on this? 

MR KAWANGA: I am sorry to come back but after hearing the hon. Minister, I think we have got some logistical problems. For example, in the case of district service commissions, one would have assumed that after splitting the districts, the original district service commission should continue to service those original districts. But what has happened is - particularly in the case of Masaka - is that all the members of the district service commissions who do not come from the original Masaka District, were laid off. I am telling you. Consequently, the original district service commission now has only three members yet they are the ones interviewing people in respect of all the original districts. So, it has become impossible. These people are so hard-pressed. They are interviewing hundreds of teachers and I do not see the logic behind what was done; but that is what is actually on the ground. So, I am asking the minister to look into this specific matter and help these areas. These people are traversing Lyantonde, Rakai, what not and they cannot handle it. 

With regard to these district land boards, the question that needs to be asked is, “Can the district land board continue handling land in the new districts or not?” So, people who have got applications keep walking through the land offices to find out whether they can be helped and nobody has a specific answer to this. That is why I raised these issues.

MR MWESIGE: Well, Mr Speaker, I would expect hon. Kawanga to have brought this matter to my attention like he has on many occasions on other issues. It is irregular for any district to lay off members of the District Service Commission just because the areas they come from have now been constituted into new districts. If this had come to our attention we would have corrected it. But I am going to follow it up from now and correct the error because it is wrong. Until the new districts like Kalungu and Lwengo have got their proper district councils, the District Service Commission of Masaka, as appointed by the District Council and approved by the Public Service Commission, must continue to transact the business of the District Service Commission for all the five districts that now constitute Masaka. And I would not imagine that a District Council alone without the authority of the Public Service Commission would just lay off a commissioner at the District Service Commission. But I have noted the concern and I am going to follow it up with Masaka, and if we find that what you have said is correct we have to correct it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you have exhausted the debate. It is now a question of taking the decision and because we are taking a decision, I look at the number, but Parliament can start debate without looking at the number. So, I think that is clear to you. Since we were not taking any decisions, we were properly constituted and we could debate. That is what I wanted to tell you. 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for that further clarification; what you have explained is exactly what I had understood although I was not sure that I had understood the right thing. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the gallery this afternoon we have students from Namirembe Parents Mixed Day and Boarding School represented here by hon. Beti Kamya. She is not here. They are here to observe the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

I think what I am going to do now, because we are supposed to take a decision, is to suspend the proceedings for 10 minutes. Proceedings suspended.

(The House was suspended at 3.12 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.28 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, while we had a break a number of Members of Parliament approached me that they wanted to familiarise themselves with the relevant law on local government before they can take a decision. In view of this, let us proceed with another item on the Order Paper as Members benefit from the time we have given them.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ELECTRONIC TRANSACTIONS BILL, 2008

3.29
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “Electronic Transactions Bill, 2008” be read a second time.
The object of this Bill is to make a provision for the use – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Before you proceed, bear with me; I will be introducing our visitors in the gallery when I get the details, but I have recognised them. I do not know their particulars and that is why I am not introducing them now. You can proceed.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The object of this Bill is to make provision for the use, security, facilitation and regulation of electronic communications and transactions. It is also to encourage the use of the e-government service and to provide for related matters.

I beg to move that the House resumes and the committee of the whole House reports thereafter -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay now, can we hear the report of the committee. (Laughter)

3.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Nathan Igeme Nabeta): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the Sessional Committee on Information and Communications Technology (ICT) is mandated under Rule 161(c) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to examine critically Bills brought by Government before the House before they are debated.

The Electronics Transactions Bill, 2008 was read for the first time on 18 March 2009 and committed to the Committee on Information and Communications Technology for consideration and report to the House on its findings. In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by Rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and now reports.

Objective of the Bill

The objective of the Bill is to make provision for the use, security, facilitation and regulation of electronic communications and transactions; to encourage the use of e-government service and to provide for related matters.

Methodology

The committee met various stakeholders who are highlighted in the report.

The committee reviewed the Bill in the context of international best practices embodied in the following regional and international electronic commerce and related instruments:

i) 	Draft East African Framework for Cyber Laws (2008)
ii) 	Council of Europe Convention of Cyber Crime (2001)
iii) United National Convention on the use of Electronic Communications in International Contracts (2005)
iv) 	UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce (1996)
v)  	UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Signatures (2001).

The committee also held two workshops with stakeholders to further discuss the Bill.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee made the following observations and recommendations:

1. 	The committee observed that the Bill departs from certain key definitions and provisions of the model laws, regional and international instruments. The rationale behind uniformity of definitions and provisions is to ease the international nature of transactions envisaged.

Recommendation
	
The committee recommends that in order to capitalise on the work already done on the model laws and conventions, and to enhance regional and international consistency of the laws, the Bill should be worded to adhere more closely to the definitions and provisions of the applicable model laws and conventions where applicable.

2. 	Application of the Act

	It was noted that clause 3(1) limits the application of the Act. This contradicts one of the objects of the Bill, which is to remove and eliminate the legal and operational barriers to electronic transactions.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the exclusion of the Bill from applying to certain documents should be eliminated. Electronically signed wills should also be recognised provided there are witnesses to confirm their authenticity.

3. 	Issuance of guidelines

	It was observed that clause 3(3) does not give any guidelines as to when the minister should invoke the powers given to him. The likely result is that these powers will be abused or will not be exercised.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the guidelines should specify the circumstances under which the minister may amend the clause.

4. 	Cancelling electronic transactions after receipt of goods or services

	The committee observed that with regard to software and music downloads, the law does not protect merchants against crooked clients.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that in order to boost e-commerce, the law should protect merchants against customers who may want to swindle their electronic goods such as software by cancelling after download.

5. 	Jurisdiction of courts

	The committee observed that there are no provisions in the Bill to give our courts extra territorial jurisdiction and jurisdiction of courts.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that such provisions on territorial jurisdiction and jurisdiction of courts should be included.

6. 	Power of the minister to amend Schedule

	It was noted in clause 34 that the minister may, by statutory instrument, with the approval of Cabinet, amend the Schedule.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the minister should do so in consultation with the National Information Technology Authority – Uganda (NITA-U) for their technical input.

7. 	Schedule

	The committee observed that the Bill did not provide for documents not covered by this Act.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that documents not covered by this Act be included as Schedule 2, and these include:

i) 	Will or codicil;
ii) 	Trust created by a will or codicil; 
iii) 	Power of Attorney;
iv) 	Document that creates or transfers an interest in property and requires registration to be effective against third parties; and
v) 	Negotiable instruments, including negotiable documents of title.

8. 	Other electronic transactions

	The committee observed that the scope of the provisions does not extend beyond sale and purchase of goods and services to accommodate inter-party transfers/exchanges, inter-bank transfers/exchanges etc.

Recommendation

The committee strongly recommends that the above mentioned and other electronic transactions should be provided for in the Bill.

9. 	Intellectual property rights

	The proposed Bill does not adequately address issues of intellectual property rights and the protection of buyer and third parties.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the intellectual property legislations in Uganda be revised to cater for the electronic environment.

10. 	Lead agency

	The committee noted that the provisions of the Bill were not clear on the role of NITA-U.

Recommendation

The Bill should deliberately make NITA-U the lead agency for the development, coordination and supervision of e-government applications and services.

Conclusion

The committee has proposed a number of amendments (as attached) and requests that at an appropriate time, the House considers these amendments to form part of the Bill.

The proposed Bill when passed into law with the proposed amendments, will make provision for the use, security, facilitation and regulation of electronic communications and transactions; to encourage the use of e-government services and provide for related matters.

Stakeholders’ comments, observations, proposed amendments and recommendations to the Bill have been attached to this report as Annex I (page 13).  More views of the stakeholders are also still available.

The committee recommends that subject to the proposed amendments, the Electronic Transactions Bill, 2008 be passed into law. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, committee, for the report. Hon. Members, before we proceed with the debate, I had introduced students from Namirembe Parents’ Mixed Day and Boarding Primary School who are on this side, but I understand these are also from Namirembe Parents Mixed Day and Boarding School. Although the uniforms are a bit different, they are from the same school. You are most welcome. (Applause)

Hon. Members, debate is open. 

3.38
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, chairperson of the committee and members. I support the idea of bringing a law to regulate electronic transactions. We do appreciate that there has been a lacuna in the law. However, I remember when a report was made in respect to other related Bills, there was a fundamental issue I raised and I would wish to reiterate the same. I thought the committee would capture this issue, and that is making the law user-friendly. 

We are piling up several legislations on the same subject scattered all over. If you looked at the Order Paper, in the notice of business to follow, there is the Bill entitled, “Electronics Signatures Bill, 2009” on the second page. You would find it extremely difficult to distinguish it from Electronics Transactions Bill. The subject is almost the same. 

When I look at this Bill again on page 2, clause 5, the definition of electronic transactions is “the sale or purchase of goods and services whether between businesses, individuals or Government and other public or private organisations…” It continues, but the whole point is that electronic transaction is about sell of goods, that is e-commerce. We already have in place a Sale of Goods Act -(Mr Nabeta rose_)- Let me finish my point. We have the Sale of Goods Act; would it not be prudent for us to widen the scope of that law which regulates the sale of goods and incorporate it in the aspect of e-commerce? How difficult would it be to make it user-friendly and to make it neat? We already have the Contracts Act. It is totally different from this; you make it so complicated.

The reason why the Law Reform Commission had to review the laws of Uganda to come up with a compendium of 2000 was to make these laws user-friendly; and it is one of our obligations as Parliament. Now we are in a situation where we are going to make legislation for every aspect of commerce or transactions. I do not think it is good draftsmanship or making of legislation for us. Otherwise, I support the whole idea of regulating commercial transactions done in that line. 

Maybe to say it a bit more clearly, the committee reported to us that telecommunications companies in their memoranda had indicated that they wanted a codified legislation called cyberspace law so that all transactions, all matters to do with cyberspace, regulating use of the computer, are contained therein. There is also another Bill on the use of a computer, electronic transactions and so on; why don’t we codify these laws into one so that we make the law user-friendly? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NABETA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, the only unfortunate part is that the honourable colleague raised this issue last time when we were handling the Computer Misuse Bill which is now the Computer Misuse Act, and we had actually asked the ministry to come and respond to that.

The issue is, yes, the laws are similar but they are different because they handle different components of the electronic world. Actually, we are using the international convention model laws. They have model laws for the United Nations, for the European Commission and even for the East African Community. Those are the model laws we are following so that everyone is in harmony with all the other cyber laws. 

So, each law affects a different aspect. You do have the Sale of Goods Act and the Evidence Act, but if somebody asked you today what the origin of that email was; what would you deliver? What is the origin of an email? If you have a contract, it is from one email to another email; from one email you have confirmed buying and from another email somebody has said you have confirmed a purchase. How do you deliver the email, which is a soft copy, as evidence?  

Actually, what we are doing is creating the environment for all those to be accommodated. We are not changing the law; we are just creating the tools to facilitate the Evidence Act, the Sale of Goods Act and all the other Acts. It is just to make sure that all the tools available to technology can be used as evidence in enforcing those particular transactions that go on in the electronic world. That is specifically for the Electronic Transactions Bill.

If you look at the Electronic Signatures Bill; if you sit on a computer, how does a person on the other side know that I am actually talking to hon. Kawanga on the other side? Electronic signature is actually inscriptions which give the identity of a person. Now, that brings in a lot of other ways of how you make sure that hon. Kawanga is hon. Kawanga using that computer. That is the inscription which lays down the rules of procedure of getting personal identification keys. You even see the Bill is bigger than the others. It is just specifically on how you create agencies to monitor personal identification keys. It is a very sophisticated thing because people are now signing documents on Internet. If you are signing something on the Internet, who are you and what is you identification? That is a whole series of just identification; using personal identification keys; and that is the Electronics Signatures Bill. It is just to re-emphasise the point that someone is actually who they are when they are actually electronically signing a document.

Electronic transaction is just about allowing all the paper transactions you have to be transformed into the electronic world and being able to be enforced under the Acts of Uganda. Those are the models we have. We have already passed the Computer Misuse Act which was actually in regard to the operationalisation of a computer - who has access to the computer and who is using it? If am using your computer under the disguise that I am you and I commit a crime with that computer, how do you deal with me?

You understand specifically how the lacunas in the law have been. So, we are just creating an environment to harmonise. Actually, the day we passed the Computer Misuse Bill you were not here, but we highlighted something specifically. If I had known that you were going to raise it again, I would have brought you another document to highlight to you exactly the specifications of how the Evidence Act and how all the other Acts are facilitated by these new laws. They are similar because the definitions must be harmonised through the same environment, but they are separate on the specific tasks they are handling. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you chairperson for the clarification, but I seek further clarification. As I said earlier, we have a number of other legislations to regulate commercial transactions here. This is not the first. We already have the Sale of Goods Act and it makes a number of provisions not on e-commerce but transactions probably done manually. 

There is this crucial aspect on the question of jurisdiction. For example, these cyber transactions are global in nature. In international trade, for example, we have been having a practice of using the bill of lading. That is a document that is consigned to you as the purchaser and that is regulated under the Sale of Goods Act. Now, this time you are saying that the bill of lading can be done by the use of an email. There is already an existing law in as far as the hard copy is concerned but now you are coming up with a soft copy. The question here is: Why should the soft copy be regulated by a different set of legislation as opposed to the hard copy? This is where the issue comes in and that is just an example. 

Also, the question of jurisdiction comes in here. When we get to litigation, we have to find out where the consignor is. They may be in Dubai but with the consignee in Uganda where the transaction is concluded from. If there is a dispute – (Interruption)

MR NABETA: Just a clarification on that. Exactly what you have said – why can’t you use the soft copy of the bill of lading today? Why do you need a hard copy today? Why is it that they now want a hard copy yet when you pass electronic transactions you actually can use a soft copy? So, is it today that actually you cannot use a hard copy?

THE SPEAKER: What I gather from you is that the law should be consolidated and unfortunately it was not. What do we do? Do we proceed with this one or not? Is it being done for purposes of future laws or will it be applied to the present laws too? I am asking this because from what you are saying, they should have come together with the others. The problem I see now is that they have been separated. Should we handle them as they are?

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Practically, it may be difficult at this stage for Government to withdraw the Bill and have it consolidated. However, I was raising this because we already have the Electronic Signatures Bill, which is more or less related to the one we are handling, still pending with us. My opinion is that these two can be consolidated at this stage. 

In regard to the Sale of Goods Act, I was trying to express that practical difficulty you are going to face. The difficulty will be to the effect that if one is to deal with that old mechanism of getting a bill of lading, they would go to the Sale of Goods Act, yet if such persons have to get a soft copy, they have to use a different legislation. This presents difficulties to the users of the law because the bill of lading is already regulated under the Sale of Goods Act.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I sympathise with my colleague, hon. Lukwago. He brought up that matter the other time and we even suspended business on the same issue because we had to go out and look at this law again. I do not know why hon. Lukwago is taking us back. I think we need to move forward because he should have gone to the committee to express all his views. He is the one who caused suspension of work and now he is again coming up with the same issue.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mt Speaker. I think it is not helpful to simply criticise the Member; it is better to help that Member understand the situation. Right now cyber laws all over the world are having difficulties because of the speed at which technology is moving. This has caused trouble all over the world. The reason is that when you deal with cyber specifications and another component in the technology changes, you have to change the whole compressed law. The reason these laws are being split is to avoid going back to the compressed laws, and I am sure that this will be possible in future. With the help of an international consensus, we will be able to bring these laws together.

As the chairperson explained, we are trying to follow the international modes so that we do not get away from the accurate thing. I am quite sure that in future we shall be able to reach an agreement through all the international conventions and compress some of these laws. Otherwise, in the meantime, it is helpful to go piecemeal. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.53
MR DENNIS HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Mr Speaker, I have internalised this Bill since it was introduced for the first reading. I would like to say that in my considered opinion and given the era ICT is moving in, this Bill just seeks to provide for the transfer of information and records by electronic means.

I know that once enacted, this Bill will give legal effect to electronic documents, records and signatures. The Bill will increase certainty for domestic and international transactions that are conducted through electronic medium. Thirdly, the Bill will encourage the growth of electronic commerce. Lastly, it will promote business and community confidence in the use of electronic transactions. To me, in this era of dot com, I would strongly think this is the way to go. We must enact this Bill into law given the above fundamental reasons I have mentioned.

Mr Speaker, I beg to support the motion and beg that we proceed. Thank you.

3.55
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank the committee for the report. However, my only small concern is about how much the committee did in examining the possibility of Ugandans understanding these laws and implementing them. Are the people who are going to implement these laws properly trained? Have we had sufficient dissemination of the information in regard to these laws? I am asking these questions because we do not want to just put in place laws that will have no implementers or laws which people will find difficult to implement. 

I would have liked to see the committee make specific references to these questions. I am saying this because I notice that so many Ugandans have been trained in ICT but either they are not focused or even finding employment for them is still a problem. So, from a personal point of view, I would like to know whether these laws will not have any implementation problems.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, have we exhausted the debate?

MR NABETA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have just a minor touch on that one. Yes, there are arrangements to do that and that is why the committee had recommended that the lead agency, which is NITA, should take the lead in terms of training the people who will be overseeing all these. They are the implementing agency that will be licensing the authentication areas. Also, according to the NITA Act, this body is supposed to oversee e-government services. It is also supposed to operationalise e-government activities in the country. We have highlighted all these in the report and asked the ministry to let the lead agency be allowed to operationalise them and disseminate the information to those people who are concerned. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, that concludes the debate and the motion for second reading in regard to this particular Bill. We shall decide on this motion tomorrow. With that we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.58 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 23 September at 2.00 p.m.) 


