Thursday, 12 September 2013

Parliament met at 12.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I want to apologize for the late start. I had gone to meet H.E, the President on the issue of the budget process. We have now agreed that both the Executive and Parliament prioritise the budget process. So, any ministers whose reports have not been considered will not be allowed to travel until the budget process is completed. The chairpersons whose committees have not yet reported are equally embargoed from travel. We want to work expeditiously and complete all the reports tomorrow so that we can do appropriation next week. Those are very serious matters; we just need to do it like that.


Secondly, yesterday I had given opportunity to the Committee on Education to report but they declined the opportunity. So, they will now come last in the order of reporting. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

12.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiti): Madam Speaker, as directed by rules 30 and 31 of our Rules of Procedure, allow me to lay the following local governments financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with reports and opinions thereon by the Auditor-General:
    1. Kyegegwa District Local Government;
    2. Kamuli District Local Government;
    3. Pallisa District Local Government;
    4. Mayuge District Local Government;
    5. Amudat District Local Government;
    6. Abim Local District Government;
    7. Moroto District Local Government;
    8. Nakapiripirit District Local Government;
    9. Buhweju District Administration; and
    10. Butaleja District Local Government.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, all those are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for urgent perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014 

12.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Ms Sarah Mwebaza): Thank you, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Hope you have the executive summary.

MS MWEBAZA: I have tried to make it. Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the Provisions of Article 155 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 177 (a) and (b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on East African Community Affairs is mandated, among others, to examine the ministerial policy and critically look – (Interruptions)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure. The defence of the budgetary estimates is the hallmark of parliamentary practice. In the event that we don’t have the Leader of Government Business, Deputy Leader of Government Business, the Government Chief Whip in the House, should we continue to deliberate on a matter of such a great importance? I am saying this because it is not only the minister in charge of the East African Community Affairs that must understand the issues on the budget process. I beg to be advised.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the absence of the prime ministers does not mean that we cannot listen to the statement. Our ears are working. Please present the report.

MS MWEBAZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me proceed from where I had stopped. Let me lay on Table, the minutes of the meetings for the Committee on East African Community Affairs on the Ministry of East African Community Affairs policy statement for the financial year 2013/2014. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, the scope of the report is indicated at 2.0 and the methodology – I am trying to summarize this representation. I know that members have the copies.

The methodology is at 3.0 – Members can go through that while the mandate and the mission are at 4.0. So, let me now go to 4.1 on the performance of the previous budget for the financial year 2012/2013.

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that the Ministry of East African Community Affairs was appropriated Shs 19.57 billion in the financial year 2012/2013. By the end of June 2013 it had received Shs 19.623 billion, which is 99.8 percent and had spent Shs 19.477 billion, representing a performance of 99.5 percent of the appropriated budget. See table 1 in the report.

The unutilized amount of Shs 94 million is attributed to the wage bill due to the existence of some 15 vacant positions in the ministry. The details of the ministry’s budget performance for the financial year 2012/2013 is in table one on page 2 of the report. 4.2, I go to the key outputs of the ministry for the financial year 2012/2013 which are in the main report on pages 2-4.

The committee noted that the projected budget for MEACA for financial year 2013/2014 amounts to Shs19.324 billion which is Shs0.24 billion lower than the previous year 2012/2013 as indicated in table 2.

For the financial year 2013/2014 the Ministry has been allocated Shs19.325 billion of which Shs0.614 is for wage recurrent then Shs18.133 billion is for non-wage recurrent;and Shs0.578 billion the development budget which includes a tax component of Shs0.180 billion.

Please I refer you to table 2 of the main report on page 2 indicating those figures for the proposed budget of 2013/2014. 

The major change in budget allocation for the ministry between financial year 2012/2013 and financial year 2012/2013 is attributed to the reduction amounting to Shs1.71 billion due to the clearance of domestic arrears for Uganda’s contribution to the EAC Secretariat that had accumulated in the financial year 2011/2012.

The committee observed that over 73 percent of MEACA’s budget will be passed on as Uganda’s contribution to the EAC Secretariat, leaving less than Shs5.19 billion for MEACA’s general operations and development. About Shs3.427 billion which is 17.74 percent will be utilised to support the general office operations, including rent and utilities, travel inland and abroad and others and general maintenance of office property. It was noted that Shs1.132 billion which is 5.9 percent will be utilised for the general coordination of EAC integration programmes. I refer you to table 3 for those details which are found on page 5 of the main report.

I now go to the planned activities for the financial year 2013/2014 whose details are found on pages 5 to 7 of the main report. 

I go to the unfunded and underfunded priorities for financial year 2012/2013.

The committee noted that in June 2013, MEACA received an additional allocation of Shs1.404 billion from the Ministry of Finance to cater for the increased contribution to the EAC of Shs1.2 billion, domestic rent arrears Shs0.284 billion and a wage increment of Shs0.024 billion. However, the following remain unfunded or underfunded:

    (a) EAC Chairmanship 

Chairing of the EAC, Uganda has got financial implications and it is the President of Uganda who is chairing the community at the moment. To effectively carry out this noble duty to Uganda’s benefit, all meetings have to be attended and country positions defended. A funding gap estimated to be Shs1 billion is required to effectively prepare and attend these meetings.

    (b) The EAC Summit in Kampala

Currently, Uganda is holding the chair for the EAC. However, the chair will be passed on the next partner state in November 2013. There is a chance to market Uganda by holding the EAC Summit in Kampala. However, this activity which requires Shs3 billion needs to be financed.

The committee observes that while MEACA was planning to rationalise within its budget to accommodate some of the budget shortfalls, this will not be possible for the case of holding the EAC summit in November 2013.  

The committee recommends that Government should identify funds to cater for this activity.

    (c) Deepening of EAC integration

It has been observed that since the inception of the EAC, the impact of the integration has not yet been felt on the ground in the country. This is due to the inadequate funding to effectively implement a comprehensive programme on sensitisation and awareness on issues of EAC integration. A funding gap of Shs0.500 billion is required to bridge the gap.

    (d) Office Space

Office space has emerged as a challenge due to increasing activity and staffing levels. MEACA is looking forward to acquiring another floor (a third floor) on Postel Building at a cost of Shs0.301 billion.

    (e) Coordination of the Implementation of the Common Market

A certificate of financial implications for the common market implementation plan was issued by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, the funding to coordinate the implementation of the CMIP is inadequate. Funding of Shs1.763 billion is required to bridge the existing gap.

    (f) Statistical Development and Management

There is a funding gap of Shs0.131 billion, which exists for statistical development and management of EAC integration process.

Madam Speaker, the details of the off-budget/development partners financing the Ministry of East African Community Affairs are found on page 9. I refer you to page 9 of the main report; I will not read those details.

I now go to the general observations and recommendations which are found on page 10 to page 18 of the main report.

The committee observes as follows:

    1. Alignment of MEACA’s Strategic Objectives with the EAC Development Strategy

The EAC development strategy is a framework that guides planning at regional level, and as such, all EAC partner states are expected to align their visions and development plans towards achieving the targets in the EAC development strategy.

The committee noted that the EAC development strategy cuts across all sectors of government and it is a duty of all sectors to align their strategic plans towards this strategy. At the national level it is through the current Vision 2040 and the National Development Plan (2010-2015).

The committee observes that MEACA has aligned its coordination function to the EAC development strategy through alignment of its five-year strategic plan to the National Development Plan, and the committee therefore recommends as follows:

That MEACA should continuously spearhead the main streaming of EAC integration with line ministries to ensure that the EAC components in their sectors are prioritised and budgeted for.

    2. Areas of the MEACA’s strategic plan which will be prioritised for implementation in financial year 2013/2014 

The committee notes that MEACA, as a coordinating ministry, derives its vote function outputs from the key strategic objectives in the strategic plan. To deliver the strategic objectives of the plan, the ministry has allocated most of its resources to the following key outputs as shown in Table 4 on page 11.

The committee recommends that the share of the MEACA budget in respect to public awareness and public participation in the EAC integration should be revised upwards to fast track the sensitisation programme for more Ugandans.

    3. National Policy on EAC Integration

The committee was concerned about the absence and delayed formulation of a national policy on EAC integration. The absence of this policy in Uganda has greatly contributed to the current unclear position and direction of the country in EAC integration.

It was further observed that for the last two years, Ministry of East African Affairs has been promising Parliament to produce the national policy on the EAC integration but without success. The committee was informed that currently, the policy is undergoing consultation with the key stakeholders and it is expected to be submitted to Cabinet for approval by October 2013.

The committee on national policy on EAC integration repeated its earlier recommendation that Government fast tracks the development of a national policy on EAC integration to serve as a reference point in the negotiations and implementation of the EAC protocols on behalf of Uganda.

    4. Lack of a permanent home for Ministry of East African Affairs

The committee observes that MEACA has no permanent home compared to all other partner states and has continuously paid escalating sums of money for rent of its office premises.
The allocation for rent for MEACA for financial year 2013/2014 is Shs 589.1 million. This is intended to cater for the existing office space and the outstanding verified rent arrears amounting to Shs 169.5 million.

The committee further observed that money allocated to clear these arrears are part of the ministry’s budget ceiling to enable payment of this bill within the cash limit of Government throughout the financial year due to inadequate resources.

On this, the committee recommends that Government should invest in permanent structures for its ministries, departments and agencies in a phased approach in order to save on its exorbitant rent bill.

5. High expense on travel abroad

The committee noted that MEACA incurs a high expenditure on travel abroad and accommodation to enable its staff to attend regional meetings. Information was availed that the EAC partner states have explored the idea of ICT tele-video conferencing in order to reduce the expenses on travel abroad.
In 2012, the EAC Secretariat with the support of trade mark East Africa started an initiative to establish EAC video conferencing facilities based at the respective headquarters of the ministries responsible for EAC in partner states. However, the estimated amount for this undertaking is US$ 2 million, which trade mark East Africa is still mobilising to kick start this project.

The committee recommends that MEACA should continuously explore alternatives to physical meetings in the region in order to eventually save time and reduce on the huge travel and accommodation costs.

    6. Level of sensitisation about the progress of the EAC integration

Although MEACA has put in place a number of measures to sensitise the public through media and outreach to the community, more needs to be done. The committee notes that public needs to be continuously informed about the progress of the integration and the expected benefits from it.

The committee recommends MEACA should carry out a massive sensitisation campaign on the EAC integration involving Parliament, all leaders and stakeholders to enable the message to percolate to the grassroots.

    7. The staffing levels
MEACA is charged with the coordination function of all issues of the EAC in Uganda. The committee however notes that the ministry is largely understaffed making it a challenge to attend to all the areas within its mandate. About 21 percent of the approved staff establishment for MEACA remained vacant.

The committee was informed that MEACA has submitted to the Public Service Commission to have the staff recruited but no progress has been made yet. The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Public Service should expeditiously handle the recruitment of more staff to MEACA to enable the ministry to effectively deliver on its key output.

8. Harmonisation of national laws with the Common Market Protocol

Uganda Law Reform Commission has been championing the exercising of reviewing and proposing amendment to national laws while MEACA has been undertaking the coordination role.
The committee noted that law reform commission conducted an in-depth review and identified 59 laws that have an impact on the implementation of the Common Market Protocol. Seven principal laws were noted to be in conflict with the EAC Common Market Protocol and an omnibus bill for amendment of these laws and four subsidiary legislations had been drafted.

Fifteen laws were reviewed and found compliant with the Common Market Protocol. Thirty seven laws have been identified for alignment to the EAC Common Market Protocol, a list which is attached to the main report.
The remaining 37 laws will be reviewed in this financial year 2013/2014. The committee therefore observes that the process of harmonisation of laws with the Common Market Protocol has been long overdue.
It therefore recommends that:
    a. MEACA should ensure that the omnibus bill that seeks to harmonise the national laws with the Common Market Protocol is expeditiously brought before Parliament for consideration.
    b. Laws that are currently being passed by Parliament should be aligned to the Common Market Protocol.

9. Progress of the ratification of protocols by Cabinet

The committee was concerned about the slow progress of the ratification of protocols by Cabinet and was informed as follows:
    • The protocol on foreign policy and coordination. This protocol was approved by the 12th ordinary summit of the EAC heads of state and signed by ministers responsible for foreign affairs on 3rd December 2010. MEACA submitted a cabinet memo to the cabinet secretariat which on 9th July 2013 was cleared for Cabinet consideration.

    • The protocol on combating drug trafficking. This was signed on 13 January 2001 in Arusha Tanzania. However, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs which was responsible for initiating the process of ratification by then did not submit the same for ratification. A cabinet memorandum on ratification of the protocol on combating drug trafficking in the East African Region was submitted to the cabinet secretariat on 22 February 2013. The cabinet memorandum number ct 2012 is still undergoing the ratification process.

    • Protocol on cooperation in defence. This protocol was approved and signed by EAC heads of state during their 10th extra ordinary meeting that took place on 28th April 2013. MEACA submitted a cabinet memo to cabinet secretariat for ratification which is number ct 2013/74. The cabinet secretariat through its letter no. ref s.7396/141 dated 17June 2013 requested MEACA to make some further input and resubmit for consideration. 

    • Protocol on combating and preventing of corruption. Upon a directive of the 24th extra ordinary meeting, the council directed the EAC secretariat to constitute a team of experts drawn from partner states’ anti-corruption agencies and ministries of justice to make further input to the revised protocol on preventing and combating corruption. 

    • The protocol was referred to the 15th meeting of the Sectoral Council on Legal and Judicial Affairs to examine its legal content. The protocol was one of the agenda items for the 15th meeting of the sectoral council on 20 July to 1 August 2013 which took place in Bujumbura, Burundi.

    • Protocol on peace and security. Madam Speaker, the 14th ordinary summit of heads of state at its sitting on 30 November 2012, approved the East African Community protocol on Peace and Security. The ministers responsible for peace and security signed the protocol on 15 February 2013. MEACA prepared a cabinet memo and is still being consulted upon by the relevant stakeholders before submission to cabinet secretariat.

    • Protocol on good governance. This is a draft protocol that is still being negotiated. The draft protocol covers various areas of cooperation such as: constitutionalism; rule of law and access to justice; protection of human rights and promotion of equal opportunities; democracy and democratisation processes; economic governance, etc. Discussions on the revised draft protocol will soon be concluded.

Madam Speaker, the committee therefore recommends on these protocols that Cabinet should expedite the ratification of protocols before it and MEACA should continuously update Parliament on the progress made.

10. MEACA’s role in mainstreaming EAC issues to ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs)

The committee was concerned about MEACA’s role in mainstreaming EAC issues in ministerial policy statements of other ministries, departments and agencies and the extent to which they, ministries, departments and agencies, have actually complied.

The committee was informed that in February 2013, MEACA communicated to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for the mainstreaming of EAC regional integration programmes/activities into the work plans and budgets of ministries, departments and agencies. 

This communication was subsequently transmitted to all MDAs through the second budget call circular of 12April 2013.  

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends on this that MEACA should carry out an audit of the policy statements of all ministries every financial year and ascertain if the ministries, departments and agencies comply with the directive from the PS/ST regarding mainstreaming of EAC activities.

I hereby lay on Table the key performance indicators on the issues of the EAC integration by ministries, departments and agencies. I beg to lay.

11. Outstanding contributions to the EAC through ministries, departments and agencies

The committee noted that there are a number of outstanding contributions to EAC institutions and organs which are paid by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development through the line ministries.

The committee observes that these ministries do no prioritize payment of these contributions, which has led to an increase of the level of indebtedness to the EAC.

The committee was informed that discussions have been held with Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Water on the outstanding contributions and some progress has been made in terms of Uganda’s contributions towards operation save the Nile Perch under the agricultural sector. 

However, outstanding arrears remain especially with Ministry of Education. The issue of funding by MDAs to meet financial obligations of EAC plans and budget is being considered by Cabinet. 

The committee on this recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should make payments of contributions to the EAC organs and institutions on behalf of MDAs through the Ministry of East African Community Affairs with effect from next financial year 2014/2015.

12.  Absence of effective focal persons at border posts and at MDAs.

The committee observes that  although MEACA has an important role at the borders with partner states especially while ensuring that issues of the EAC integration are given due consideration, there are no EAC focal persons at the border points.

The committee therefore recommends that MEACA should prioritise the recruitment of focal persons at the borders with EAC partner states in the financial year 2014/15 in order to foster the issues of the EAC integration.

Madam Speaker, allow me to present to you the proposed allocations for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs 2013/2014 Vote 021. The following are the allocations: recurrent expenditure is Shs 18,746,563,883; the development expenditure 	is Shs 578,000,000 which is a total of Shs 19,324,563,883.

Madam Speaker, I now move that Parliament adopts the report of the committee on EAC and I beg to move. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, now I am proposing that for the next report, we just read the heading and recommendation because the full report is going to be reflected in the Hansard. I am directing the Clerk to reflect the full report in the Hansard for our record purposes.

We shall only comment for 30 minutes and I do not know whether the shadow minister is here to give some highlights for only five minutes. If not, hon. members, the - you cannot assume representation. I think there is no shadow minister. 

So Members, the report has been signed by the necessary one-third and you may comment now. But again, the Members of the committee should not stand up. 

12.59
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): I thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the committee and the chairperson for the report. However, the report hints on very important issues that really we have to take seriously as Parliament and one of the issues concerns the coordination role of MEACA. MEACA is a coordinating ministry. Its major role is to see how other ministries do implement the resolutions of the Council of Ministers. 


However, the organisation structure within the ministry is still lacking. The people that head the departments in MEACA are of a low rank compared to the people that they are supposed to coordinate in other ministries. A head of department in MEACA is at principal officer level or commissioner yet he is supposed to coordinate directors in other ministries. It is like a teacher calling a meeting of headmasters. So, I think this issue has to be put right if MEACA has to do its role properly.

Secondly, on the budget of other ministries, I read the policy statement of MEACA and they do not indicate how much money other ministries have dedicated to implementing their laws in ensuring that they implement issues of MEACA. So, it should have been very important even in this report to show the amount of money in other ministries that have been put aside to implement MEACA issues. 

Also, the legislations are going to be harmonised and a list has been indicated of how many laws that need to be harmonised –(Member timed out_)

1.01
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Island, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done. However, I still wonder and question how Uganda is really positioned to benefit from the East African integration. Take an example of the islands where our people are always reporting cases of stolen items especially fishing gear and in most cases, I will not use the words “different governments” but individuals from our partner states like Kenya are the ones stealing these engines and our people have suffered. We have even reached the extent of actually crossing to different police stations in Kenya and it takes over a year to secure that engine back to Uganda if at all you can secure it. 

The amount requested for by these different police posts in Kenya, because I have seen here that there are protocols of security and peace and as a result of this integration, when we complain several times, we are always held back by our own Government saying, “You are jeopardising the integration” yet it is the individuals from the other partner states who are stealing items from Uganda and when these people come here, they are free to fish but when our people cross over, they are not free to fish. So, how do we benefit from this integration? Are we ratifying protocols for the benefit of other countries? What about our country –(Member timed out_) 

1.03
MS THEOPISTA NABULYA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern is about the harmonisation of some laws because we have mentioned about seven of them and the Employment Act of Uganda is one of them. I just want to request the Ministry of East African Affairs to ensure that at the time of harmonisation, the stakeholders are involved, specifically the workers because at the level of our trade union organisations of the respective member states, we have already started on the issue of harmonising our labour laws. So, in this case, if we are to match the East African Community Affairs, we need to be involved at that level as well.

Secondly, I wonder, the other member states of the East African Community have a minimum wage policy which is absent in Uganda. I beg the government to open up so that we can have a minimum wage policy in the country to guide the players to be above to match with the East Africa Community Affairs. 

Lastly, I just want to urge the government to see to it that at least this time, they adhere to the obligation of the international contribution to the East African Community which has not been the case with other international bodies. 

1.04
MR ABDI CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its report and especially the chairperson of the committee for the good presentation. I would also like to thank the late Rt Hon. EriyaKategaya for spearheading this Ministry of East African Community Affairs very well.  

I also thank the current minister, hon. Bageine, for the work that he is doing. However, we wouldn’t wish to appropriate money for meetings only.  You are always in Arusha for meetings without any tangible issues gotten by the state. In fact, when we look at what is happening in Congo where Tanzania has already sent in their forces, what is the ministry doing in terms of helping to curb the conflict that can exacerbate into regional conflict – (Interruption)

MR EBIL: Madam Speaker, actually as we speak, there was retaliation by Rwanda to overcharge the trucks from Tanzania from $150 per truck to $500 and all this shows the bad blood that is brewing because of the differences between the two presidents of Tanzania and Rwanda. So, Mr Minister, how are you going to ensure you suppress this when the two sister country leaders can raise their differences to the extent of taxing the innocent citizens of this country? 

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you very much for the information. As you can see, the community right now is a three state affair: it is Kenya, Uganda and Rwanda. We have not yet seen the involvement of Tanzania so much and maybe you are recruiting Southern Sudan into it but we do not see anything coming forth by the ministry including us, the sprinters of the East African Community Affairs. In fact, it would be unfair for us to begin discussing finances to be given to you when the community itself is almost collapsing because without Tanzania, where will you sit? Will you be in Arusha anymore or shall we change the headquarters and take it elsewhere – (Member timed out.)

1.07
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and because of time, I will comment on only two points. My first is the promotion of the Kiswahili language. I know they are planning this financial year to establish a protocol and establishment of the Kiswahili commission. But this one is not supported in the local countries, especially Uganda. I am aware that one time Government had attempted to promote the teaching of Kiswahili in schools but that idea was abandoned. So, how will this Kiswahili commission operate when the local people have not been helped to internalise the Kiswahili language? And of course you know the importance of a language in such institutions like the East African Community.

Madam Speaker, my second point is on the public awareness or public sensitisation of Ugandans about the East African Community. Much may have been done but a lot still remains to be done. In the communities at the grassroots, the activities of the East African Community are not understood and felt. Can we change the methods we are using?  I have seen on page 4 that the Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom and the Acholi sub-region cultural institutions were sensitised; when you talk of cultural institutions, are they the people or what? I was pleasantly surprised when I visited one of my remotest community primary school in Kyakaitera and they sang the East Community Anthem very well, including all the stanzas. But this was because the volunteer teacher had participated in the patriotism club teaching. Otherwise, if it had not been for that advantage, it would not have happened - (Member timed out_)

1.09
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is good to have the East African Community but what we see today leaves the need for Government to explain if what is being done is in accordance with the mandate and the treaty, because you can see what is happening now – it is only the three countries out of the five that are cooperating. We deserve an explanation.

Another issue is on travel abroad; why can’t the Minister of East African Affairs stay in Arusha so that we cut on the costs? If you are the Minister of the East African Affairs, and its headquarters in Arusha, what are you doing here? We just need a coordination office here and you stay in Arusha with your staff. And then, why should the Minister travel Business Class for a distance which is less than one hour? Government should review that policy so that whenever there are travels within East African countries, people should travel in Economy Class because some of these aircraft do not even have provision for Business Class; so why would you pay for what you are not even getting? So instead of paying $300, you are paying $2,000 on a minister to travel First Class and yet there is no First Class in Alliance Air, RwandAir and some of these small aircraft.

Another issue is that the ministry is operating as though it were not a lead agency; whereas it is a lead agency, it is operating alone. If you went to the Ministry of Agriculture and asked them what we are doing in the East African Community, they have no idea. So the ministry is closed in itself and has failed even to graduate into a lead agency.

On the level of sensitisation, where are we? Are we at the economic integration or political federation? Are we sincere? This is because all these states have an element of sovereignty; these presidents want to be presidents of their countries. So you might find that they are talking only for politics and not for reality. Thank you.

1.11
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Madam Speaker, Pan Africanism and regional integration is core principle No.2 of the NRM Government and therefore the East African integration is part of those items on the priority list of our Government - (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Order, members, order.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I am very concerned that after 12 years of regional integration, we have not documented what our interests in the integration are - (Interjection) - Madam Speaker, can I be protected?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t we really treat each other with some courtesy? 

MR BAHATI: It is important and this has been a stumbling block in many negotiations we have had on the East African integration - our delegations are not sure of what our interests are in some of these issues and you find people changing positions over and over again. I have seen from page 1 to almost the last page – every page is talking about Cabinet not finalising on the laws and protocols. Why is that so? Then Leader of Government Business needs to inform this House why we are not making this a priority yet it is a core principle of our Government.

The second point, Madam Speaker, is the issue of the border posts – I come from the border of Katuna. We approved here a loan of $4 million in 2007 to modernise our border posts. I think the Minister of the East African Affairs should take keen interest on how far this loan went. 

1.14
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to those that have thanked the committee chairperson for the good report. However, I would like to reiterate what my sister, Princess Kabakumba, said, especially sensitisation of the population about the East African Community.

Madam Speaker, it is reported on page 3 that the Minister of the East African Community Affairs was to conduct a public awareness sensitisation programme for Ugandans on the integration and among those included were formation of clubs and associations for universities. 

It is further reported that these activities could not take place because of lack of funding. This is a serious matter; we are talking of integration – not only integration but accelerated integration - without the involvement of the people.  

Madam Speaker, you and I will recall – and a few who are here - how the East African Community disintegrated in 1977. It disintegrated because the people themselves were not involved; the Community was by then looked at as belonging to the three leaders. And we are repeating the same mistake today. Without the involvement of the people, I do not know where we are going - (Member timed out_)

1.17
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for its report. I just have a few comments to make. First of all, as usual, Uganda is known for initiating programmes which it is not bothered to benefit from. This is the same thing which is going on with the East African Co-operation. I am aware that the head of state is seriously promoting the East African Co-operation. I am also aware that we do not intend to achieve what we are advocating for. I say so because I know that right now it is Uganda chairing; we had an opportunity to host the Swahili Commission. We reluctantly refused to take it on and it has gone back to Zanzibar. That means we only want to initiate programmes without any interest to benefit from them. I do not know what we want as Ugandans; what is our objective?

Secondly, in view of East African Community, the Minister of State for Fisheries is moving around telling Ugandans that we are going to introduce a fishing holiday. I do not know how he is going to implement it in Lake Victoria when they do not have a common stand among the three countries: Uganda Kenya and Tanzania. You cannot initiate a fishing holiday when the lake is shared by two other countries, which are not part of what you are doing. We also know the nature of the fishing communities; the moment the minister introduces that fishing holiday, these people will move to Tanzania and Kenya – (Member timed out_).

1.20
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson for the good report. On page 16, the committee talk about protocol on good governance. When you see the draft protocol, it covers areas of co-operation; including democracy and democratisation. All these countries in the East African Community have term limits for the presidency. I do not think we shall sign that protocol with those countries because we do not have a term limit here. We had term limits and we changed it. Do you think we are going to sign this protocol when our democracy is still below the mark? That is a big issue and I want to remind my brother hon. Bahati; you are the chairperson of the movement caucus. You discuss about this issue; otherwise we are not going to sign this protocol before you answer the issue of term limits. 


Secondly, the issue of the ministry lacking a permanent home. As I speak now, we have a new building for the President’s Office. The Prime Minister’s Office has shifted from where it was and has occupied this big building here. Actually you have a few Members of staff; why don’t you come and occupy this big building here? It is a whole tower. Why are you paying all that amount for rent when – (Member timed out_)

1.22
MR FOX ODOI-Oywelowo (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two words that I know that are mutually exclusive: Integration and disintegration are mutually exclusive. In the East African Community, we talk of integration and practicing disintegration. Here is the evidence, Tanzania is not keen on political federation; it is certainly not keen on monitory union; and so is Burundi. But when you talk to the leadership of this community, they present a flowery picture that all is okay. They say we are going to hold meeting every two months to fast track political federation and monitory union. But on the ground, there is a fundamental problem. Why don’t you, first of all, resolve the question of Tanzania and Burundi? Why don’t you address their concern before coming to us for a federation?

Secondly, I agree and concede that Pan Africanism and Regional Integration is point No.2 of the expanded ten-point programme of the Movement. In financial year 2013/2014, the minister has only budgeted for Shs 1.32 billion to implement point No.2 of the ten-point programme and that is integration programme and coordination. You want to spend Shs 1.2 billion on a core activity like regional integration. What results do you expect; absolutely nothing. So we are dealing with work that – (Member timed out_)

1.25
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise. First of all, I think this is not the first time we are having this co-operation; it existed earlier in the 70s. But I strongly believe that the East African Community now is more based on a political agenda than institutionalising things. The East African Community of the 70s has more institution. That is why today, we are even arguing about sensitisation. 

I am a young woman but majority of the people of my age are not aware of the East African Community. And I think we need to have more money invested in sensitisation. I also strongly believe that the political agenda in the East African Community is much more of individual driven interests. Everyone is asking, why fast track a federal system when other countries are not party to it? We are going to invest a lot of money in this area and at the end of the day, it will collapse; and it will not be the first time this agenda collapses because of individual interest – (Interruption)

DR BAYIGA: Thank you very much my colleague for giving way. The model of integration that we took was a model of market integration. The major aim should have been to realise economic benefits from trade creation and diversity. 

So the committee should have told us about the trade benefits we have got so far and therefore show us where to invest more money to get more benefits in terms of trade by describing the volume of trade; which they cannot do. That is why this agenda is superseding the major economic model we took.

MS NABUKENYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My advice and recommendation is that we should first engage everyone - (Member timed out_)

1.28
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I thank the committee for the good job they have done but when I look at the budget of this sector, I feel that we should not expect much because most of the money is for recurrent expenditure and there is nothing much.

Secondly, when we look at the cost of rent for offices in the country in general, I do not see why we cannot put aside money to put up buildings so that we have offices for these ministries. I do not wish to belabour this point because we have sold most public properties and we have no assets as a country. This is dangerous and that is why we are spending a lot of money. I hope your Government will try to put up office buildings for this country.

On integration, Madam Speaker, when some of us were at university like University of East Africa, I think this was a better form of integration. We integrated with so many people from East Africa while studying with them and even when we go out now, we find that we know some of them. However today when you look at our laws; our land policies, our education policies and migration policies, how do we integrate when every country is on its own? Surely, I expect the ministry to put more emphasis on these issues.


There is also this idea of political integration. How do you integrate when Kenya has a completely different system, Uganda a different system, Tanzania a different system and every head of state is protecting his small empire? It is high time - (Member timed out_)

1.31
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this job done and also to congratulate hon. Shem Bageine for being appointed a Minister of State for East African Affairs. For some of you who may not know, hon. Shem Bageine was our treasurer of NRM external mission when we were fighting to change the regime. So this is a man who knows East Africa very well.
Madam Speaker, I have read in the papers that Southern Sudan will be admitted to the East African Community and I am wondering whether this is just a club of heads of state or we are serious about what we are doing. In the recent days, we have been talking about how South Sudanese are tormenting Ugandans. We should have benchmarks. You just do not admit any country anyhow just because you feel you want numbers. This is a very serious issue.

I am disappointed that we do not even have our members of East African Legislative Assembly in this House when we are debating money for them. You are talking about protocols that have been approved: protocols of cooperation on defence, peace and security. This Parliament has not seen any of these protocols –(Member timed out.)

1.33
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I think we will be dreaming if we come here and debate as if everything is going on smoothly. The truth is, the East African Community that was envisaged at its inception is not the East African Community today; we now have a tripartite arrangement of three countries. In the last two months, we have seen progress of this tripartite arrangement consolidating and alienating the other two countries. All the issues that have been discussed in this tripartite arrangement are part and parcel of the East African Community Protocol.

We have edged out Tanzania and I am really surprised that the committee did not address this issue as a general concern. You see, we need to revisit history. This community collapsed because of mistrust primarily between Tanzania and Uganda and these very issues have arisen. The biggest problem is for people to imagine that East African Community is about leaders. East African Community should be about the peoples themselves.

As long as you do not have harmonisation of vision of the peoples of East Africa, we are just wasting time and resources. It is an academic exercise. Just look at today’s papers. South Sudan, who we are very anxious to have join us, are saying no, they do not want to see other partner states involving themselves - the people themselves are very hostile! Many Ugandans have lost lives and business opportunities and here we are having these glorious summits - just pretending!

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, we need to address one issue. The heads of state and these ministers should involve the people so that we are all eager to work and develop together as a community. The Tanzanians never respected Ugandans during the time of Idi Amin - (Member timed out_)

1.36
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. Frankly speaking, from the very many people who have deliberated this morning, it is very clear that the question which still looms at the back of their minds is, is East Africa a reality? Since 2009, I have sat in the various summits that have been sitting in different countries in regard to what the East African Community is and believe me, for every summit that we do sit in, you find that Tanzania as a nation always walks out; this is whenever we sit as three or four mother countries in the integration.

As we speak, Tanzania has got its legs both in the East African Community and in the SADC region. We, the different countries in the East African integration, have a cosmetic approach to all that is going on in the East African region. What we should look forward to doing as a people within the East African integration is to ensure that we bridge the gap between our nationals; that is the citizens within the different countries and the leaders in our respective ministries.

Hon. Migadde tabled about the Fishing Act that borders Lake Victoria and the like. As a lawyer, I will talk about the Advocates Act –(Member timed out_)

1.38
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise to add my voice to those of my colleagues in thanking the committee for presenting this report. The history of the East African Community is well documented and all of us know something about it.
What is now of urgent and critical attention is to see as to whether we learnt nothing and forgot nothing from the collapse of the East African Community in the 1970s.

Madam Speaker, you will recall that in 1982, the Arusha Declaration critically laid a roadmap in which the late President Obote mentioned in this House, during the Fourth Session – the problem is keeping our people with the idea that the East African Community is working yet it is not. What is making us more afraid is the relationship among the leaders in East Africa. If you see critically what is happening between the President of Rwanda, as I said before and that of Tanzania – it is not only the problems between the President of Uganda and that of Tanzania; it is breeding some sort of suspicion among the citizens hence affecting business yet we know very well that for any community to do well like the European Union, the political federation must go along with the economic federation.
So, Mr Minister, we deserve, as the people’s representative, for you to provide a clear answer as to why there is a problem? Why are there suspicions among the leaders – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, minister. I am giving you seven munities to respond to the issues raised.

1.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Shem Bageine): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, allow me to first thank the committee for the job that they did and the good report that has been submitted to this House. I also would like to thank the honourable members for the various questions and issues you have raised, but which I might not be able to respond to in the seven minutes I have been given. However, I will try to answer as many as I can.

First, on the issue of the ministry coordinating other ministries in terms of the activities of the East African Community integration, I want to say that is what the ministry’s mandate is all about and we will continue doing that.

On the issue of budgets of other ministries capturing activities of the East African Community is something we have written about. The ministry is concerned but you also need to know that we are not in charge of their budgeting processes.

Three, there was an issue on the harmonisation of laws. I want to say this is an on-going process and we all have agreed that all the five partner states should harmonise their laws to comply with the provisions of the various protocols particularly the Common Market Protocol. This is being done here in Uganda as well as other countries.

The other issues that have been raised related to the type of staff that we have in the ministry. I want to say that the staff are not of low caliber. The procedures of coordination are done at various levels from the ministerial level to PS, directors and so forth. People in these positions are quite capable of doing that work.

On the issue of bilateral meetings, which was commented on by many Members, I want to say and to use this opportunity to explain it. The meeting which took place here in Entebbe was called primarily to deal with issues that had been decided upon by the heads of state during the infrastructure retreat that was held in Nairobi on 29th November last year.

These decisions related to the development of infrastructure. This was the primary reasons why this meeting was called. The meeting centered on the development of the railway line from Mombasa through Kampala, Kasese to Rwanda and the development of the oil refinery into which the partner states were invited to invest in. 

On the road between Kitale, Swam and Kapchorwa; on the oil pipelines between Uganda and Kenya – and which were extended to Rwanda. These were discussed initially bilaterally and later on trilaterally and there is no room anywhere to say that we cannot implement decisions that have been arrived at bilaterally or trilaterally. We – (Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Some clarification. Okay, Madam Speaker, thank you very much and I also thank the minister for giving way. We know that they used to call it East Africa Railways and Harbours. The word “harbours” means something to do with ports. Now we have Lake Victoria that has ports, one of them being the Mwanza Port. So, why did you have the one of Kisumu, because you had Kenya and one of Jinja, because you had Uganda, but left the ones of Musoma and Mwanza yet these are the ones that deal with railways and harbours, which could also be the integration that we are talking about now?

MR BAGEINE: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, the issue that I was talking about is between Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania. But let me also say that there is a proposal of developing the southern line starting from Tanga through Arusha to our port on Lake Victoria, and we will discuss this matter with the Minister of Finance from the United Republic of Tanzania. So bilateral developments are acceptable and they are not in conflict with the provisions of the treaty establishing the East African Community.

Madam Speaker, we also dealt with issues relating to implementation of the provisions of the Common Market Protocol such as non-tariff barriers removal. As you will recall, the slow movement of goods from the Mombasa Port to Uganda and beyond was causing a lot of costs to the business community and this was one of the issues that was discussed in full.

The other issues which have been raised relating to the discussions of political federation and others, this is consultation between states and there is no reason why this cannot be done. When you have a common interest in an issue and you are five or 10 people there is no room to say that three or four cannot consult so that when they come to a meeting they present their position and a decision can be taken. 

Madam Speaker, there is no decision that the three countries are going to take on political federation, the single  customs territory or the single tourist visa because the decisions will have to be taken by the five members of the summit during the next meeting after reports have been submitted by the Council of Ministers.

Madam Speaker, South Sudan has not been admitted into the community. South Sudan applied and we have been carrying out a verification process and the report is going to be brought to the Council of Ministers that is scheduled for end of this month. The council will report to the summit in November on the application of South Sudan to become a member of the East African Community.

I take note of what Members have said in terms of what has been happening in South Sudan particularly in relation to nationals from Uganda who have been trading there. We have criteria that a country must fulfil before it becomes a member of our community and such are some of the things that are going to be looked at before we can admit South Sudan. 

Madam Speaker, the issues relating to harmonisation of laws - this is being done by all the five partner states and we are progressing. The protocols have been ratified. A few have not and it is not only Uganda which has not ratified protocols; other states have also not ratified but we are following this in order to ensure that these protocols come into force because until they are ratified they cannot come into force.  

Madam Speaker, I want to assure Members of this House that we as a ministry will present a status report to this House to inform Members of activities that have been taking place in the community. I want to give my undertaking that we will be giving quarterly reports on activities, achievements, and challenges to this House so that this House is informed. 

I believe personally that the East African integration is the way to go because there are benefits that can accrue to our people including having a larger market in which we can trade. And I would like to appeal to Members of this august House to support the integration process. We are planning to engage Members of Parliament either centrally or in your local areas to help us- (Laughter) - work together so that we can integrate our people to become one people.

THE SPEAKER: Please try to wind up.

MR BAGEINE: Madam Speaker, once again I want to thank the hon. Members for their concerns, the views and issues raised and I want to assure you that I will take these into account during the execution of my job as Minister of the East African Community. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. Honourable members, I want to put the question that save for the recurrent and development expenditure under Vote 201- Ministry of East African Community Affairs, the House do adopt the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, before we go to committee on Natural Resources, I want to invite the outgoing Chair of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to update us on some outstanding issues because we did not adopt their report. Just for two or three minutes - I said outgoing. 

1.55
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, on Tuesday we were handling the report of the Committee on Defence And Internal Affairs and members exhibited great passion and concern as to why sanitary towels had not been provided for to the female inmates and I wanted to provide information to that effect that the leadership of the Uganda Prison Service has responded to our concerns. 

One is that we wanted to refer to the ministerial policy statement, page 158 whereby they provided Shs 400,480,000 for that particular item called sanitary towels. Maybe let me just read the whole response from the prisons’ leadership. They are saying: “Budget provision for sanitary towels for female prisoners: 

Reference is made to your concern about our inadequate provision for sanitary towels for female prisoners and your request to us to make adequate budgetary provision for the same. 

As our policy, budget provisions for essential items including sanitary towels take the first call on our resource allocation. As you are aware, under our budget for financial year 2013/2014 we made a provision of Shs 400,800,000 on page 15 of the MPS to cater for sanitary requirements (sanitary towels, soap, razor blades and disinfectants).

However, within our budget we also propose to use Shs 94,500,000 from the budget item of prisoners’ uniform specifically to cater for sanitary towels for female prisoners as indicated below.”

The daily average population for inmates is 38,684 per day. Out of these 1,500 are female inmates. So they have been able to provide per unit cost at Shs 3,500 and they have provided 63 in quantity, that is on average each inmate getting 18 packets. That totals to Shs 94,000,000- (Interjection) 

Members I am continuing. So they are saying the required annual budget is Shs 1,500 per inmate, on average each getting 18 packets for a whole year then they multiply by 3,500. That is the unit cost thus coming to Shs 94,000,000 as an addition to Shs 400 million that is already catered for in the MTF.

We are going ahead; this adjustment will not significantly affect our work plans since under the JLOS basket funding, we have been allocated Shs 150 million. This implies that if at all the Shs 94 million, the Shs 150 million and Shs 400 million, what we are pushing for is well taken care of.

So, I beg to lay the original response from the Under Secretary Uganda Prisons Service signed by Commissioner General of Prisons, addressed to the Chairperson, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs in the Parliament of Uganda.

I was standing in for the chairperson because he is not around but he requested me to represent him because I am still a Member of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, as you recall, we had deferred adoption of the report because of this pending item. So save for the recurrent and development expenditure for the Ministry of Defence; save for recurrent and development expenditure for Ministry of Internal Affairs and its agencies, I put the question that this House adopts the report of the committee. 

As the committee of natural resources comes, in the public gallery we have citizens from Bugiri District represented by hon. Oguttu and hon. Kasule. They are the ones up there; they are welcome. (Applause)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014 

2.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe):Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to submit a report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statement for financial year 2013/2014. I beg to lay the minutes of the proceedings of the committee while considering the policy statement. Secondly, I beg to lay a copy of the report of the committee.

This report is being submitted in accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Under paragraph 2, this report covers the following votes:
    • Vote 017- Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development
    • Vote 019- Ministry of Water and Environment
    • Vote 150- National Environment Management Authority (NEMA)
    • Vote 157- National Forestry Authority 
    •  Vote 123- Rural Electrification.

On page 2, under Vote 017- Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, I request that we move on straight to page 10.

Page 10, paragraph 4.3, observations and recommendations:

    I. Improved household stoves 
The committee observes that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is promoting the use of energy saving stoves to save energy especially for cooking.

I go to recommendation on page 11, the committee recommends that Government subsidises energy saving stoves so as to reduce the amount of energy wasted during cooking and reduce destruction of forests to make charcoal

II) Solar systems programme 
The committee recommends that Government subsides the purchase of solar panels, which will reduce on the demand for hydro-electric power so that it can be used for production purposes. Solar also helps the poor since it does not have monthly bills. UNBS should ensure that all solar panels on the market meet the required standard.

III) Petroleum development agencies 

The committee observed that Parliament considered and passed the Petroleum Exploration Production and Development Act, 2012 which established the Petroleum Authority; the national oil company and the directorate of petroleum to manage the oil resources. However, up to now these institutions have not yet started to operate.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that Government fast tracks the incorporation of the national oil company, appoints the board and executive director of the Petroleum Authority and the Ministry of Public Service considers the organisational structure of the directorate for petroleum urgently so that these agencies can start their work.

Electricity tariffs 

The committee recommends that Government works with Umeme to reduce power system losses, these include both technical and commercial, so that the impact of losses on the tariffs is minimised.

Prepaid metering should be rolled out to other parts of the country so that consumers can manage electricity consumption within their means and the ministry should carry out sensitisation on efficient utilisation of energy.

V) Umeme Escrow Accounts 

The committee recommends that the lease and assignment agreements be reviewed and Umeme should be stopped from claiming unpaid for electricity from the Escrow account.

Umeme should disconnect those institutions as it is with other electricity users since each Government department has a budget for electricity. This should be done within three months and the minister should report the new agreement to the committee.

The Auditor-General should conduct an audit of all Government departments that have refused to settle their electricity bills on how they used the funds appropriated for electricity.
The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide adequate funds for ministries, departments and agencies to cater for electricity bills.

VI) Restoration of the earthquake research facility. 

The seismological centre was vandalised by what Government later termed as land grabbers. Note should be taken that these so-called land grabbers had title deeds, which they used to claim the land and vandalise the government institution.
The committee was informed that the Police are investigating the matter. The ministry now needs Shs 4.6 billion to reconstruct, retool and equip the earthquake research facility.

The committee recommends that the people who were involved in this matter be prosecuted. The government institutes civil proceedings against them so that they can obtain compensation and disciplinary proceedings instituted against the officials in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development who issued the land titles.

Government should provide the Shs 4.6 billion to enable the ministry reconstruct this important earth centre.

The money recovered from the land grabbers should deposited in the Consolidated Fund.

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should report to the committee on the progress made within four months.

VII) Mining Reserves

The Committee recommends that Government provides Shs 3 billion to enable the ministry inspect and regulate mining activities.

Government should also provide Shs 37.599 billion in a phased manner to enable the ministry conduct geological mapping in Karamoja region.

VIII) Mining leases 

The recommendation is on page 16. The committee recommends that the ministry invests in mineral exploration and adopts competitive bidding for mineral rights. The Mining Act be amended to strengthen the provisions regarding suspension and cancellation of mineral rights for non-compliance. It should impose heavy fees for licensees who apply for transfer of their mineral rights and restrict transfer where no work is done and conducts a due diligence on all active licenses for compliance with the provisions of the Mining Act, 2003.

IX) Compensation for the Refinery Development Project

The committee recommends that Government provides Shs 29 billion to enable the ministry compensate people and re-settle them so that the project can start on time.  

X) Karuma Hydropower Project 

Madam Speaker, as we all know, ground breaking has taken place and work has commenced. However, the committee recommends that the process – that is on page 18 - for the construction of Karuma Hydropower Plant be expedited and should be cost conscious to avoid high tariffs.

XI) Investment in transmission 

The committee observed that Government was investing a lot of money in the generation of electricity. However, there is no corresponding investment in evacuating and eventual distribution of electricity to the consumers. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that Government should equally budget for transmission and distribution lines to ensure that the energy produced is evacuated and eventually distributed to the consumers. 

Vote 123- Rural Electrification Agency

I propose, Madam Speaker, that we move on to page 21; it is under paragraph 5.3.

Observation and recommendation 

The committee observed that Rural Electrification Agency is performing well and fulfilling its mandate. However, many rural areas still lack access to electricity. 

There is need to connect all parts of the country to the national grid in order to attract investors to all parts of Uganda. This will spur not only economic growth but balanced economic growth.  

The committee recommends therefore that Government increases funding to REA so that all areas in the country can be connected to the national grid. 

Vote 019- Ministry of Water and Environment 

Madam Speaker, I request that we move to paragraph 6.3 for observations and recommendations.

Rain water harvest

Most parts of the country continue to be water-stressed despite receiving enough rain during the rainy season. Lack of access to safe water also affects public institutions like schools, hospitals and churches. This can be averted through rain water harvest. 

The committee recommends that Government puts in place a policy where all plans for construction in planning areas shall not be approved where there is no rainwater harvesting facility. Also, all public buildings like for schools, hospitals and churches should have rainwater harvesting facilities.

The Ministry of Water and Environment should carry out sensitisation so that people can use rain water from safe water roofs and Government should also provide incentives to enable the poor acquire rain water harvesting facilities.  

Climate Change Policy 

Madam Speaker, we go straight to recommendations. The committee recommends that Government approves and starts implementing the Climate Change Policy in order to mitigate the effects of climate change, which are affecting various parts of the country. 

The policy on climate change be mainstreamed across Government ministries and departments. 

National Meteorological Authority

Recommendation on Page 32: The committee recommends that Government fast tracks the implementation of the National Meteorological Authority so that the country can get the necessary information. The implementation of the Act should be done within three months.   

Ban on polythene bags

The Government of Uganda banned the importation and production of polythene bags for purposes of protecting the environment in the Budget Speech for financial year 2009/2010. A six months transition period was given to the general public during which they were expected to find alternative materials for packing considered more environmentally sustainable but up to now, of course, that has not been done and therefore the committee recommends as follows:

    (i) The Ministry of Water and Environment through National Environment Management Authority should be the lead agency on the implementation of the ban on polythene bags.
    (ii) The Minister for Finance should amend the Finance (Permitted Plastic bags and other Plastics for Exceptional Use), Regulations, 2010 leaving only polythene materials which are above 30 microns.
    (iii) A total ban be implemented on the importation and production of plastic bags after six months.       

VAT on water 

The committee recommends that Government stops the implementation of this proposal and finds alternative sources of income to support the budget. (Applause)

Activities in wetlands 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Ministry of Water and Environment should work together to stop issuing title deeds in wetlands. The Ministry of Water and Environment should also demarcate and gazette all the wetlands in the country to stop encroachment. 

Vote 150- National Environment Management Authority 

Madam Speaker, I propose that we move straight to Page 39. 

Observations and recommendations 

The Environmental Levy

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development from the financial year 2006/07 introduced the environmental levy on used imported products including second hand vehicles. This was in line with the National Environment Act provisions in Section 93. All the fees collected by URA are retained in the Consolidated Fund instead of being transferred to the National Environment Fund. This has affected the ability of NEMA to effectively carry out its mandate with limited funding from the Government.

The committee therefore recommends that Government starts remitting the environmental levy to the National Environment Fund to enable NEMA carry out its mandate effectively. 

Starting from next quarter, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should start remitting the environmental levy failure of which Parliament should suspend the budget of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. (Applause)

E-waste management 

The Government banned the importation of old computers, refrigerators and television sets. Despite this effort, the equipment which is imported as new in the country becomes obsolete overtime and therefore requires to be disposed of. However, there are no places designated for disposing of this type of waste. This has led people to dump such obsolete equipment into the water bodies. 

The committee recommends that Government builds incinerators to manage e-waste which has become a problem. These will also help to dispose of obsolete mobile phones. 

Environmental Police 

The committee recommends that Government facilitates NEMA and NFA to recruit and train its own 250 Environmental Police to protect forests and wetlands as it is done with Uganda Wildlife Authority. This will improve their training and desire to protect the environment. 

Discharge of affluent into water bodies 

The Committee observed that various industries and flower firms are discharging untreated affluent into water bodies. This is hazardous and also increases the cost of water treatment to National Water and Sewerage Corporation. 

It was also established that NEMA hasno boat to pick water samples from the lake for testing and depends on water resources management for testing. This is a mandate for NEMA. The committee recommends that Government facilitates NEMA to acquire boats in order to conduct monitoring of discharge into the water bodies.

Enhancement of salaries 

Madam Speaker, let us move to page 41. The committee recommends that Government approves the salary enhancement request which has been submitted to the Ministry of Finance so that NEMA is above to retain their highly trained and qualified staff. This would imply that the wage bill would have to be increased from the current proposed budget of Shs 2.4 billion to Shs 4.4 billion. 

Compliance with Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) 

The committee recommends that NEMA cancels all the EIAs where the developers have breached the terms under which they were approved and restore the degraded environment at their cost. 

District environmental officers 

The committee recommends that Government centralises the appointment of environmental officers under NEMA to ensure effective control over them and ensure the presence of NEMA in all the districts of Uganda. Government should also start conditional grants to the districts to support environmental activities. 

Importation of used vehicles

The committee observes that Government has allowed the continued importation of used vehicles, some as old as 1985 models, which are very dangerous to the environment. Note should be taken that the cost of environmental degradation can never be computed in monetary terms. In Kenya, for example, Government does not allow importation of vehicles which are more than five years from the time of their manufacture. 

In Uganda, this has contributed to emission of dangerous gases in the atmosphere thus polluting the environment. The committee recommends that Government stops the importation of vehicles which have been used for more than five years and that the Uganda Revenue Authority stops clearing these vehicles to enter into the country. 

Vote 15 - National Forest Authority

Madam Speaker, I propose we move straight to page 48, to the observations and recommendations.

Management of forests

The committee recommends that the National Tree Planting and Forest Act be reviewed to streamline the management of national and local forest reserves.

Deforestation

The committee recommends that all encroachers be removed from forest reserves to facilitate restoration as the presence of encroachers inhibits proper management of forests. Communities which live near forests should be encouraged and facilitated with seedlings to plant trees and NFA should share a certain percentage of revenue generated from the forest with the local communities to encourage co-operation. 

Mabira Forest

The committee recommends that the National Forest Authority demarcates the external boundary as well as enclaves with concrete pillars to stop encroachment. Government should also provide funds for a resettlement action plan so that the communities living in the forest can be relocated to other places. 

Grazing in central forest reserves

The committee observed that cattle keepers were destroying trees planted in central forest reserves. This is breeding conflict between cattle keepers and tree planters as the animals destroy the forest. 

The current guidelines on grazing in central forest reserves are weak and need to be revised. Therefore, the recommendation is that the National Forest Authority revises the guidelines from grazing in central forest reserves with a view to making them stronger to create harmony between planters and cattle keepers. 

Tree funds

The committee recommends that Government increases the funding to the tree fund to enable NFA distribute seedlings to communities for tree planting. This will also enable the authority to have enough seedlings to plant on national tree planting days. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that Parliament adopts the report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statements for the financial year 2013/2014. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Chairperson. The report has been signed by more than the necessary one-third and therefore is eligible for debate. I want to give the shadow minister five minutes just for the highlights and I direct the Clerk to reflect the entire report on the Hansard. 

(Entire report to appear in the bound volume of September 2013)

2.24
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENERGY, OIL AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would, first of all, like to congratulate you for the gold medal you brought us. Yesterday, I was away but I associate myself with the success you brought to the country. I would also like to thank the committee for this presentation.

Madam Speaker, the concerns of the Opposition are as follows: 
On the issue of the cost of electricity - and I will summarise because I have a thick statement. We recommend that the tariffs of electricity be reduced immediately if not, then the Umeme contract be revoked. The reason is that when Bujagali Dam was commissioned, the expectation of Ugandans was that the cost of electricity would drastically reduce. The cost of electricity before Bujagali Dam was Shs420 but after its commissioning, it has gone up. What could be the justification then? We want the government to come clear on this, because it is a big issue to Ugandans who can no longer afford the use of electricity.

The bio mass energy use in our country is still on; that is the use of charcoal and the like. We would like, as the Opposition, to see the government invest in alternative energy sources and solar energy must be our priority because this can be sustained by the ordinary Ugandans. We want heavy investment in this area as has also been recommended by the committee in the next financial year, to ease the cost of light and other alternative energy sources. 

Madam Speaker, we would also want to take note that by the increase of the tariffs and connections priorities, which was placed only at the district headquarters and schools, we have seen that the other areas have been neglected. The households which need this have been left out and the schools which were connected with this electricity, because of its high cost, school fees has been drastically increased and this has impacted on our education. 

Therefore, we call upon Government to ensure that such institutions like schools and health centers are given a sustainable energy sources like solar to reduce on the escalating costs. Thermal power which is supposed to have been phased out should be one of the areas to implement to ease on the high tariffs.

Madam Speaker, we also recommend that the IGG should undertake an audit of the cost of Bujagali Dam because as we speak, it is still unclear on how much as a country we have invested in this dam. We still see these costs coming up; we need to establish this as quickly as possible.

Another area which I want to bring to the attention of the government is that one of the dams – Kabalega Dam – which was commissioned to produce 9MW is only producing 3MW and the reason for this is that the transmitter is not in place. However, Ugandans are paying for all the 9MW; how come that such an omission was allowed – that a minister could commission such an investment and yet what is produced is not what we pay for. 

We want the IGG to investigate this so that it is rectified immediately. In the same vein, Madam Speaker, I would like to request the government to fund both the generation and transmission to avoid such discrepancies because as we speak now, the transmission is left in abeyance and such an oversight like in the Kabalega Dam is happening. We want the government to immediately take on this.

Madam Speaker, on page 4, we, as the Opposition, have concerns which we have raised as far as the Rural Electrification Agency is concerned. As we speak now, despite its glittering research, it is still lacking in the sense that the coverage has not reached all the ordinary Ugandans and yet it could have helped them. What we are recommending now is that this very important agency should be made independent –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Lukyamuzi next; please use five minutes. Now, hon. Members, I will be looking out for those who did not contribute on the first report. Those who spoke on the first report, kaachini.(Laughter)

2.31
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I will try to be as brief as possible but my docket is slightly longer in documentation than the previous ministry.

Madam Speaker, the environment policy in Uganda is dictated by the National Objectives of State Policy, which cuts across the Ministry of Water as well as the Ministry of Energy. So, I may refer to the Ministry of Energy as well in protection of the environment policy, which is under my docket as Shadow Minister in terms of critique.

Now, in regard to the report, I would like to thank the committee for their recommendations. But I believe that I can also enrich that committee report as follows; for example, there is a recommendation that activities or construction plans of those who do not have the idea of tapping rain water could be suspended or stayed. My vision is that it is not enough to do that; you could also encourage them to start generating that rain water by planting more trees so as to tap convectional rain environmentally. 

There is a complaint that the Ministry of Finance has been neglecting the dispatch of finances, especially with reference to the most previous quarter. I ask the Ministry of Finance not to joke with this Ministry of Environment because, essentially, Uganda’s economy depends on the environment. In the absence of the environment you have no economy. (Laughter) So, I propose that we improve the amount of money we are giving to the ministry up to 10 percent of the total Budget.

Madam Speaker, the issue of climate is very important; it is true that Government has delayed the Climate Change Policy. But delaying the policy is not the issue; in my view, there is need to know that problems which occurred in Bududa and Kasese are man-made disasters. Why don’t we straight away encourage tree-planting so that we reduce occurrences of that calamity.

Madam Speaker, I am now turning to a very important matter and I beg you to give me some extra two minutes because this is very important.

THE SPEAKER: No, you will only use five minutes in total.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: This is the issue of VAT on water; the introduction of VAT amounting to 18 percent is an absurdity. The public has already borne the burden of existing taxes; if you put tax on water, you want people to die because water is life. Why am I saying so? You would be encouraging people to cheat by carrying out illegal connections. I propose that that tax be scrapped for the good of the people. 

Madam Speaker, in industrial production, depending on the water, you will be giving extra burden to the consumers and this water tax – Madam Speaker, this is also important; it has been reported that Uganda is doing very well in regard to the Millennium Development Goals – [Mr Dombo: “Point of clarification”] – No, I reject that.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have point of clarification from hon. Dombo, the Commissioner.

MR DOMBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issues being raised by my honourable colleague are very important and they would carry a lot of weight if they were part of this report. Given that he is a Member of the committee, did he consider making this submission to the committee so that they are captured as recommendations? That is the clarification I am seeking.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, what I am delivering right now is already documented and copies can be available after here – I can lay it – 

THE SPEAKER: No, it is on the website.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, Uganda has been reported to be doing very well in implementing the Millennium Development Goals. The creation of this tax amounting to 18 percent would negate the success story under the MDGs. 

On the issue of the Forestry Act, the committee has proposed that the Act should not only be revised but it should also streamline local forest reserves. I would like to add that there is need to mark the national tree-planting day every year, seriously, with some tree-planting in every district - (Member timed out_)

2.36
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Natural Resources for its excellent job. But my concern is on the energy-saving stove; this should be a household work, whereby every woman should be able to make it and save firewood.

Madam Speaker, Government claims to have this programme but in my district, I have not seen any Government programme regarding energy-saving stoves; the programmes I have seen belong to the NGOs, which are training women and at times when I want them to train my women, they are very expensive. Can the minister tell me which area they are implementing this programme so that I am also aware and the criteria they use for selecting the districts.

Secondly, there is the issue of rural electrification. The committee observed very well that Government is good at producing electricity but transmission is zero. The typical example is the one of Nyagak; we commissioned Nyagak in November 2011 but up to now, the transmission has not been done and Koboko, Yumbe, Pakwach and other districts that were supposed to benefit have not seen any pole being erected on the road up to now. 

Madam Speaker, can the minister tell us when these poles will be erected? I have received communication from other people saying that Government is waiting for the elections and then they will put them up. That is not good; it will be very bad for you to bring power in 2015. Let us have this power extended to the areas so that we can benefit from it. 

THE SPEAKER: Before commissioner Jalia comes in, in the gallery, we have our friends from the National Assembly of Ethiopia. Again you are welcome; they were here yesterday. They are led by the Deputy Speaker. (Applause)

We also have children of Nabuyonga Primary School; invited by hon. Mutende, but they are represented by hon. Wamayi and hon. Nakayenze– (Interjections) – I said, invited by- but represented by so and so; yes it is on the Hansard– (Interjections) – honourable members, I know what I said. 

2.39
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to thank the committee for the good work done. The committee on page 15 has talked about compensation for the refinery development project. It is true that the budget has got a funding gap, but also we are aware that the people who are supposed to be compensated especially people from Kabale and Hoima District are faced with a lacuna with regard to the amount supposed to be given to them. 

As we speak now, the Government Valuer is still valuing these peoples crops and lands according to the rates which were used previously, yet the cost of the plots in Hoima and Masindi in particular has appreciated to the extent that what you are paying here in Kampala may not be enough to buy a plot of the same size in Bunyoro and other areas where the oil projects are being conducted. 

So I want to find out from the minister, what plans do they have for the people in the oil-producing area with regard to compensation? I know that at the end of the day, even when we appropriate these funds, they may fail to get land to stay on. 

On page 20, I am happy that the committee has noted that the power lines have been completed; especially in my district. But on construction of Masindi-Lira-Nakasongola line. I have a query; I want to find out from the minister why they are going ahead to do survey before they construct the line? The people along Masindi-Kigumba– (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: I give you half a minute to conclude.

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, these people have never been compensated yet the power line is already up and there are no signs in the ministry that they are going to be paid. Can I find out from the minister, why they do not compensate the people before going on with the construction of the power line? That will help our people to settle somewhere. 

MR CHEMASWET: Madam Speaker, under Rule 29, sometime last year, hon. Tinkasiimire came up with a position pertaining to a one Mugisha who was appointed as Managing Director for NSSF. That report has not come back to the House –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that issue did not come up in the report. Let hon. Kabasharira take up the Floor.

2.43
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to commend the committee for the good observations and recommendations. I will particularly focus on observation 6.3 on rain water harvest. This is long overdue; the ministry of water should have looked into this especially for the people who experienced a dry spell. 

In their recommendation, they say the ministry should focus on the institutions hospitals and churches for rain water harvesting facilities. They also say they should provide incentives to enable the poor acquire rain water. I propose that these incentives should be: cement, sand and wire mash for people to construct tanks, for those who have iron-sheet roofed houses and they are very many today. 

Madam Speaker, I also request clarification on the improved households. The committee observed that the Ministry of Energy’s saving stoves - but they add that the energy saving stoves on the market are very expensive and ordinary Ugandans cannot afford them. So which is which? What criteria are you using to promote this – how will our people benefit from this expensive measure. Let the minister tell us how they will promote this.

2.46
DR KENNETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. I want to address myself to page 42 of this report, particularly on importation of used vehicles. As the committee puts it, the cost of environmental degradation caused by some of these vehicles cannot be computed in monitory terms; it is dangerous both to the environment and human health.  

Madam Speaker, I have taken trouble to look at the value of contamination in our atmosphere. Taking a very simple sample, on Jinja Road as you leave the road junction; there we have the road going to Wampewo Avenue and the other to Luzira; there are very nice plants planted by them, but the leaves are dark with fumes from motor vehicles. I even took trouble to clear a leaf and come back to look at it the following day - it is that bad! 

It is also confirmed now that un-burnt fuels - particularly those from petrol and diesel engines is a cause of lung cancer. You find many old vehicles on our roads discharging un-burnt fumes to the atmosphere and that is why incidents of lung cancer and problems on the respiratory system are now alarming. I think it is time to control the type of vehicles we import into our country. 

Not only that, we also know very well that un-burnt fumes have other terrible effects. When we talk of global warming, it comes from these un-burnt fumes - with moisture and sunlight; when they settle on the atmosphere closest to the earth’s face, what we call the prop-sphere, this forms what we call the greenhouse effect which contributes heavily to the global warming that we are seeing - (Member timed out_)

2.48
MR JOHN AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and the chairperson of the committee. I want to thank you so much for the report that you have brought forward to the Floor of the House. I want to enrich your report concerning the pre-paid metering system. 

I have done an experiment for about two months and my discovery is that when I compare the metering system within Kampala area, especially in my home with the one in the village like in Kalongo Town Council, it is not the same. The one in Kampala goes much faster than the one in the rural towns. I do not know about the standardisation or uniformity, maybe you have to take keen interest so that in a way, we make this uniform.

On rural electrification, I think you are right. Many of our rural areas have not got any of those grids that have been extended to them. If I may give an example in my area; we have 16 sub counties but there are key areas that require rural electrification such as Lapono; you go to Lira Palwo and other areas like in Kokil and Mutu in Paimol sub county, Omiya Pacwa, Kuyweee, Toromo Wol Centre on Wolsub county and Acuru in Parabongo sub county. Now if only one particular place needs such kind of electrification then you are so right that we need to increase our speed or planning towards that.

You have talked about alternative sources if we stop the VAT. I agree that we should stop the VAT and there is another potential taxable area - alcohol. We are leaving this one untouched. I think that is an area where we can get a lot of VAT and it is an alternative source of revenue to us.

Finally, on energy saving stoves, I think the technology the government is using is very expensive. There is technology called Lorena, which uses local materials that are very cheap and we have the knowledge; go to most of the areas where we had IDPs. We trained the people there on how to use energy saving stoves, which are - (Member timed out_)

2.51
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Members for the best report so far. Most of the issues and recommendations, which the shadow ministers brought, were almost all captured by the committee. That is why I am saying it is one of the best reports so far because it balances both sides-

THE SPEAKER: Or they have merged?

MS NTABAZI: Yes, I think it is the best. However, there is one recommendation on page 48, which deals with encroachers on forests. This issue was raised and an outreach programme by NFA was conducted in my district where they went to Kasitu and other sub counties, which I cannot mention. 

There was an agreement made because of the recommendation that tree planting should go on in these areas. The people there had already planted cocoa trees and we also have palm oil trees. There was a joint agreement that these people, who are occupying those areas and are planting cocoa, should be left with their cocoa because this is income for the country.

Madam Speaker, when the Budget was read in June, we went for consultations and I strongly recommend that VAT on water, paraffin and salt be scrapped. These are things, which affect the rural woman who is suffering due to poverty -(Member timed out_)

2.53
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the good work and I will go on to talk about the Rural Electrification Agency. I would like to thank that department for the good work they are doing, but I have some issues that I would want to raise in connection with water and rural electrification.

If you look at the terrain of Kisoro, Kabale and other areas, you will find that we fail to get enough water because we do not have the electricity to pump water to those hilly areas. Therefore, I am requesting the minister that if it is possible, when you are taking electricity to the rural areas, to connect with the water agencies so that we are able to have water in these areas. As I speak, some parts of Kisoro have been buying a jerrican of water at Shs 3,000. I wonder whether this is really in order.

Still on rural electrification, as you plan to take electricity to the rural areas, I do not know whether you target areas that bring income to this country because if you are taking electricity to Kisoro and you leave a place like Mgahinga National Park, which is giving us money, it is not very good on our side.

Finally, on rural electrification, I would like to talk about compensation. When you are taking electricity, you do not sensitise the people that you are taking electricity to their areas but you are not going to compensate them. Can you come out clearly and tell them that you are not going to pay compensation as you take electricity to the rural areas?

On the issue of water, I have been reading through the report and I have failed to see anywhere how you are planning for the sewerage treatment plant especially in the urban areas - (Member timed out_)

2.56
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker and I thank the committee for the good work done. My first observation is on page 23 of the report and this is about the achievements of the financial year 2012/2013. I would like to register the gratitude of the people of Bududa for the commencement of the Bududa gravity flow scheme. The people are happy about it and they pray that this project is accomplished.

Secondly concerning deforestation on page 48, the committee recommended that National Forestry Authority should give out seedlings especially to mountainous areas and those other areas that are affected. It is my prayer that areas like Bududa and Bundibugyo mountainous area, which are disaster prone, be considered. This is in line with Article 247 of our Constitution and Sections 39 and 40 of the National Environment Act.

About the Rural Electrification Agency, we are grateful for the work being done. Actually in my area in Bududa, the mapping commenced so we pray that in this financial year, the areas which have not yet benefitted from the project be considered. This will help us who plan to relocate the people from the mountains. Rural electrification will also help us attract people from the mountains to come and settle in the urbanised centres that the government is proposing. So, I also request Members of Parliament to advocate for more funding in this area. Finally – (Member timed out_)

2.58
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also want to thank the committee for coming up with this report.However, I have issues to raise. Madam Speaker, whereas the committee is saying that rural electrification should be extended to all parts of the country – you know I come from the islands. On many occasions, the President has been indicating that the only alternative that the people in the islands use is either solar or wind energy.

I would like to seek clarification from the minister – because throughout the report and even in the ministerial policy statement – there is no evidence that the people living in the islands will ever access national grid or even a single lighting.

Madam Speaker, another issue is on page 40 about the discharging of effluent into Lake Victoria onto which the entire livelihood of my people depends. The committee says that there is need for NEMA to be provided with police – whereas all these factories that discharge the emissions are on the main land and so don’t need boats. So, I want to know from the minister what they have done before NEMA issues a certificate to these factories.

Finally, let me talk about the issue of polythene bags. The chairperson actually omitted this area yet I also find that the recommendation given is wanting. The issue of kaveera in this country has done a lot of harm and damage to the people. There is need for this Parliament to pronounce itself on it, or else we are ruining our country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.01
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report they have presented. My concern is first on something on page 20. This is about the issue of rural electrification that many Members have talked about.

I want to start by posing a question to the Minister of Energy. I wonder whether the minister is aware that in the whole of this country, there is place a person can drive 50 kilometers without coming across a power line except on Kaliro-Nawaikoke-Irundu-Iyingo Road. It is on that road where somebody will drive for 50 kilometers along the main road without coming across a power line. There is no other place where you can drive for that distance without coming across a power line; and on the other side, there is the Kaliro-Nmwewa-Gadumire Road.

Madam Speaker, when you look at page 20, you see the on-going projects and the planned activities for 2013/2014, but still we are missing out. So, I am wondering whether the honourable minister is aware that this place is in such dire need of power and the President made this categorical - after discovering that the place was so much in lack of power – that power would be extended to this place very quickly. However, we are still missing out on this.

So, what are you planning for these people and what can we tell them when they ask us about what is happening? On page 33, there is the issue of banning polythene bags. I want to say that we can have another approach on this, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out_)

3.03
MR KEZEKIA MBOGO (Independent, Budaka County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the wonderful job done. However, I have some concerns to the honourable minister. For the last three years, we have been receiving some surveyors from your sector in Budaka District – they come and drive throughout the district after which they deceive people that they have finished the mapping exercise. That has been going on for the last three years.

But when I looked at this document, I realized that Budaka District is nowhere to be seen. So, I still wonder whether Budaka District is not part of Uganda. If it is still part of Uganda, where are you placing it? Is it part of the on-going activities, or it is just not there at all?

Secondly, let me also take this chance to inform the Minister of Energy that in Budaka, we have some trading centres that have the traditional lines cutting across the roads. So, it would be better if you provided us with transformers to step down power in those trading centres other than waiting for this one where we already know we are at the losing end. We are not going to get – for the last five year or perhaps for the next 10 years to come.

3.05
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the work well done. Their report was very interesting when I went through it. In the interest of time, I have three issues to talk about. 

The first one is about National Forestry Authority. Madam Speaker, I want you to agree with me that climate change is real. At the National Forestry Authority there is a department called Community Tree Planting. But when I visited their offices last week - after my voters requested me to go and get for them seedlings for planting, because we are now receiving rains, the officers there told me that when they came to face the Committee on Natural Resources, the Members of the committee acted in a manner, which showed that they were not concerned about the tree planting programme and that they only allocated them Shs 3 million for this financial year. Madam Speaker, Shs 3 million is not even enough to procure seedlings for a parish in my constituency –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, first of all, the committee does not allocate funding. We only make recommendations, and indeed when you read the report you realise that we have said that these people need support of at least Shs 3 billion for them to increase the capacity of generating seedlings. If you read the report properly, that is what it states; it is not Shs 3 million.

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you, chairperson of the committee. Anyway, according to what I said, I think I was supporting – Otherwise, that is the information I got from National Forestry Authority.

Madam Speaker, the second issue is about REA. I want to commend the management of Rural Electrification Agency –(Member timed out_)

3.07
MR PAUL MWIRU (Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people discharging these effluents into the water bodies are known. These factories - Police are talking about my place Jinja. These factories are discharging effluents into the water bodies; even if you went and picked anybody within the area, everyone knows but the question is one of enforcement. 

I will give an example. I have ever discussed with the Minister for Environment about Luzira, Lake Victoria. When you go there the water is green. She is aware. I have actually discussed it with her outside this place. So, what we need to see now is the enforcement. Maybe we also need not to underscore the effect of pollution. When we are boasting about investing in the fisheries sector yet the entire water bodies have been eaten up by pollution, it affects the quality of fish you are getting out and even the breeding areas on Lake Victoria. These should be basics which the minister should know so that we enforce the implementation of this Act. The players are known and the effect has now been told to you even on this Floor.

Then when it comes to wetlands, we know people who are filling these wetlands all over this place, but the question is what action are we taking? I think we need to take another action of explaining to the government the effect of backfilling these wetlands. We have seen on TV where Sudhir is trying to fill up all those areas. 

3.10
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Allow me to add onto what hon. Mwiru has talked about wetlands. I have been seeing along Gulu-Kampala Road, people putting up industries in the wetland; and I would like to ask that, don’t we have environmental police to add on to the work that the district environment officers are doing? 

I cannot leave without mentioning something about water. I pray that this idea of VAT on water be dropped because water really affects the woman more than any other person. Right from the word go and from the morning up to sunset the women are heavily in use of water. So, my proposal is that we should not tax water which greatly affect the urban poor woman and man respectively.

On the Rural Electrification Agency, I would like to propose that before REA begins, we need serious sensitisation and consultation with the local leaders. In my district we have this programme but unfortunately the surveyors went, they did not consult the local leaders and for that matter many public institutions are missing, for example, the schools, the health centres and even churches  and yet these are the institutions which cannot afford high tariffs of electricity. Can’t the electricity programme- (Member timed out_)

3.12
MS RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have the following to say on the committee report: 

One, I thank the committee for coming up with the recommendation that the Government should set aside Shs 29 billion to compensate people who have settled in or are living within the refinery development project area. It is my prayer that when this comes women must be involved and included. These men, where there is money, they will keep the compensation money and go and marry new wives and forget about- (Interjection) - the existing women. So, I ask the committee to consider women- 

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MS ACHENG: Secondly, Madam Speaker, I want to talk about rural electrification. I looked at the chief programmes and activities under rural electrification. I looked at the on-going and the planned activities and I have not seen Kole. Where is Kole in this rural electrification? We have health centres which we want elevated to health centre V; they do not have electricity. 

Finally, I thank the committee for their recommendation to stop issuing land titles to wetlands. I even want to propose that the land titles that have already been issued in these wetland areas be withdrawn. We are destroying our environment. We have destroyed this world which God has given us. During creation, God created us to continue with creation but for us we have destroyed it- (Member timed out_)

3.14
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I find it disturbing that Government is very unserious about matters of the environment especially when you are talking about flower firms and other industries discharging effluents into our water bodies. I wonder whether these ministries do some audit for the benefits of some of these firms and industries that we have. For example, what will be the cost of treating water if three flower firms discharged their waste, let us say, into a specific lake? Here we are crying for foreign direct investment when these are in actual sense foreign direct cheaters. Because then how do you continue with this kind of partnership? You have flower firms; you are praising them; we are earning forex; they are devastating our environment and most importantly our water bodies. It is very disturbing. God has given us these fresh water bodies and here we are all greed trying to destroy and yet we cannot allocate money into the ministry - how unfortunate!

And, Madam Speaker, look at the miserable money they put in tree planting - Shs1 billion. How many corrupt officials get away with trillions in this country and then they just find it feasible to put Shs 1 billion only for tree planting? How many trees are destroyed on a daily basis? Most of us seated here use charcoal in our respective households –(Interjection)– yeah. One person might have stopped but many of us are here. (Laughter) But how many of us take time to plant trees? And this annoying Government just puts Shs 1 billion for tree planting. I think this is being unserious - (Member timed out_)

3.16
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for the report. 

Quickly I have two issues that I want to make submission on, the first one being the mining leases. This year the Committee on Public Accounts brought a report on the Floor of this House and reported about the loss of Shs40 billion through the cancellation of mining leases. This year, thereafter, Madam Speaker, as I talk to you, there is even a ploy to again defraud this country of large amounts of money. There is a company known as the East African Gold Sniffing Company which, clandestinely within one week, obtained leasing mine for Hima Cement grounds. Right now this matter is in court. They have opted for out-of-court settlement in favour of East Africa Gold Sniffing Company and that is going to make us lose lots of money. This was all out of inside business through staff of Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. The minister needs to take action and avert a situation where the Government is about  to lose surmountable amounts of money –(Interruption)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I am very glad hon. Kassiano Wadri is raising a very important point. We want to know who the owners of this company are and their godfathers so that if they are with us here we move a motion? There is nobody who can defraud this country without having a godfather here. Who are these people who have completely finished the money of this country?

MR KASSIANO: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to thank Dr Bitekyerezo for seeking that clarification. Without mincing my words, one of the beneficiaries is a Member of this House. The legal officer who even represented them in the registration of this company up to the award of stage is a blood son of one of the senior officials of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Out of that and an assistant commissioner was sent on forced leave. I have got letters to that effect and these are public documents that we can always avail to this House.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the hon. Wadri is raising a very important point; if he says one of them is a Member of this House, it could be John Ken-Lukyamuzi the man. So can he mention that person?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, if it is in the interest of this House, I will even at a later stage avail documents and lay them on the Floor of this House. But the message I am sending goes to the minister. She knows what I am talking about, if she is a serious administrator in that ministry. So this is homework for her to get back to her House and find out as to whether the lease to a cement factory of Kasese after it had expired within less than one week, before it could even apply for renew, was already issued out to East African Gold Sniffing Company.

The second issue that I want to address my mind to is the –(Member timed out_)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I am raising on a point of order. The hon. Kassiano Wadri raised a very important point and mentioned that a Member of Parliament is involved in this without mentioning a name. We are all going to walk out of this House as suspects, including you, Madam Speaker, because you are a Member of Parliament. So is it in order for the hon. Wadri just to proceed without mentioning that individual Member of Parliament so that people who are watching us know - and I do not want to be party to that. Can we give him the opportunity to name that Member of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Member, there are 386 MPs; your statement is endangering all of us. So we want to know who of us is involved in this programme.

MR WADRI: While others are saying I seek for leave, I do not seek for leave and I am going to say it now and it will be on record. The hon. Member representing Jinja Municipality West, hon. Moses Balyeku, is a member of that company. I have said it.

3.23
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report and make three observations. On page 33, the committee is recommending that the ministry and districts should stop leasing, work together so that title deeds are not issued on wetlands.

I want to bring it to the attention of this House that Section 44 of the Land Act already makes it illegal for any institution to issue a title deed for any piece of land on a wetland, and I do not know why this law is not being implemented and it is now coming as a way of recommendation in this report. It is becoming a trend now that Uganda is decentralising most of the functions and powers given to districts.

Under Article 176 of our Constitution, we committed ourselves as a country to operate under decentralisation. Under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy we took a commitment as a country that we shall devolve functions and powers to districts. It is becoming a trend now that each report that comes to Parliament there is a recommendation to decentralise either the functions of recruitment, remuneration or monitoring and supervision of officers at districts. 

As a shadow minister for local government, I want to protest this kind of action. Twenty years after Uganda decided to adopt the decentralisation system, it is very hard to believe that districts have not acquired the capacity to recruit, retain and supervise officers.

3.29
MR ANDREW ALLEN (Independent, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. However, I have got some concerns related to the household stoves that are very expensive and cannot be acquired by the ordinary Ugandans yet Government is trying to promote their use.

If we look at the current trends where forests are being destroyed by ordinary Ugandans, I would think Government would look at finding more cheaper alternatives by subsidising the stoves while strongly protecting our forests from further destruction. It does not make sense promoting the stoves and making them very expensive while destroying the forests. It is very wrong and Government should think properly about this whole thing. The destruction of these forests is what is causing the current climate change that is impacting on the livelihoods of Ugandans.

I have a problem with NEMA; I think this institution is very unreliable because if you look at things, I have come to believe that they do not care about the environment. If you look at the rate the investors are destroying our environment you would actually think it is all about money; it is about profits and not human life. I would think it would be wise for the government to think twice about the whole idea of NEMA.

There is also a concern about the issue of the environmental protection police. This Police is very unqualified to handle environmental matters; 150 unqualified environmental police officers are doing wrong things in handling the environment. They are a small number who cannot understand environmental issues and only understand police work. I would suggest that Government considers another alternative of dealing with this NEMA institution otherwise, if you think of the way the environment is being destroyed, whoever is dealing with NEMA is actually destroying human life. And I suggest that it would be wise for the minister in charge of NEMA to actually resign and do us good. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.29
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to make a contribution on this report. 

I just have three points to raise: one is in regard to the Ministry of Energy which I thank and I think that they are doing a good job. Maybe we should encourage them once again that they should come out with a comprehensive strategy and present it to us as to how they are going to carry out a verification of the whole country so that if we are to borrow money, we borrow it at once and address this problem once and for all.

In the same vein, I would like to thank REA people for the work they are doing but I have my problem - the spread of the power is along the roads and at times administrative centres. This is a very expensive venture. Why do we spend a lot of money to spread power on roads which is not going to be consumed by people to address the problems you are trying to address? Isn’t it possible that when you are planning, you do shorter distances but you also serve the people who are willing and able to pay for this power? 

I also want to follow up on what hon. Nambooze was talking about: decentralising the environment office. I think this is unacceptable because the problem is not recruitment of the environment officers. I think the problem is funding. Why don’t we fund local governments to have the capacity to supervise and manage these wetlands?  

If you go upcountry in our rural areas, I think the situation of wetlands is very bad and if nothing is done in five years or so, we shall have no wetland –(Member timed out_)

3.31
MS DOROTHY MPIIMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee that has presented this report.

I, however, have three concerns. The report talks about the Bujagali Hydropower Project that has been commissioned and it is going into one year. The people of Jinja and Buikwe districts gave their all to this project but they are getting a raw deal.  

I would like to talk about the unpaid royalties. These districts are supposed to earn royalties from the electricity generated. To-date, they have not received any money from the financial year that we have just ended and they have no hope so far in terms of receiving royalties in this financial year because of being tossed up and down.  

As if this is not enough, they have been advised that the royalties that they earn come to 1.5 percent of the gross revenue. I would like to be educated on why or how the revenue that is going to be generated from oil comes to seven percent while that of electricity only goes to a mere 1.5 percent? I do not know whether that is a matter of Animal Farm.

Finally, there are areas like in the Bunyoro region that have had a minister and they have a grand plan for infrastructure development. These two districts continue not only to be denied services of electricity - we have a major landing site that provides fisheries resource and income to this government but does not have electricity as well as all the other rural areas of these two districts - (Member timed out.)

3.34 
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryadongo):  Thank you very much. I want to thank the committee for the report. I have a few reservations like on page 48 that talks about Karuma Hydropower Dam. The people of Kiryadongo District welcomed the project and it was recently launched by His Excellency the President. However, many of these people, as I talk now, have never been compensated and yet they are not allowed to carry out activities on their land. So can the government tell the people of Kiryadongo when they are going to be compensated? If not, then let them be allowed to carry out agricultural activities on their land and when they are ready they inform them.

I am a biology student and I want to talk about forestry. In Budongo Forest, we used to have what is called a strict nature reserve and recently, I took my students to that forest but what used to be the strict nature reserve, where no human activity was supposed to take place, is not there now. It is like a shrub.  

Can this government really tell us if we still have strict nature reserves in as far as zoning the forest is concerned? I know the minister is aware because there are buffer zones and others.  

The issue of wetlands leaves me with a question as to whether these wetlands were privatised like the silos and all the other government agencies because as I talk now, there are serious investments in wetlands with even nobody bothering.

On the issue of polythene bags; polythene bags are very detrimental to our environment and are non-biodegradable. When they get into the water - no wonder the fish catch is going down every other year! The issue is on polythene bags.  What is wrong with banning these polythene bags? Who are the people benefitting directly from these polythene bags - (Member timed out.)

3.36
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you so much. I want to start on an informatory note to inform this House that 70 percent of the people depleting our forests are not Ugandans. Taking an example of the forests in Kibaale, Kyenjojo and Kyegegwa, the people using those forests do not know any single local language including Luganda and Kinyarwanda. They have passports belonging to other countries and also passports from Uganda. It is fortunate that sometime back we were with Prof. Kamuntu in one of the security meetings on forests discussing similar issues in relation to forests. 

It is true that the land is bare in the former green forests and most especially, I will talk on behalf of Kyenjojo. It is my interest and concern that the country – my government takes concern to look at all these people evicted and possibly evicting them on the same day. It is something we would have discussed probably in another forum. But we have one day to evict the people encroaching on our forests and taking charge at once – deploying at once?  

As Members of Parliament, we are requested by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to protect, preserve, monitor and create awareness of these forests but we cannot manage, Madam Speaker. The condition is wide and too much for us to control. It is beyond our control.  

Can we, Madam Speaker, help the NFA to take charge by revising the policies and making them stronger and talking –(Member timed out.) 

3.38
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to appreciate the committee for the detailed report. 

My concern is on Vote 19 that is the Ministry of Water and Environment. We all know that water is life and water is among the basic needs of a human being and animals. It is quite unfortunate that the people of Namayingo District have a strain when it comes to issues of water. I want to re-echo that the feasibility study for the Shabwana Water Project was completed in 2009 but it is unfortunate that up to now, the studies have been shelved and the people of Namayingo are suffering. Water is a big problem and there is a day when I raised the issue on the Floor and the minister said that he was shying away from telling us or telling the public the truth. So, can I know from the minister in charge when the people of Namayingo will get the services? We are also Ugandans; why should we suffer? We have the water atlas that shows the entire Uganda and the percentage of water. In Namayingo, we have only 24 percent of the water coverage. 

It is quite unfortunate that in other places where water is available, they still add them more water when we are dying. My people in the islands are being eaten up by crocodiles when they go to fetch water from the lake. What is the ministry doing about the people of Namayingo – (Member timed out.) 

3.40
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also join colleagues in thanking the committee for the detailed report. I have two concerns and one of them is electricity. My district, Kween, has been promised electricity for the last five years. They have told us that they are going to extend electricity from Kween to Bukwo. I have been looking through the report and I have not seen anything like that. May I take this opportunity to ask the minister to tell me and the people of Kween District and the Sebei region as a whole when electricity will be extended to Bukwo?

Looking at rural electrification, I still missed out on the connections that have been planned for this year and when I asked what criteria they are using, they told me they consider special services in those areas. We have trading centers and health centres; I have been requesting that these services be extended to these special services that I have. I have only one Health Centre III that has a maternity ward. I have gone to the ministry and I do not know what is happening. I really request that rural electrification be extended to these areas like health centres and secondary schools. The only secondary school in the district – (Member timed out.)

3.42
MS SARAH NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am getting a challenge. We make recommendations in this Parliament and nothing is implemented. This brings us back to the same thing, year in year out. In the Budget Speech of 2009/2010, polythene bags were banned from this country. Resolutions were made and recommendations were made. In 2013, we are doing the same thing; what is the problem? Where is the problem? Do we have political will in implementing the resolutions that we pass and the recommendations that this Parliament passes? If we continue with this, we shall be doing the same work this year and even next year we shall do the same. 

Madam Speaker, look at the Meteorological Centre; the Act was passed in 2011. We have only 130 staff at that centre and most of them are approaching retirement age. What is the problem and where is the problem? Why can’t we recruit? Out of the 300 staff that we need, we have only 130. Where is the problem? Do we have the will to drive this country to the next destination?

Lastly, I want to talk about water. Water is a resource and should be a blessing to this country. When it rains in the mountains, water flows to the low lands and it becomes a disaster. Why can’t we harvest this water and turn it into a blessing –(Member timed out.)

3.44
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and the Committee on Natural Resources. First of all, if we are going to consider the cost of services of water and electricity plus other utilities, urbanisation should be a policy which should be front loaded; otherwise it will not be achievable. But I want to ask the Ministry of Energy and more so, Government, whether we are serious about commercialising the oil and gas sector. It is now over eight years but in our budget, there are no signs of seriousness in terms of going for the oil and gas production, unless we are only relying on the investor without Government doing its part. 

For the last four years, I have demanded here that every ministry involved in the inter-ministerial roles of oil and gas comes and tells us what they are doing. We may be doing the road to Kalikatonya but we need railways more than the road, that is if we ever take off. We are talking of 25 square miles for the refinery but what about the land issues, the land use and the comprehensive resettlement plan of the area? We are only talking of compensation. What about the recent debate of “we are going to do some crude as we wait for the refinery.” Nothing is coming to us. Should we, as Parliament, take another set of resolutions so that we can get something serious because we, on the ground as host communities, are losing because of this delay and yet for this budget, we are discussing why other ministries or departments are underfunded.

Now, if we are not discussing where to get money from oil and gas and we continue saying there is no money for the teachers, then we are not serious. Can –(Member timed out.)

3.46
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I first of all wish to appreciate the committee for the report. Secondly, I want to go on record to appreciate the work of the Rural Electrification Agency. At least I have travelled the countryside and this is the only arm of the Ministry of Energy that has results that you can see in the countryside. In fact, this report makes me bleed as an individual by virtue of the fact that every weekend, our friend, the Minister for Energy, flies along Tirinyi Road going to Bulambuli and as soon as she leaves Tororo Highway at Nakalama, that ends the issues to do with lighting. We have followed up, we have said this and that, and surveys have been done but nothing is unfolding. 

I just want to put the minister on notice that anytime, these people are going to ask her what she have for them. I have a sub-county that has never had even a single pole of power yet we are in a semi-urban constituency. So, hon. Minister, we need to take this cake.

Before I go to water, it is good this report does not mention anything to do with the achievements of Umeme. If I had powers, I would close Umeme and terminate the contract. Why am I saying so? Asking for a mere transformer when these people are minting money from our constituents every day but when a transformer breaks down, you take several months following it up and yet it does not come! So I see no value addition by this company.

About water-for-production, I salute the committee for coming up with these proposals. But hon. Kamuntu, I would like to remind you that Iganga District is landlocked and we have one dam called Lake Namadope; it separates Luuka District and Iganga. For the last four to five years, they have been including it in the report for de-silting such that we could use this water for production. To-date, there is nothing and the report is equally silent; there is no mention yet it has been surfacing for some years as one of those to be de-silted and promoted for water-for-production.

On Buseruka Hydropower, hon. Minister, the Bible and the Koran do condemn wastage; if we can put money in constructing a dam but we do not provide a plate for the people to consume this power by putting up transmission lines, I feel public resources are not being utilised – 

THE SPEAKER: Now, I had noted a Member but after checking the list, that Member is a committee Member. So let me now invite hon. Bitekyerezo and the ministers get ready to respond.

3.49
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I thank you for seeing me. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER:Iiih! Can anyone miss you? (Laughter)

DR BITEKYEREZO: So, Madam Speaker, mine is going to be on three things. I will be very precise – and I thank the hon. Werikhe with your committee for a wonderful job done. 

I want to talk about people who construct in the wetlands; there is nobody who will construct in a wetland without the support of, again, my uncle, one of my brothers or people that side. There is a problem and my problem is that somebody begins a house in a wetland and as it comes up and we are – Madam Speaker, I wanted to request, through you, that the NEMA officer in charge but through the Ministry of Water, bring us the names of the people that have constructed in wetlands because you know the wetlands which you own. That will enable us to – because we are tired of dinning with enemies of this country, who are pretending, wearing ties but they are building in wetlands. Some of them are our uncles - (Interruption)

MR VINCENT MUJUNI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not want to inconvenience my colleague, hon. Bitekyerezo, but I also could not rest when he said that people constructing in wetlands are his “uncles”. Unfortunately most of them – (Interjections) - Yes, he is the MP Mbarara Municipality and I am from Rwampara which is in Mbarara and so most of my voters are his uncles. Could he precisely tell us who his uncles are who construct in wetlands so that my people of Rwampara can be exonerated from this circus? 

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate your allegations because you are endangering many relatives here. (Laughter)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I come from Mbarara Municipality and hon. Kyamadidi comes from Rwampara. I wanted to be very polite and recently here and even in submission, one of us said, “This big man called Sudhir Ruparelia…” (Laughter) You see, I wanted to be very careful in my debate by saying that “one of our uncles” because MzeeSudhir is an uncle of Uganda in terms of economics; so I wanted to be very polite. (Laughter) 

The Vice-President said there was putting of sand and soil in the lake here and he was very precise and even raised it as a matter of national importance. And this one is a former Vice-President, by the way, and I took him very seriously. So I was of the view that surely, hon. Minister of Water and Environment, what if the President gave you the ministry to govern – Hon. Kamuntu, I want you to listen to me: Why don’t you tell Mr Sudhir to stop depositing soil in the lake?

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Time is over. Can I ask the ministers to share the next 15 minutes between them; the Minister of Energy first and then the Minister of Water – seven and half minutes each.

3.54
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to take this opportunity to extend my congratulations to you; I missed catching your eye yesterday. So I want to extend my congratulations to you for the recent elections. On behalf of the people of Bulambuli, we wish you God’s blessings and a successful term of service. And of course, the ministry that I lead equally extends its congratulations to you and the Bamasaaba at large do the same – (Laughter) – including Umukhuka. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, in the same spirit, I thank the Committee on Natural Resources for the job well done. This committee is very committed to its work; it does a thorough job and we have spent a lot of time interacting as we respond to the issues they have raised. And for my colleague, the Shadow Minister, the issues that she raised, as you all recognised, are issues that the committee had thoroughly discussed.

I thank you colleagues for the interest you have in my ministry; I thank you for recognising and appreciating the work that we do. It is that which keeps us going to serve you better. 

Colleagues have expressed the need for us to promote energy-saving stoves and increase the distribution so that many of the people can use them. And by so doing, we will be saving our forests from being depleted. As a ministry, we are making every effort to improve efficiency and the promotion that we are carrying out – we are reaching out to our development partners to see how best they can support by way of grants. We are also dealing with financial institutions which extend credits. So we are going to review the programmes that we have to see how best we can make these energy-saving stoves affordable by the rural poor.

In addition, we are also looking at using the carbon-credit mechanism because this in a way protects the environment and we think we can benefit from it. So, more effort is going to be put in that directly so that we can make them wide-spread throughout the country.

I know colleagues have been very much interested in knowing where these energy-saving stoves have been utilised because all of us want them in our constituencies. But the fact that we have limited resources means that we can start off on a small scale and we hope that with the training we are giving to the artisans, they will be able to come up with cheaper technologies which will make it affordable to the bulk of the people. 

I wanted to share the districts where some of these stoves have been constructed; there is Oyam, Dokolo – we actually looked at Northern Uganda as one of the areas to start off with and then some other districts later. So we have reached out in Oyam, Dokolo, Amolatar, Soroti, Kaberamaido, Maracha, Adjumani, Nebbi, Koboko, Zombo, Arua, Kayunga, Wakiso, Mukono, Rakai, Bushenyi and Kabale. As I said, because of the limited funds, we have started off on a small scale but we will try to come up with a mechanism of ensuring that we reach out to more people.

On the issue of electricity distribution in West Nile, West Nile is one of the regions that my ministry focused on and since Nyagak was commissioned, the people of West Nile are only consuming half of the capacity that is generated there because the electricity distribution network is not widespread. But I want to assure my colleague that next month, we are going to launch the construction of the electricity distribution network in West Nile. The contractor and all modalities are already in place. We are going to make sure that we have a network spread out from Arua, which needs rehabilitation, Maracha, Koboko, Yumbe, Nyapeya, Zombo – these are the areas where electricity is going to reach; Wolu, Vvura and then in Nebbi we have Nyaravu, Pakwach, Panyimu up to Parombo. Also the power line to Moyo and Adjumani is in progress to be commissioned in financial year 2013/2014. 

So a lot of effort is being made to extend rural electrification. Colleagues, I want to plead with you; we want the whole of this country to be electrified. The government plan is to have electricity for all by 2040. But you also recognise that we do not have sufficient resources to enable us reach out to everyone. We have come up with a new master plan for rural electrification and we are going to ensure that with the additional resources, which we have requested for, we extend power to the rural areas and promote industrialisation in the rural areas through value addition and it will help us to better the lives of our people.

Madam Speaker, when we extend electricity in the rural areas, we target the district headquarters and other institutions like health centres, schools, trading centres and where there are industries, priority is given to –(Interruption)

MR ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister is giving this House a programme on how she is going to roll out rural electrification. But we are aware that the rural electrification strategy of 2012/2013 has expired. Now the honourable minister has not had it renewed. How can she proceed without renewing this strategy? Is she in order to mislead the House that she is going to roll out rural electrification without giving a framework on which she will base her work?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is work in progress. Please continue. 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. But for the benefit of my colleagues, Cabinet approved the revised –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, my sister, for giving way. Rural electrification is very good, but where I come from, together with hon. Werikhe and the minister, people cannot afford to connect power to their houses. So they got barbed wires and made illegal connections. The reason is simple; power is for all yet they cannot afford to get it into their houses. 

So how will you get the rural people connect power in their homes when the connection costs alone are still unaffordable to them. For example, connecting to a rural house would cost Shs 500,000 and the man may have built his house at a cost of Shs 100,000. How can you tell him to pay half a million shillings; how can we have rural electrification when connection fees alone are half a million – (Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, all Ugandans are struggling to have power in our areas. Is the honourable member, the Leader of the Opposition, from Bamasaba in order to boast about having many lines in their region yet in our areas we are just struggling to get a single line? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us support the minister to roll out her plan so that we can all get power. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, let me make the record clear; it is not the entire region that we are talking about. In fact, the most disadvantaged place is Bugisu perhaps because the minister is from there –(Interruption)

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I implore my brother Nandala to assist me in fighting illegal connections by advising our local people to apply for electricity connection. All of us need electricity connected to our homes. We should also support our local people in income generation so that they are able to get power connection to their homes – (Interjections) – Madam Speaker, I have only a few minutes here.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, please take your seat. 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The other issue Members have raised is to do with compensation for people who are in the corridors of electricity power lines and also compensation for people where petroleum activities are going to take place; areas like where the refinery is to be situated. Before we plan any project in the petroleum area, feasibility studies and assessments are carried out, including environmental impact assessment. Right now, as far as Kabale is concerned, particularly where the refinery is going to be, assessment was done and the local people were engaged. Evaluation was done in 2011/12 and those are the rates which we have been using in compensating the people.

There is a question that arose regarding the line from Masindi-Lira-Nakasongola where the power line has already been constructed. I want to assure my colleagues that the assessment for the damages done arising out of construction of this power are being undertaken and the people who were affected will be compensated. 

But I also want to appeal to colleagues – you see, we all want electricity to reach our constituencies. And compensation does not take little money. Given that we do not have much money to extend power to everyone at ago, where we would like power to be extended as quickly as possible, we should sensitise our people to allow the electricity lines to pass by them so that we can make use of the electricity to generate income. If we are to wait for government compensation, it is going to take a very long time – (Interruption)

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The hon. Minister is talking about the passage of electricity lines. If you go to an area like Kweni, which is in our neighbourhood, you find that we have plenty of land, but electricity is not there. Is it in order for a neighbour - is it really African culture not to talk about the neighbour when the neighbour is also - Is it in order, Madam Speaker? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should support the neighbour to get more money so that she can roll out to everybody. 

In the meantime, in the public gallery, we have students and teachers of Chemwaniya Secondary School represented by hon. Kisos Chemaswet and Lydia Chekwel. You are welcome. (Applause) 

Minister, please conclude.

MS MULONI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take note of my neighbour and his needs, as far as electricity is concerned. All those needs of the neighbours and all other districts in this country are being taken care of –(Mr Fungaroo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Please, you are interfering with my programme.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much for giving way, Madam Minister -

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to talk about extending and evacuating electricity from the generating station to the rest of the country. I do appreciate and recognise that there is need. As we increase generation capacity, we need to also increase the transmission and distribution capacity so that we can evacuate all this power that we are generating. 

Of course, our interest is to make sure that we have adequate electricity throughout the country. I am bringing this for the case in Buseruka, which is Kabalega Power Station. Indeed the capacity of Kabalega is nine megawatts but because of the transmission lines from Hoima area - Hoima area right now is saturated in as far as electricity consumption is concerned because we have Kinyara and we now have Buseruka so the amount of electricity, which they consume has been met and the excess electricity is the one that we have to transmit outside Hoima.

We are improving the transmission network from Hoima so that we can get this additional electricity, which Hoima does not use, to be used throughout the country. 

I do appreciate your recommendations that as Government, we need to get more money so that we can invest in transmission and distribution. When Rural Electrification Agency is going out to map, we try as much as possible to sensitise the local leaders so that they are able to know the work that we are going to do because we need their support when we are taking electricity into the rural areas. We will endeavour to continue sensitising and engaging as many of you colleagues so that when we are doing the mapping of your needs in the district, you are involved and you support us especially.

There was an issue that was raised by my honourable colleague on the mining leases and in particular talking about Hima. Madam Speaker, this matter is in court and therefore prejudicial. I am not in position to comment about it.

The other issue that was raised was to do with royalties. Madam Speaker, we do pass over these royalties to the local governments for them to be able to benefit. I will be interested in taking more details from my colleague on Bujagali because what I know is that these royalties are actually being given out. But I will get more information from her so that I can establish what is happening. The problem could be at the local point but I will establish that and follow it up. Otherwise, you are entitled and you must get those royalties.

There is concern about non-compensation for the Karuma area in Kiryadongo. I do appreciate and thank colleagues for the support that they gave us. The bulk of the people in the Karuma project have been compensated and the few who have not been compensated are because there is a dispute. It is one big village that has not been compensated because of a dispute but the money is there. Once the courts resolve this dispute, the money is going to be paid.

In as far as commercialisation for oil and gas is concerned, a lot of work is going on. We have the Committee for Petroleum and we are meeting regularly. Each of the ministries involved has been tasked to do its work. Work has already commenced on the roads in the area and we are going to continue.

At the same time, we have been engaging the companies because our initial commercialisation plan was to construct the refinery and after the refinery is running, we would then look at exporting crude. Madam Speaker, we are going to use some of this crude for power generation as we wait for the refinery to come on line. We are discussing with the oil companies with a view of constructing a pipeline for petroleum export as we also construct the refinery.

We know that the refinery is going to meet the needs of Uganda since we are landlocked and the needs of the East African Community. We have already communicated to our partner states to invest in this refinery. It is going to be a public private partnership and so the government is going to participate in it but the private sector will take the lead. We are going to start with 60,000 barrels per day and as we have more crude discovered, we will expand it to 120,000 barrels per day. Through that, we should be able to meet our needs as a country.

So colleagues, there is work that is going on in all these sectors of mining, energy and petroleum. We are going to strive to ensure that we meet all these plans that we have put on the table for this year and that we fulfil our promises to our people.

Colleagues, once again, I want to thank you very much for the interest and for the support.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am now inviting the Minister for Water and Environment.

MS MULONI: We also pledge that we will continue working together to make sure that we deliver a good service to this country. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Minister for Water.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, on a procedural note, we raised the issue on Escrow Account, which talks about - this is an account where the government is supposed to put money and if we do not pay bills, they take it away. We have experience of Escrow accounts in this Parliament; there was an Escrow account with UCB and the money was taken.

Annually, we appropriate money for paying electricity bills. There was money on the Escrow Account, which has been taken according to the committee and it is reflecting a zero balance. The minister has not talked about this. This is a big problem because – (Interjections) - no, I mean the minister has not talked about it. What Umeme has been fond of doing is sometimes it exaggerates the bill to Government so that they are able to draw the money.

So, Madam Speaker, I would be happy if the minister makes a comment on the Escrow Account where we have lost over Shs 100 billion, which is taxpayers’ money.

THE SPEAKER: Are you not satisfied with what the committee recommended? Yes, minister.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee made its recommendations and we are going to work towards realising what the committee has recommended. The Auditor-General is going to carry out an audit -

THE SPEAKER: And the minister is supposed to report here within three months if we adopt this report. 

Okay, let me invite the Minister for Water and Environment.

4.18
THE MINISTER FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Having listened to a good explanation from the Minister of Energy that there are meetings taking place, there are works being planned in the inter-ministerial committee on the Oil and Gas Development, I am aware of all that, but she doesn’t mention the part of the funding yet we are already in the budget process. Can I request that at an appropriate time, the ministries responsible bring to Parliament detailed evidence of funding? Is it procedurally correct for us to continue getting stories on meetings without evidence of funding or evidence of the timeline because as we speak, we don’t have a timeline of that oil production? So, is it procedurally correct for us to continue without details being brought in? 

I would like to request that the different ministers – not for the Minister of Energy to speak for them – I am not aware of any other road being done apart from the one of Kaiso-Tonya. I would rather want to hear on infrastructure what NEMA, Education and Lands are doing to make this country ready for the oil and gas.

THE SPEAKER: You know, if you ask so many ministers to speak about something, it can’t be just one minister. I think you need to address the Leader of Government Business. I don’t think she can commit the other ministers.

MR MUKITALE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. The concern is that on this matter, we continue asking questions to the Minister of Energy as if they are the only ones responsible.

THE SPEAKER: Can we now task the Leader of Government Business to go back and report to us on that matter after he has organized all the ministries?

MR MUKITALE: Most obliged.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I really would like to thank you not for the accomplishments you have done but for the stamina you have shown since morning. (Laughter) There used to be some water on the Table here, but it is now no longer there. This is fantastic.

I want to thank the chairman of the committee – (Interjections) – I would have very much wanted to serve her with water as a minister for water. (Laughter) But I just want to thank the Committee of Parliament on Natural Resources for the comprehensive recommendations they have made and the analysis on the policy statement of the ministry.

I also would like to thank Members of the House for your constructive presentations on the Floor of the House. These will definitely help in setting realistic priorities for the ministry. I would like to assure you that because of time constraints, in the event that a matter you have raised is not comprehensively covered in my response, we will pick the Hansard and we shall attempt to follow up these recommendations as much as possible although subject to the constraints of the budget.

Let me begin with the specifics, Madam Speaker. There was a matter on the centrality of water sustaining life. This is universally recognized and I am inspired with the kindness that Members exhibited in debating this report. Water is life. Its development and management remains a mandatory issue and indeed if you read the Constitution, it is part of the National Objectives and Principles of Policy that we must do everything to protect, promote water and environment for us and those to be born. This is a very heavy responsibility.

There are major issues that you have raised, which I want to respond to. One is on the rain water harvesting as part of an element that could increase water coverage in our country. The policy of the government is water security for all Ugandans. No Ugandan should walk more than 2.5 kilometres to the source of water. For that to be achieved, we need a package of water. We need boreholes to provide water; we need protected springs, gravity water schemes, piped schemes and we need rain water harvesting. 

I am really passionate about this. The figures we have are that we can reach 11 million Ugandans if we focused on rain water harvesting. And indeed every time you see a woman or a child carrying a jerrican of water on their heads looking for water when much of the water could be harvested the way hon. Kabasharira has done – would have been harvested from the iron-sheet roofed houses – you could rain harvest and put water in a tank right at the doorstep, but instead children have to walk miles to access water.

I have a proposal and this recommendation is one of the elements in our quarter package that we shall be implementing as soon as the budget is approved by this House. This is true – water – I don’t know how I can say it – and as a ministry, we will provide guidelines. We would agree with a recommendation that any public building financed by public funds should be provided with rain water harvesting facilities - in schools, health centres, and so on; this would go a long way in increasing water coverage. I can assure you, Madam Speaker, that we shall do the best we can to increase water coverage in our country.

Madam Speaker, the second element – again, we take it as a value chain – water, you take it back to rain; you take it back to the forests and you take it back to the wetlands. Consequently, the issues that you have raised on climate change and the impact it has on encroachment on wetlands and increased forest cover – this is a very serious recommendation and I can pledge that we are going to honestly attempt to address it.

Let me point out something on the climate change policy. I can assure you that this policy is already in the policy committee on environment, chaired by the Prime Minister and within a matter of months, not years, it is going to be approved to harmonize all the coordination with stakeholders so that approval is obtained for it to be implemented.

On the National Metrology Authority, again it was approved mid budget and I can undertake and confirm to the House that within three months, the Metrology Authority Board of Directors will have been appointed. The policies of appointment are in advanced stages.

There were three issues that became very controversial. One is VAT on water. This is a tax proposal, which the Ministry of Finance will explain when they appear before the committee. But I would like to beg, Madam Speaker, that since VAT on water is just a tax proposal, the mandated Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development appears before this House to respond to this issue comprehensively. All I can do, as an affected ministry is to make sure – I will at least inform the House that VAT is not likely to affect – (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are a Member of that committee and you always meet the minister. Minister, please conclude.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, you are a Member of that committee. You have more opportunity to meet him than others.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. Actually I have engaged hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and assured him that VAT on boreholes will not be applicable. It will not be applicable to gravity water flow. It will not be applicable to protected springs. It will not be applicable to rain water harvesting sources. It will only be applicable to metered water and further explanation will be given by the Minister of Finance.

Third, you raised issues on wetlands, particularly issuing titles on wetlands. Again let me share with Members of Parliament the position Government has taken on titles on wetlands. I have a legal opinion which basically states the following: 
“
    1. Issuance of certificates of titles in wetlands by anybody: Uganda Land Commission, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Development and Land Board is illegal as it is contrary to Article 237(2)(b) of the Constitution and section 44(4) of the Land Act and statutory instrument No. 153/3 of the National Environmental Act.
    2. Continued allocation of plots in wetlands, river banks and lake shores is illegal as it is contrary to the National Environmental Wetlands, River Banks and Lake Shore Management Regulation No.153.5.
    3. Environmental impact assessment certificates that have been issued in wetlands illegally can be cancelled.
    4. Government is not obliged  to pay compensation for land titles in wetlands issued after the 1995 Constitution as they have been issued illegally, contrary to Article 237(2)(b) of the Constitution and section 44(4) of the Land Act.”

And I lay on Table these legal opinions. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the hon. Professor, I am standing on a point of order pursuant to Article 237(2)(b) of the Constitution. The minister has ably stated that it is government policy that any land earmarked or existing as a wetland is constitutionally protected. If that is so, do you have double standards? Why am I saying so? In Lutembe in Wakiso, there is an investor in the names of SudhirRuparelia directly filling Lake Victoria with soil contrary to what I have read as prescribed constitutionally. Is he in order to lie before this House that he is doing what the Constitution says when he is doing the contrary pursuant to the example I have given of LutembeWakiso - Rosebud? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, one, that matter is before our committee so we should allow them to discuss it and tell us what is happening. Secondly, I think when the former Vice- President raised the same matter, we asked the ministers to come and speak to us on that issue. So it is premature. Please, conclude. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise and wide guidance. What I was sharing with Members - (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Professor, it is order on you. Madam Speaker, the ministry of environment is a government ministry. The ministry of lands which issues titles is a government ministry. Now, one government ministry, properly guided by the Attorney-General issues titles another one says, “You should not touch the wetland.” So, is the minister in order to come and tell us that the Attorney-General has ruled that they will not compensate for these titles and yet it is the same government, which issued the titles?

THE SPEAKER: But if the titles are void, why should they be compensated for? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General are principal advisors to the government. Consequently, if any department of the government is doing something contrary to law, he can advise. And what I was sharing with you is his opinion and I have put it on the Table to indicate to you that no department of government is above the law and will go against the ruling that I have tabled. 

Madam Speaker, on a more serious note, I want to emphasise the recommendation of tree planting and the tree fund, conservation of forest cover and reserves and the whole issue of enforcement capacity or the police unit that we have. I agree with you, hon. Members, that the Environmental Police Unit is a nucleus. We have just started; it never existed and it has done some positive work but the work is still quite heavy. Consequently, we would be too willing to look at your proposal to transform it from being a police unit to becoming almost like Uganda Wildlife Authority where you have a trained institution to protect the wildlife environment. 

The encroachment - I do not know how we can share this. The mind-set is an issue where no amount of police can guard the whole country against encroachers. That is why as it is in the Constitution, increased sensitisation and awareness of knowing that this environment is for us and the future should be a shared responsibility not only for the police unit but for every Ugandan.

Finally, because the time does not permit me, I want to quote hon. Members. There are some hon. Members in this House - I can take hon. Mulindwa if he is in this House - people who have taken very earnest efforts to plant trees for every occasion - on your wedding; plant trees on road reserves, on boundaries of your land - plant trees as school orchards. Plant trees, trees, trees, trees, trees. 

And then I would agree with you. I will push National Forestry Authority to assist in providing seedlings so that this exercise - because we start - if you want to guard environment and guard wetlands and have water, you have to start with forest cover so that it is restored.

Finally, we have to make hard choices and the hard choice we must make is simply to know that the national policy objectives - we must protect the environment for us and the future. And the time is now. When choices come to be made of the budget, this is in your hands, Members of Parliament. Choices have to be made. The resource envelope is limited and how you divide it will make an impact on addressing the concerns you have raised. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Members. I want to put the question that save for the recurrent and development expenditure under Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; save for the recurrent and development expenditure on Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment; save for the recurrent and development expenditure under Vote 150 - National Environment Management Authority; save for the recurrent and development expenditure under Vote 157 - National Forestry Authority; and save for the recurrent and development expenditure under Vote 123 - Rural Electrification Agency, I put the question that the rest of the report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, during the course of the debate, some allegations were made against one of the Members of this House. He would like to use a few minutes to explain his position. Hon. Balyeku.

4.38
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 
Madam Speaker, one of my colleagues who is also a Member of my constituency made a very serious allegation and I thank you that you have given me this opportunity to clarify. I want to put it categorically clear that I have no dealings with this company in picture which the hon. member has referred to. I have no knowledge about this company; I am not a director in this company called gold sniffing. I challenge the hon. Member KassianoWadri to produce any simple evidence that he has proof that I am connected to this company, which wants to dupe Government.

Madam Speaker, before you and the House, I have no dealings with this company and I challenge the hon. Member to bring any simple evidence where my name appears as far as this company is concerned. Maybe when he thinks about gold, he thinks about me. 

On this note, I ask him to give me a clear explanation in this House how he involves my name in a company that is trying to dupe Government. I am not asking for an apology from him; I am asking him to come out and explain to the House on how he found information, which is false because if he comes before the House and lies that a Member of the House is involved in dubious dealings, then he has to bring a clear explanation to this House and prove to the House how I am involved in this company because I am very sure about what I am mentioning on the Floor of the House. Let him produce the evidence. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, the hon. Member has rebutted the allegations. It is now up to hon. Wadri to produce the document proving that hon. Balyeku is part of the sniffing - this company has got a very funny name “Gold Sniffing Company.”

Hon. Members, I will suspend the House for one hour, we will reconvene at 5.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 4.39 p.m.)

(On resumption_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND BUDGETARY ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2013/2014

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for according me the opportunity to present a report from the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. But before I do that, allow me to lay on Table the minutes of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee meetings that were held in considering the policy statements. For ease of reference and helping Members to follow the report, I have already submitted to you a summary of our report but I will use my report referring to specific pages so that Members can follow my presentation.

Madam Speaker, the committee considered the policy statements of the following Votes: 
    • Vote 007 – Ministry of Justice and Constructional Affairs
    • Vote 102 – Electoral Commission
    • Vote 105 – Uganda Law Reform Commission
    • Vote 148 – the Judicial Service Commission
    • Vote 109 – the Law Development Centre
    • Vote 106 – Uganda Human Rights Commission
    • Vote 101 – the Judiciary
    • Vote 133 – the Directorate of Public Prosecution
    • Vote 104 – the Parliamentary Commission
    • Vote 103 – Inspectorate of Government and 
    • Vote 119 – the Uganda Registration Services Bureau.

Let me now proceed to page 2, which is a summary of the crosscutting issues in the entire report that we encountered in our meetings and submissions. The committee in its meetings recognised that there are some issues that cut across the sector and need urgent action from the government short of which will lead to the continued poor performance from the sector institutions. This section of the reports highlights those issues and makes recommendations.

Office accommodation and JLOS House

Madam Speaker, the Justice Law and Order Sector (JLOS) is plagued by problems of high rent fees, rent arrears, small unsuitable operational spaces, low capital development allocations and threats of evictions and suits. For the last three years, the Justice Law and Order Sector House has been looked at as the ultimate solution to these problems yet it has also remained unfunded over the same period.
The committee received a commitment from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that they will work to ensure the architectural designs and all required information is received and concluded within three months from August 2013. We, therefore, recommend that the construction of JLOS House commences during the financial year 2013/2014.

Harmonisation of salaries and emoluments

Some institutions in the Justice Law and Order Sector such as the Inspectorate of Government, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau and the Law Reform Commission have received salary enhancement while other institutions such as the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, Electoral Commission and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs are still operating on old salary structures. The disparity in salaries has resulted into a number of problems such as high level of staff turnover, low motivation leading to poor staff performance.

The committee recommends that the establishment of the salary review commission be expedited. We further recommend that in the short and medium term, institutions such as the Electoral Commission and the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, which are in dire need of wage enhancement to enable them pay a living wage to their staff, be given due attention for consideration.

On page 4, we give you a summary of the budget that has been given to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. But what is more relevant is the last paragraph and which I advise Members to take note of. It reads that it should be noted that of the non-wage bill, Shs 4.3 billion has been provided to settle court awards and compensation arrears. 

It should be further noted as at 30 June 2013 of the financial year 2012/2013, domestic arrears stood at about Shs 130 billion while the contingent liability on the other hand stood at Shs 541 billion compared to Shs 250 billion the previous year. Most of the court awards attract interest of up to 30 percent.

Observations and recommendations

Funding of the JLOS House: The committee is concerned that while JLOS House is supposed to solve accommodation problems for many institutions in that sector, and that although land has been acquired in Naguru, construction is yet to commence. The JLOS institutions together with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs spend up to Shs 55 billion annually on rent. The committee received assurances from the Ministry of Finance that Government is ready to get a financier to construct on a build-operate and transfer arrangement, that is, if the Ministry of Justice conclusively submitted architectural designs and bills of quantities.

Madam Speaker, the committee adopted the proposal by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Ministry of Finance and recommends that the two ministries working together should ensure that the architectural plans and all the required information is received and concluded within three months so that the construction of JLOS House is able to commences during this financial year.

The committee was concerned that in spite of previous resolutions, the Government has not taken concrete measures to acquire its own premises and save on astronomical rent costs incurred by the Government. The committee reiterates its recommendation that the various agencies of the Government currently renting office space should liaise with the Uganda Land Commission and secure land, develop bankable projects and access credit to construct their own offices. This will not only save the Government substantial sums of money but it will also add to its assets.

Compensation and Court Awards

The committee notes that as of 30 June 2013 in the financial year 2012/2013, domestic arrears stood at about Shs 130 billion while the contingent liabilities stood at Shs 514 billion. The committee noted that at the current rate of proposed payment, it will take Government more than 40 years to clear court awards and compensations. Madam Speaker, that is if none is awarded in the 40 years we are talking about. In spite of the commitment to do so, the Ministry of Finance had not provided the committee with a payment plan for this item by the time of writing this report.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs liaises with the Ministry of Finance to establish a payment schedule for this outstanding obligation. In particular, the committee recommends that the two ministries should work out a three-year payment plan starting this financial year and submit it to the committee within one month.

The committee further recommends that court awards and compensations originating from ministries should be recovered from the budgets of those respective ministries. Madam Speaker, this is very important. This is in view of the fact that Government at times loses cases due to the negligence of officials in those respective ministries.

The Administration of Justice Bill

The committee observed that for more than four years, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has failed to table the Administration of Justice Bill to Parliament, despite repeated promises, reminders and commitments to do so. This law would strengthen the Judiciary as the third arm of Government. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should table this Bill in Parliament within the next three months. The committee noted that in the event that this Bill is not presented in the next three months, it will be brought to Parliament as a Private Member’s Bill originating from the committee.

The Heritage Arbitration

The committee notes that in the financial year 2011/12 and 2012/2013, the Ministry of Justice incurred about Shs 12 billion on the Heritage Oil arbitration case in the United Kingdom. This amount was spent on payment of external legal services, fees to the Permanent Court of Arbitration, sitting allowances, per diem and air tickets for travel by the legal team to London and for the Uganda legal and technical team. 

The committee is concerned that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is yet to provide the exact details of how much funds have been approved, released and spent on this arbitration. The committee will, therefore, inquire into these details and report back to this House within three months from now.

Operationalisation of the Centre for Arbitration and Dispute Resolution (CADER)

The Centre for Arbitration and Dispute Resolution was created under Section 68 of the Arbitration and Reconciliation Act, to steer and guide the growth of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms so as to decongest the courts. However, CADER remains non-operational in spite of the committee’s and Parliament’s previous recommendations that funds be allocated to operationalise it. This state of affairs has contributed to case backlog and affects investment. 

The committee notes that the Arbitration and Reconciliation Bill, 2007, provides for the direct financial support from the Treasury to CADER. The Ministry of Finance informed the committee that it would consider funding for CADER as and when it received a submission from the Ministry of Public Service. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service submits staff requirements and funding needs for CADER to the Ministry of Finance within the next three months. 

The Electoral Commission

Observations and Recommendations

i) Staffing and Staff Remuneration
The committee notes that the current wage structure of the Electoral Commission was last set in 1999. Since then, the social-economic realities have changed with inflation rising. The committee was informed that the Ministry of Public Service is currently in the process of establishing a salary review commission to harmonize pay scales across the public sector.

However, the committee further noted that the Government has not addressed remuneration of Electoral Commission staff and commissioners in spite of the delicate and sensitive work that they do. Government has promised to address this issue for the last three years but without results. 

The committee recommends that Government sets up the salary review commission to harmonize and streamline remunerations of public servants. This should be done in the course of this financial year. However, without prejudice to the above, the committee recommends that in the interim, Government implements the salary increment proposals that have been agreed upon between the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Public Service and the Electoral Commission.

ii) Election of Local Councils
The issue of elections for lower administrative units – LCs I, II and IV and women councils - has been around for some years. This is a constitutional matter that cannot continue to be ignored. The Electoral Commission was unable to conduct elections for these lower administrative units due to insufficient funding contrary to the committee’s and Parliament’s previous recommendations. Non-election of local councils is not only unconstitutional; it also impacts adversely on judicial powers conferred upon those councils. 

The committee recommends that Government should provide the required funds so that the local council elections are held as soon as possible, in any case before the end of this calendar year. The committee further recommends that the elections for the newly created local councils and town councils should be done within six months.

iii) Domestic Arrears
The commission has domestic arrears amounting to Shs 472,324,176. While the committee, in the financial year 2012/2013, recommended that the Ministry of Finance provides funds to cover the domestic arrears, no funds were availed. Madam Speaker, we are recommending that funds to that tune be availed so that these arrears are cleared.

iv) Capital Development
The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides the MTEF ceiling for capital development for the Electoral Commission, to match the need for critical investment and office accommodation for the Electoral Commission.

Madam Speaker, I should say that the Electoral Commission of Uganda is the most insecurely and poorly housed commission that the committee has had an opportunity to visit. 

Law Reform Commission

Observations and Recommendations
i) Vehicles for Entitled Officers 
The committee was informed that the Commission requires Shs 680 million for five vehicles for the chairman, secretary and three heads of department. While a provision has been made for one vehicle to be purchased per year, it is worth noting that the old vehicles are problematic and expensive to maintain. The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs 680 million be availed in order to enable the Commission purchase five vehicles to do their work.

ii) Office Space
Madam Speaker, we propose that Shs 130 million be provided for increased rent for the financial year 2012/2013. 

On point No. iii, we are recommending that Shs 3 billion be availed for the Commission to accomplish the work of revising the laws in the course of the financial year.

Law Development Centre (LDC)
Observations and recommendations
i) Construction of a Multi-Purpose Auditorium
The Law Development Centre is in the process of construction of a multi-purpose auditorium. It has received support from the Government in the past for this project but currently, has a funding gap of Shs 1.7 billion to cover the completion and furnishing of the auditorium. The project that was supposed to be completed in June 2013 has so far been pushed to February 2014, and there is a certificate amounting to Shs 630 million that remains unpaid.

The committee recommends that the Government provides the Shs 1.7 billion to enable LDC complete construction of the auditorium and furnish it. Failure to do this will lead to expensive litigation, which LDC is bound to lose. The committee strongly recommends that Government restores the Shs 1.3 billion capital budget funding as a long term measure to address capital developments of the Law Development Centre.
	
ii) Restructuring
The committee noted that the Law Development Centre concluded its first phase of restructuring involving the professional staff. The centre cannot proceed with phase II involving the administrative and support staff because while the new structure has been approved by the management committee and the Attorney-General, final approval from the Ministry of Finance has not been received.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development signs off on the restructuring approval as requested to enable the centre conclude its restructuring process. Partial restructuring will defeat the purpose of the exercise on which the Government has already spent a lot of money.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission 
Observations and Recommendations

i) Independence of the Commission
The committee was informed by the commission that its funding arrangement currently stands at 70 percent by Government of Uganda and 30 percent by donors. It, however, emerged that this funding arrangement exposes the commission to influence by pressure from donors who often want to have undue influence on the commission’s performance of its mandate. This goes against Article 54 of the Constitution, which provides for the independence of the commission.

In that regard, the committee recommends that the Uganda Human Rights Commission be given 100 percent funding in financial year 2014/15, to enable it perform its functions without undue influence from external funders.

The committee was informed that the commission handles cases of human rights violations. In some cases handled by the commission, complainants have reported loss of their means of livelihood because they have been maimed or disabled through human rights violations they have suffered. When compensations are awarded in such cases, the expeditious processing of such compensations is vital to restore the dignity of those afflicted. Accordingly, the commission proposes to have a special compensation fund for the victims of torture. 

The committee supports the commission’s proposal, given that payment of compensation for court awards and arrears in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has remained unresolved for a long time. The Government should, therefore, set up this special compensation fund for torture victims.

ii) The Uganda Human Rights Commission received a salary enhancement but the current package in the 2013/2014 budget excludes funds for gratuity, NSSF, medical and housing allowance which accompany the salary increment already provided. The committee recommends that the government avails funds to the tune of Shs 3.5 billion to work for this unavoidable expenditure.

The Judiciary

Observations and Recommendations
Madam Speaker, we have already reported onobservation and recommendation number one.

ii) Case backlogs
The committee notes that the issue of case backlogs continues to hound the Judiciary and is concerned that little is being done to comprehensively deal with this issue. The committee further recognises that the quickwins project to clear the case backlog was an efficient way to deal with the problem. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that a scheme similar to the quickwins project be designed to take courts closer to the people and comprehensively deal with the case backlog problem. Further, the committee recommends that all vacant positions, particularly in the upper bench, should be filled up expeditiously to clear the backlog and decongest the prisons.

iii) Discriminative Salary Enhancements
The committee notes that while the Judiciary received a remuneration enhancement package recently, the increments were done discriminatively and haphazardly. The current remuneration of judicial officers, particularly judges, is grossly inadequate. This negatively impacts on the Judiciary’s capacity to attract dedicated and quality staff. 

The committee recommends that the Government should comprehensively address increment of salaries of judicial officers in tandem with the public promise by His Excellency the President to do so at this year’s Labour Day celebrations.

The Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP)
Observations and Recommendations
i) During the meeting with the Directorate ofPublic Prosecutions, it emerged that the directorate has the lowest remuneration in the sector. A comparison of the salaries paid to officers in government departments doing similar functions as compared to the salaries paid to officers in the directorate reveals an incredible disparity. While the Directorof Public Prosecutionsearns Shs 4.6 million per month, officers heading other government departments but doing related work earn more than Shs 15 million per month.

The committee, therefore, recommends that as the process of constituting the long awaited salary review commission gets underway, the salaries of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions be reviewed in order to address the exodus of staff from the directorate to more lucrative governments departments and the private sector.

ii) The directorate informed the committee that it has rent arrears amounting to Shs 930 million. It further emerged that the directorate had been directed by the Ministry of Finance to look for this money within its already small budget. The committee recommends that Government strives to ensure that all government ministries, departments and agencies secure land. This recommendation has been made in respect of the JLOS House that we propose must be done starting this year. 

iii) Staffing 
The committee was informed that there are some districts within the country in which the DPP has no presence or office. The DPP informed the meeting that in such districts, police prosecutors perform the functions of the directorate. 

It further emerged that even where the DPP has no presence and the work is done by the Police, there is no mechanism in place to supervise the work done and ensure proper performance of the DPP’s functions. Efficient running of courts requires the presence of the DPP officers in the respective areas.

The committee, therefore, recommends that in the long-term, the MTEF ceiling for the DPP be enhanced to boost its capability to expand and reach all districts where it currently lacks presence.May I remind Members that in our report of last year, we had recommended that creation of more districts be halted until we can well service –(Interjections) - I am just alluding to the committee’s recommendations.

iv) The committee was informed that the DPP has inadequate technical staff capacity to handle emerging and changing forms of crimes such as cybercrime, environmental crimes, drug and human trafficking, money laundering, corruption, terrorism, war crimes and crimes against humanity. There is, therefore, a need to professionalise prosecution services but this has a funding gap of Shs 1.03 billion.

The committee recommends that the Government avails funds to the DPP to cover the funding gap of Shs 1.03 billion to enable it train their staff and equip them to be able to handle the emerging forms of crimes.

Parliamentary Commission 

Observations and Recommendations 

i) The Recruitment of more Staff 
The committee noted that currently, the commission is undergoing a restructuring process with a view of boosting its human resource capability. This will involve recruiting more staff so as to improve on efficiency and effectiveness of the Legislature. 

The research function, for example, whose current ratio of researchers to members is 1:40 will benefit from this recruitment drive so as to improve the ratios to 1:10. The committee welcomes the planned recruitment of more staff as this will boost the efficiency and effectiveness of the Parliamentary Commission.

ii) Security Budget
The committee further notes that the creation of the Parliamentary Police Directorate in light of contemporary security challenges has come with a large budgetary implication captured under the Office of the Speaker. The committee is currently in the process of scrutinising this security budget so as to form an opinion and advise the Parliamentary Commission accordingly.

iii) On-going Plumbing and Renovation Works 
The committee notes that Shs 3.5 billion has been spent on plumbing works in the East and South wings of the Parliament Building, with works yet to commence in the North Wing. The committee has also received complaints that the completed works in the East Wing especially are shoddy with blockages, leakages and weak installations. The committee undertakes to look into this matter and report to Parliament in a period of two months.

iv) Office Accommodation and Rent
The committee noted that Parliament pays Shs 2.5 billion annually as rent for Baumann House. The committee further noted that the Government had handed over offices previously occupied by the President’s Office in Development House to Parliament. Further, the Ministry of Education and Sports is to move out of Development House and Shs 2.2 billion is required to renovate Development House for relocation of Members from Bauman House. It was noted that Parliament had previously resolved not to renew the tenancy agreement of Bauman House in May 2014, when it expires. 

The committee was informed that there was a funding gap of Shs 12.39 billion in the capital budget required for construction of an additional floor on the East, North and South wings, paying outstanding certificates on the underground car park and renovation of Development House. The required capital budget is broken down as indicated there-under.

The total requirement for the above activities amounts to Shs 21.35 billion. Given that only Shs 8.96 billion has been provided in the budget of 2013/2014, there is a funding gap of Shs 12.39 billion. The committee strongly recommends that an additional Shs 12.39 billion be availed to the commission in the financial year 2013/2014 to allow the commission commence on the above projects. 

The renovation of Development House and the construction of the additional floor on Parliament Building should be done concurrently in order to provide sufficient office space for Members of Parliament. The committee notes that even after the renovation and occupation of Development House, there will still be 81 Members of Parliament without offices; in other words, if we do not go up.

It is, therefore, recommended that the tenancy contract of Parliament at Bauman House be renewed for one year, running from 1May 2014 to 30April 2015 –(Interjections)- there will be another Parliament coming.

Inspectorate of Government (IGG)

Observations and Recommendations 
i) Government Support for the Operations of the IGG 
The committee was informed that whereas the Government has enhanced the wages for staff at the Inspectorate of Government, the operational funds have remained mostly stagnant. There is a funding gap of Shs 0.5 billion for the NSSF contributions and Shs 2.2 billion to beef up operational funds.

The committee recommends that the Government provides an additional Shs 2.7 billion onto the non-wage component of the Inspectorate of Government so as to enhance the operations of the inspectorate and get the best results out of a well-motivated staff.

ii) Rent of Office Accommodation
The committee recommends that the Inspectorate of Government liaises with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to secure funds for the project. They have a piece of land and they are looking for funds to develop that land into offices.

Judicial Service Commission

Observations and Recommendations 
i) Ad hoc/Temporary Nature of the Commission 
The committee notes that the Judicial Service Commission, which is a creation of the Constitution, works on an ad hoc basis. It is only the chairman who works on a full-time basis; the rest of the members work part time. This calls for the need to reconstitute this commission and accord it the rightful status in order to enable it execute its mandate. 

The committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendations that the status of the commission as the body superintending over the third arm of Government be reviewed, and the commission be made permanent with full-time commissioners. In the meantime, the Government should consider taking on the part-time commissioners so that they can handle the business of the commission. 

ii) The committee notes that the funding of the commission has remained low and facilitation paid to members of the commission is inadequate compared to the important mandate that they handle. The committee accordingly recommends that the funding for the commission be reviewed, and in the short term commissioners be engaged on the full-time basis and be paid accordingly. 

In the short term, an additional Shs 1.3 billion should be availed to the commission to appropriately facilitate the commissioners to perform their duties.  This will cater for the retainer fee for commissioners and expenses towards recruitment of judges. 

iii) Recruitment of Judges
The committee was informed that the Judicial Service Commission recruited 49 judicial officers in the following categories: The committee noted that the office of the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice, who retired in the course of the year, had not been filled. The committee was informed that the Judicial Service Commission had advised His Excellency the President on the persons to fill the two positions. 

The committee reiterates its recommendation that the posts of the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice be filled expeditiously and in accordance with the law. 

Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB)

Observations and Recommendations 

i) Rental Arrears 
The first recommendation is for payment of the arrears in rent amounting to Shs 4,080,389,000 to clear the rent. 

ii) The bureau has received an offer to the tune of $10 million from the World Bank for construction of its home. This is on the condition that Uganda Registration Services Bureau secures a plot of land for the project. Without a capital development budget, it is impossible for the bureau to secure the said piece of land. 

The committee recommends that the Government considers this matter as a matter of priority and avails land for the Uganda Registration Services Bureau to take advantage of this opportunity. 

iii) The committee is cognisant of the effort by the Uganda Registration Services Bureau to automate its business support systems in order to enhance efficiency and effectiveness in service delivery and implement the information security strategy. This issue has been raised over and over for funding to be availed but to date, no funds have been provided for this effort. 

However, the committee was informed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is carrying out an audit verification to confirm that URSB collected Non-tax Revenue (NTR) of Shs 21 billion as opposed to a budget of Shs 7 billion in the budget of 2012/2013. Thereafter, the ministry would provide more non-wage resources to facilitate URSB generate more revenue.

The committee noted and appreciated the tremendous improvement in NTR collections by URSB. The committee recommends that Government provides Shs 6.5 billion in non-wage bill for URSB in order to facilitate automation of URSB operations and expanding URSB by operationalizing regional offices. The committee further recommends that the Government honours its pledge by the Prime Minister and provides Shs 312 million to URSB for establishing the intellectual properties enforcement unit in URSB. 

That summary brings me to the end of this submission. I would like to conclude by thanking all the members of my committee, the shadow Attorney-General and the shadow Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs from whose submissions we benefited in compiling this report. Madam Speaker, I beg to report. 

I am sorry, Madam Speaker; I should have duly appreciated the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs who was very religious in attending our meetings for the duration of the exercise, his deputy and the Attorney-General. Thank you very much.

(Entire reprot to appear in the bound volume of September 2013)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair. Before we move to the debate, since the Minister of Lands is here,I was wondering whether he has any land he is holding in trust for the Government. In lieu of all these demands, - everybody is being asked to look for land - maybe you could help us solve this issue.

6.30
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, this is the first time I am appearing here since you assumed that very important office – (Interjection) - I mean to speak here. Congratulations. This goes out to show that the entire world appreciates what Uganda can deliver. We shall work to give you the necessary support so that there is clear success at the end of the day. 

Madam Speaker, you have raised a very important issue, which has kept on featuring in this report and others. We have a Cabinet directive, and this morning the Cabinet committee chaired by the Minister for Security was trying to address this matter to determine the exact space requirements for various government ministries. My ministry was represented at that meeting by hon. Sam Engola.

Through these discussions, we are going to be in position to determine exactly how much land we require for creating office space for the various government departments.We shall accordingly go out to ensure that we acquire this land so that we can be in a position to provide various ministries with office space. At this stage, I do not have the exact information on the exact amount of land that is required but once my ministry and Uganda Land Commission get instructions, we will move out and get the land. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we wantto know whether there is any land you are holding for us. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, we have land; it just depends on exactly how much and in which particular area you need this land. As I indicated, the Executive has already foreseen this need and has set up a committee to deal with this matter. My humble request is that the Members should allow us time to work on this. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I donot see the shadow Attorney-General. So, the Floor is open.  

6.34
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very happy about the report and I would like to thank the chair and the committee. 

My interest is in the area of compensation and court awards. We can see that astronomical amounts of money are required to compensate or to settle court awards.The growth rate of these awards is actually 100 percent per annum compared to last financial year’s figures. The issue is that we have had cases of conspiracy between the office of the Attorney-General and those who seek compensation. Can we have investigationsdone into every award, particularly the big ones, so that we donot have to lose money at this rate? 

Secondly, the Attorney-General is the principal legal advisor to Government. We have seen cases where the Attorney-General is hostile to one of the institutions of government, particularly this very institution, Parliament. Does this bring to test the concept of the Attorney-General being the principal legal advisor and actually the counsel to us? Can we revisit this and see to it that where there is any problem with the interests, Parliament is fairly represented?

Finally, concerning the issue of the Parliamentary Commission, we have heard that the issue of recruitment is very critical and there was a recommendation to have additional staff. I just want to be informed as to how the recruitment is undertaken. We have heard rumours in the corridors that relatives and friends of commissioners or people related to that are the ones considered for various posts in this very institution of ours. Can I get clarification on how the staffing process is done so that we have it fairly done? Madam Speaker, I thank you.

6.38
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the detailed report.

I am also very worried and concerned about the huge compensations, especially since some are over 30 percent. It has become a business of some of our ministries. They deliberately make mistakes and they donot pursue these cases in court properly, and when these awards are ready they share the loot. 

I have experienced this in the local government. One may have a case and it will be carelessly handled so that the officers share the money. So, as Parliament, I request that we get interestedin this and actually support the committee recommendation that the votes of those ministries, which carelessly handle these cases, should suffer, instead of accumulating these losses centrally to the office of the Attorney-General.

I am also concerned about the high rent these ministries are paying. We have a very good example of the Ministry Of Agriculture, which moved from Entebbe; in this budget, actually, they have budgeted for Shs 1.3 billion for rent. 

Even here, there is Shs130 billion, which has been budgeted for some of these bodies as an unfunded priority. It is a debt, which was incurred last year but in the budget, it is an unfunded priority. How do you incur a debt and when budgeting, you call it an unfunded priority? Are we really serious? Where are we taking this country? You have incurred somebody’s debts and instead of making it a priority, it has been imported here as an unfunded priority. I think as Parliament, we have a duty to overturn some of these items in the budget. I thank you. 

6.38
MS EMMA BOONA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for the thorough report that has been presented.

My concern is about our local council and women council elections. I think this might be the 100th time that this issue comes to Parliament. I remember in the last Parliament, it seemed that we would nearly have elections in place. I remember there was a report made in this House that the issue of money was no longer a problem, so we told the voters that we are about to get the voting process in place; but right now it seems it is nowhere in the offing. 

Can we, therefore, in this budget, do our best to ensure that we have the local councils and the women council elections taking place? Wherever we come from, there are problems that arise from not having these councils in place. So, I think it should be a priority whose funding should be put in place, so that we have law and order and peace and in our villages. 

Secondly, I would like to comment on the issue of case backlog in the Judiciary. There are many court cases, as we know, and we know that justice delayed is justice denied. We should take it as a priority if we are concerned with the human rights of the people we represent especially the people who cannot afford the legal costs that go with court cases. It should be a priority in this Parliament that the solution to this backlog is quickly found. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

6.40  
MR MICHEAL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for their report.

I would like to draw your attention to page 72 in respect to URBS and rent arrears. The committee has said that URBS has been served with a notice to be sued in respect to rent arrears, but on page 73 we see that they have progressed in NTR collections. They have been given a budget of Shs7.5 billion but they have been able to collect more than Shs21 billion, and yet I can see they have an outstanding rent bill of Shs4 billion. 

Can the Minister of Justice work together with the Minister of Finance to allow these people retain the extra collections they made to be able to sort out this rent problem? Shifting premises has got its own problems; you lose files, you lose information, you lose computers. 

This is the quarter that they do most of the business. Most of the businesses would be filing end-of-year returns and also preparing for the beginning of the year business. So, if they are evicted from the premises, they will have a problem looking for new premises and also they will not be able to settle and collect revenue. If they can be allowed to use part of this money, as long as it will not affect the budget - they were given a budget of Shs7 billion but they have collected more than that.

Secondly, they have intensified and they are doing a very good job in as far as births and deaths registrations are concerned,and this information is fed onto the ID project. The ID project has so far spent more than Shs 215 billion and there is nothing on the ground. However, these people, without even any resources, have been able to streamline births and deaths registration – (Member timed out.)

6.42
REV. PETER BAKALUBA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and his committee for this wonderful report. 

I just have a few concerns, beginning with the Judicial Service Commission. We have talked about the case backlogs but we still realise that only a few judges and magistrates have been appointed, and this can also be a cause for this scenario. Also, there are many lawyers that have applied to be considered as judges or magistrates but they have not been considered. I do not know whether they are selecting only those who are NRM and leaving out the Opposition. I think we should be accommodative to everyone; we need competent people who can come and take up these positions. 

Recently, we heard that everything has to be handled from State House – the vetting of judges. I think this kills the spirit of the legal profession - being vetted by an ISO person who is not a lawyer and who does not know what is required. We need to be mindful of this. The President should simply receive the resolutions and swear them in, instead of going that extra mile of checking who is who.

Madam Speaker, we also need to re-visit the magisterial areas. We find that some of the chief magistrates are handling very big areas and they cannot do administration work competently. In Mukono, for example, the chief magistrate covers Kayunga District and then he comes to Buvuma and other islands. I suspect that is the reason we have this backlog. 

We also have the problem of resident judges –(Member timed out.)

6.45
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to say something about URBS. I visited their office near CPS; most business people want to reduce the cost of doing business but when you go to that office, you cannot believe the level of congestion. You can actually see that these people make a lot of money and it is only the Ministry of Finance that is limiting their activities. I think this is where Parliament can come in and help - where we need to give money and invest more. 

If we get regional offices operationalised, people from Gulu will register from there and will reduce on the cost of doing business. I am sure many people are waiting to do business at a cheaper cost, but you can imagine they have to rent here because they come from as far as Mbarara to register businesses in Kampala. This is where even more non-tax revenue could be collected. 

I remember the Leader of the Opposition recently reflected that we need to widen our avenues of collecting more money for the Treasury. To the Ministry of Finance, now is the time to prioritise where you can get revenue collected and we fund those projects. 

During the recent Budget Speech, I heard that Government is going to reduce the wastage of resources on rent. I think that by this time, all ministries should get their own homes instead of renting. Fromthe Shs 1.3 billion to the Ministry of Agriculture – (Interjection) - Somebody is saying even Parliament is renting. With Shs 1.3 billion, you can start with the first floor. The Ministry of Agriculture has got offices in Wandegeya, where FAO offices were, -(Member timed out.)

6.47
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work they have done. 

I will start with the issue of office rent and domestic arrears on rent. If you look at this report, you will realise that Government is soon going to run into very serious costs in terms of office rent. Just look at the budget of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; the amount of money for arrears in rent is equivalent to the money which is being used by one ministry – that is the Ministry of East African Community Affairs. That ministry is running their development on a budget of Shs 5 billion and yet one other ministry alone requires Shs 4 billion to clear rent arrears. 

I think we took on privatisation at a time when Government wanted to make business for the business people. However, time has come for Government to get away from paying rent since business people can now rely on rent from other people but not from Government. If we do not take this seriously, time will come when most of the ministries’ money will go to paying rent.

Secondly, I thank the committee for raising the issue of victims of human rights violation – those who have been maimed. It takes very long for Government to compensate them once an award of costs is given, and yet it is very easy for some other people. Take the case of Mr Basajjabalaba; it took two months for Government to compensate him and yet for the person whose rights have been violated, it will take a number of months before they are compensated. So I think it is good for us to support the proposal to create a special fund so that victims of human rights’ violation are actually catered for. (Member timed out.)

6.49
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for doing a very good job. However, if all the recommendations in committee reports that have been written since I came to Parliament were implemented, even by 50 percent, I wonder how this country would be.

I would like to comment on the salaries of the prosecutors, which is highlighted on page 47, and the people involved in the Ministry of Justice. Ever since we were young, we have heard - and this is the notion even in the villages today - that Government never wins a case. No wonder; this is part of the reason. When the prosecutors meant to defend cases are underpaid, they are likely to connive with the private lawyers to lose cases and later share out money behind the scenes. This is a reality we are aware of but we cannot prove to the state because we shall be asked to subject it to strict proof. 

Madam Speaker, I think we need to pay these people very well so that they are able to deliver fair justice. Government actually pays indirectly, and yet no one can thank them for paying because they have been cheated. 

My second contribution is on local council elections. In many Ugandan villages where the leaders of LCs I and II do not have the people’s goodwill, there is anarchy. Maybe if there is no money, which I think should not be the case, but I think we should pass the law to re-empower these local councils because there is anarchy in the villages, to the extent that some people are not working. It is only in those villages where the leaders are loved that you find justice administered by the LCs. (Member timed out.)

6.52
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. However, I have some comments to make.

We shall be able to achieve justice and fairness only when we ensure independence of the Judiciary and the Electoral Commission. I say this because there is conflict of interest relating to appointment and delivery of service. If I was appointed by someone, I have to show loyalty or allegiance to them.

Secondly, on the issue of the court awards, I want to know whether the awards include the Shs 12 billion, which was awarded. The same matter was raised by hon. Lukyamuzi. I also want to know about our status as a government in court because sometimes, due to our negligence, there are express rulings. As Parliament, we can only follow these things when we know how many cases we are responsible for.  

On the issue of land, I want to know how much land the government owns. There is a lot of encroachment on government land; many activities are taking place, but I think up to now, we do not know how much land we own. 

In every sector, there are huge arrears reflected. To me, this reflects how indebted we are. So let us know from the Minister of Finance or from the Budget Committee how much money this government owes people in arrears so that we can know –(Member timed out.)

6.55
MS ATIM JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work well done. 

I would like to comment on the issue of court awards and compensation from page 8. The committee said that these court awards attract a 30 per cent interest, and they say it will take about 40 years for the Government to complete these awards and compensations. They have devised a way in which the government can clear this. I support their recommendation that if Government is to compensate or reward, the awards and compensations originating from ministries should be recovered from the budgets of the respective ministries.

Madam Speaker, you will realise that there are some reckless drivers who are from different ministries but they are all heaped on this ministry. There is the case of Heritage, which originated from the Ministry of Natural Resources, but it is among those heaped here. Why don’t we tax that particular ministry; what effort did they put in to prevent us from facing such problems? Now they are heaping it here. 

Another case may involve say the Minister of Works, who may fail in his contract and then someone sues Government and it is heaped here. We are saying that if a particular minister does not perform his tasks well, let that ministry face their own burden other than burdening another ministry. 

Another case is on exorbitant court awards. This Parliament tasked the Attorney-General on this issue of Severino v. the Attorney-General. Parliament asked him to appeal. Up to now, we have not known whether the case was appealed or not. It really fetches a lot of compensations and awards– (Member timed out.)

6.57
MS ANGELLINE OSSEGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too would like to thank the committee for the report. 

Allow me to begin my comments from page 8 concerning compensation and court awards. Probably, the committee would have helped this House by giving us the periods in which these compensations were awarded. Which is the oldest and from which year? As far as I know, the classic award, which was given in the case of Severino v. the Attorney-General, was processed in two weeks. So how old is the oldest award and how much is it? Let the committee help us with such details so that we can follow and understand why some are being paid much faster than others.

Madam Speaker, I know that these court cases that Government loses are an amalgamation from different departments. However, I also know that many of them are political cases, which are sometimes concocted to cause this country and the taxpayer loss of exorbitant amounts of money; all in the name of politics. I think at some point, we should decide that the people who take these cases to court should be charged when we learn that the case is concocted instead of the taxpayer losing money. 

On page 9, the committee mentions the Heritage arbitration case. I remember this was talked about in the last budgeting cycle. I know after passing the budget, we do monitoring as committees during the course of the year. If we do our monitoring well, why is this coming up again in another budget cycle? We need information on the progress of this case. This money was ring-fenced; we should now be told how it was utilised or whether it got out. I remember we said, until certain provisions were met, this money was not supposed to go out. Now we are hearing it in another budget cycle –(Member timed out.)

7.00
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My first concern in from page 11 where the report talks about the achievements of the Electoral Commission and it highlights a number of by-elections listed as achievements. I am a victim of a would-be by-election and according to me, a by-election cannot be an achievement of the Electoral Commission; it is a sign of mismanagement and failure of the Electoral Commission. 

A number of by-elections that have been listed here are a result of individuals versus the Electoral Commission and the Electoral Commission losing the court battles. The Electoral Commission is just ordered to conduct other elections; such cannot be an achievement. It is a loser being ordered by court; that cannot be a sign of his achievement. Actually, all the by-elections listed here are a testimony of the failures of the Electoral Commission of Uganda. 

I do not want to mention my case where the Electoral Commission was ruled out of order, to the extent that it was ordered not to tamper with elections of Rubaga North. That is why I was sworn-in directly from court, without going back to the Electoral Commission that was found to be total failure as far as the elections of Rubaga North were concerned.

7.02
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee very much and especially hon. Tashobya for this job. However, I do not see hon. Nantaba’s and hon. Seninde’s land committee mentioned here. Where does it get its money from? They have always been praised by the President for their role, so we need to know the fate of this,disregarding all other factors.

Secondly, I support your recommendation that ministries and other government departments should pay for the compensations - UPDF and Police; they panic a lot when you come up very strongly and they start paying even before you tell them to.

Secondly, the Electoral Commission only carries out by-elections for Members of Parliament. If they think that other political offices are useless, - LCs II and I - I want to tell you here that I am going to conduct elections of LC Is in my constituency. I will end up in court and I will challenge the Electoral Commission on this matter. I saw how elections were carried out in the first term of NRM, by people lining up behind others.

On appointment of judges, let us not lead this Chief Justice into temptation but deliver him from evil. He should not even come to the Appointments Committee and we should follow this recommendation.The National Social Security Fund has already lowered the age of retirement by paying people at the age of 55 years old and they are targeting 50 years. This is because they are raising a lot of money but people at the age of 70 years still want to serve until they die, claiming that they are energetic. We shall not allow that, Madam Speaker.

Finally, there is this issue of arbitration. I am very disappointed by our Attorney-General in this country. What is his work; we go out to hire external people yet we have strong lawyers in this country and they are supposed to carry out this work? You hear about arbitration cases where we spend money on these people. You have the LDC and law courses in Uganda; can’t our people take that money as Ugandans? (Member timed out.)

7.05
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by thanking the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. When you look at this report, the people who have signed it represent 77.8 percent. This is the highest record in the signing of documents and I want to thank that committee and to thank hon. Tashobya for his effective leadership in the committee.

Hon. Migereko did not answer the issue of land to my satisfaction. We already have an offer of US$10 million by the World Bank. As hon. Muruli is busy with the committee, can we fasttrack this and isolate this money so that we do not lose it and we get a home for the URSB? I think that would be the best thing for us to do.

On the issue of elections of LCs I and town councils, I want to thank the committee for the recommendations; but can Parliament put its feet down and be firm on this so that we have these elections conducted? The Electoral Commission had even announced a date for Kasilo Town Council elections and candidates went and printed posters and T-shirts. These have now been rendered useless because they cannot be used. This is expenditure on the part of the individuals.Let us help these people, and I know it was not only Kasilo Town Council. 

I have seen in other countries where the Attorney-General is picked from among the civil servants, not politicians. Can we learn from that and change? Possibly, we could see some sanity come to that office. 

On the issue of awards, these awards are very exorbitant because the Government is involved in this type of shoddy cases. Look at hon. Chris Baryomunsi here and how he was taken; now he has won the case and he is going to be paid. We would have avoided this but because of the way we handle issues - Hon. Fox Odoi here was paid because he was detained for over 48 hours; when he was released he went to court and was paid over Shs 150 million. Why? 

I think the Government is a contributor to these high court awards. You are aware of the case of Severino, a case which was heard for just 30 minutes and the person was awarded Shs 12.9 billion. I think that concerning the directive Parliament gave to the Attorney-General here, which he is yet to come to this House and report how far they have gone with the appeal –(Member timed out.)

7.08
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga COunty, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to raise a question on land. In countries like Tanzania, land is owned by the state. In Uganda, some land is owned by individuals and some land is owned by the state and controlled by the Uganda Land Commission. This includes forest reserves, wetlands and public land.

I would like to ask the chairperson if there is any person who has power to give away these pieces of land permanently to an individual. Land can be given to another department, where you change users, but they have no power whatsoever to take away public land and give it to an individual. This has happened in this country and I want a legal explanation on this matter,because this is why we do not have land on which to construct offices.

I think if we do not come out as Parliament to protect public land, we are in trouble. Tomorrow, we are going to spend too much money looking for land on which to build public offices. Even local government land is now being given away. If it is given away, where will these districts put their buildings? How will they work? 

So I would like the chairperson of this committee and even legal experts in this area - I am not a lawyer; I did administrative law but all I know is that public land is public land. (Member timed out.)

7.11
MR PHILLIP WAFULAOGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Minister of Justice why we persistently have this shortage of filled positions in the Judiciary. This has been going on for a number of years. Is it because we do not have people? Is it because of the pay or is it because we are looking for cadre judges?

A few weeks ago, I heard the Minister of Justice saying very nice things about good governance and he was quite patriotic. He was saying that in the Judiciary, there is no party; no UPC, DP or NRM. I thought those were very nice words, and I would like to thank him for that. 

We have seen what cadre judges have done on two occasions in the Constitutional Court in the case of Severino v Parliament of Uganda, and recently the case of our so-called rebel MPs. I think judges should be judges who qualify on merit as stated by the Minister of Justice.

My second point is on the issue of institutional houses for judges upcountry. I went to meet some magistrate - judicial officer - in one district and he was staying in a slum. It is not proper that the judicial officers or judges should stay in slums. Districts should be empowered to build houses for judges. We should budget for that, Mr Chairman of the committee. We should consider that as an important matter - housing judges decently in good places. 

The question of domestic arrears; this country respects foreigners more than it respects Ugandans. Foreign loans, foreign arrears attract interest but our domestic arrears at home do not attract interest and the Government does not really care about that. Somebody who was supposed to be paid Shs 5 million 10 years ago is still looking for arrears. I think it is not fair and this Parliament should be looking at this question. (Member timed out.)

7.13
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work done. 

On page 15, the committee mentions the elections of LCs I, II and IV. The recommendation is really good but I would like to find out from the chairman of the committee whether the position for LC IV still exists. What I know is that the position for LC IV exists in municipalities, headed by mayors. The position for LC IV which was at the county level has been replaced by the councillors LC V. The elections for the councillors LC IV for the municipality were carried out successfully and they are now working. I would like the chair of the committee to clarify that.

Secondly, looking at page 52, the committee says the introduction of police officers in Parliament has increased the budget of Parliament. All along, I have been wondering about the role of the so many policemen in Parliament. We know security is very important but the number of policemen we have in Parliament must be more than the number of Members of Parliament. Wherever you are entering – just at the gate - you will find over 20 police officers. At the parking lot, you will see over 30 police officers. At the reception, you see over 10 police officers. From the lifts - (Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, we are lucky that the honourable minister is a general. I got an opportunity to teach in the Army for 10 years as a professional teacher, but I want to say that in the Army - even in the Police - it is very rare to find an officer with three pips standing at the quarter guard from morning throughout the day. They go for parade and if they are not on duty,they take off their uniforms and do other duties. But here is a situation at Parliament where somebody with his three pips, whether he is a captain, - I do not know the ranks of the Police - spends a whole day checking people coming in and others who are going to the gallery. This is demeaning the level of a senior soldier or policeman. That is the information I wantto give.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, honourable member, for that good information. Madam Speaker, let us think of reducing the number of police officers and reducing the budget under the office of the Clerk to caterfor the police officers. Sometimes the presence of police officers may inconvenience some Members. We should not fear the unknown –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Just for your information, most parliaments now have police stations. This is a police station. Go to India, you will find a police station. Most parliaments now have police stations. Let hon. Dombo give information. 

MR DOMBO: I do appreciate the concerns which the Members have raised. One of the things they should realise is that the higher the hierarchy and importance of the institution or the individual, the higher the people who serve such an institution and the people. (Applause) 

Parliament is a very important place. We have so many MPs from other countries and so many VIPs coming here. In order for a person to offer the necessary attention that goes with such offices, it requires them to be of highunderstanding and highcalibre. If this was a complaint from the police officers who are serving, that would be understandable and we would find out whether it is so; but if somebody is complaining on their behalf, at least as a Commission that has not come to our attention. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.18
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In a few seconds allow me, because I was not here yesterday, to congratulate you upon that very noble achievement. You are doing us proud and we really congratulate you, Madam Speaker.

I also thank the chairman for this good report. However, I want to mention that the committee did not put a lot of emphasis on the issue of case backlogs. Sometimes people think that whoever is in jail or whoever has a court case is a criminal or something like that. There are many instances where we have seen people declared innocent even when they have stayed in jail for many years. Recently, we saw many people who had stayed there for three years and when they went to court, they had no case to answer. So, we need to look at this aspect more critically. 

How does UNEB do it? If it was UNEB officers setting and marking all the examination papers, I think they would not do the job but they hire the services of other senior teachers. I think we can do it in the Judiciary. Why don’t we get senior lawyers and use those people on a temporary basis to get this backlog out of the way? (Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for yielding the Floor. I just want to inform you that this matter was of great concern to the committee. I also want to say that we addressed our minds to this matter when we were making our recommendations. 

If you look at the recommendations on the Judiciary on page 40, we are talking about reinstituting the quickwins project. This is where you would commit more money and judicial officers, first of all to go upcountry and conduct more sessions, even over weekends. In addition to that, we are also proposing the recruitment and filling of all judicial vacant posts so that we have the manpower and also the spread and time for this activity. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, but I think you can give it a timeframe so that we can become more serious as Parliament on this very important issue. 

Lastly, there was a recommendation made on local council elections. On page 15, the committee recommended that the elections for the newly created local councils and town councils should be done within six months. I donot know what you had in mind. I think although it doesnot cover your area, from the way things are happening on the ground, there is a vacuum in almost every local council in this country. I donot know what we can do, Madam Speaker, but the committee should have liaised with other responsible committees on this issue –(Member timed out.)

7.23
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I was about to shift to the front bench because for the last two days, I have not been catching your eye. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you should sit nearer to me.

MR MULINDWA: Madam Speaker, I want to congratulate you for that seat you won for Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware I sit on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and one of the big problems we have found in the prisons sector is the ever increasing number of prisoners. The number has increased nearly beyond 100 percent. The reason is because we donot have enough judges and there is lack of transport for prisoners to go to courts. 

I would like to suggest that the judges should begin to go to the prisons premises to hear cases from there. From my time on this committee, we have had to visit very many prisons facilities and one question you expect from every prison is about people who have spent eight years, 10 years without seeing a judge. Those people are not allowed to work or even to move out of the prisons premises. They eat, they drink, but they are not allowed to work; they are called “committals” in prisons language.That means that we spend a lot of money on; in spite of them being not productive, we also deny them justice. 

I appealto the committee to push for an increase on the allowances for judges, to allow them see these prisoners –(Member timed out.)

7.26
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The committee, on page 52, has observed that Parliament needs a capital budget of Shs 6.012 billion to complete our car parkand it is an unfunded priority. From the way Members are scrambling with the staff of Parliament for the space we have for parking, I donot think that this should really be an unfunded priority. I donot know whether we can look around in all the ministries so that we get this money to finish this car park. 

This is a very big problem. When you park at the National Theatre parking lot the whole day, you pay Shs 10,000; if you park there for five days, you pay Shs 50,000. It is very expensive. If you donot park at the National Theatre, by the end of the day your car is vandalised. 

If you went to Kenya, all the premises around the Parliament have been given to the Parliament by the Government. This makes it very safe for the staff and for Members of Kenyan Parliament, because you can park anywhere within the premises and streets of Parliament. I donot know whether our Government can borrow a leaf so that all the premises that border this Parliament should be ours. That can help us to solve that issue. 

It is true that the Electoral Commission this time tried to come up with a roadmap so early - (Member timed out.)

7.28
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have about three comments to make. I just want to thank the committee chairman and my neighbour, hon. Tashobya, and his committee for a good job. 

The first point I want to make is that all of us probably will repeat what hon. Emma Boona said about elections of local councils. To us, as Members of Parliament, the governance of constituencies and lower local governments is becoming a problem because of lack of elections of local councils. 

I lost for an LC V councillor, a lady; there are very few ladies in Sheema District and it is a small district. I have three new sub-counties that were created and they do not have LC III chairmen.So, governance becomes an issue. We had thought that there was some easier and cheaper way of holding these elections. I want to appeal to this government; if you think this is expensive, try cheap democracy. 

I am glad the committee is recommending advocacy for quick passage of Bills. I want to appeal to the minister to fasttrack the Marriage and Divorce Bill. I was a little bit disappointed that we didnot go through this Bill as we had started. As a Member of Parliament, I have never had participatory meetings like I had during the Marriage and Divorce Bill consultations.(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: I will give you one minute; it is the first time we are hearing about this.

MR KATWIREMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you go to any sub-county in this country, the officer who has a whole line waiting to see him or her is the Community Development Officer.What is she or he dealing with? It is marriage and divorce issues. We can pretend, hide our heads in the sand as if there is no problem, but whether we bring the law here or we donot, we have issues on marriage and divorce and we had better tackle them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katwiremu, I want you to clarify on the first issue that you mentioned; did you say you have two new LCs III? 

MR KATWIREMU: Yes

THE SPEAKER: You have two new sub-counties?

MR KATWIREMU: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: When were they created?

MR KATWIREMU: They were created recently.We got a communication from the Minister of Local Government and in one of them now, we have to elect a new LC III chairman.

THE SPEAKER: How can that be? We were told that we have to wait for the census. I gave resolutionsfor my district and there are other places I know where they want new sub-counties. I am really in shock.

MR KATWIREMU: Well, I do not know how they were created but for me, I am just saying I have two new sub-counties and we need to elect officials for them.

THE SPEAKER: You are very lucky.

7.32
MS KWIYUCWINY GRACE FREEDOM (NRM, Woman representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also take this opportunity to congratulate you upon your election and achievement for you and for all of us.


I have seen a recommendation in this report, which I support very much, about the salary review commission, which all of us need.However, I also see the same committee, on page 47, is now recommending that, “as the long awaited salary review commission gets underway, the salaries for the Directorate of Public Prosecutions should be reviewed in order to address the exodus of staff from the directorate.” I am wondering who will do this, how this will be done and in what period.

Also, aren’t we creating a disparity and an inconsistency? Why don’t you wait for the Salary Review Commission to do something, which is uniform for all of us so that all of us can benefit from this at the same time? We had an experience here when some sectors reviewed their salaries and caused budget shortfalls and caused us to go through problematic supplementaries. So, I really think that it is better to wait for the Salary Review Commission, which should work for all of us at the same time.

My second point is on another recommendation, which is –(Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank my friend for giving way. The reason the honourable member does not support increasing salaries and wages for the people who are running away from the DPP is because of the Salary Review Commission we are proposing should be in place. She is saying that we should wait for that to be put in place so that we have harmonised salaries and remuneration, which is okay. 

I am aware, Madam Speaker, that she is the chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. Is she informing the House that actually, this Salary Review Commission is coming to the House and if so, when, so that we can be patient? 

MS KWIYUCWINY: I wish the Minister of Public Service were here but in our meeting, we were assured that this discussion has already been to Cabinet level.We are now waiting for it to come to Parliament. 

My second point is about making the Judicial Service Commission a full-time commission for everybody and not only for the chairperson. I want to observe that many commissions in the country are yearning to be full time – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let me ask the Leader of the Opposition to respond.  

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I would just like to seek some clarification. Thank you very much. 

The report of the chairperson leaves out fundamental issues. We are all aware that the Government of Uganda was taken to court by the Government of Congo; the information available indicates that we have a total debt of more than about US$10 billion, that is, about Shs 26 trillion, which is the budget of Uganda for two years. Your report has left that issue out, so you need to clarify. 

The report also needs to tell us the total debts. Most of the debts have been incurred outside parliamentary approval and that is a violation of the Constitution, and it continues to happen. We expected the chairperson to make a recommendation. What recommendation are you making to this House, because we are just going to continue lamenting? 

As we speak, Madam Speaker, the total debt of Uganda is over Shs 38 trillion. The Ministry of Finance only declared Shs 14 trillion. If you look at the report of the committees, the interest rate for domestic debt alone from 2012/2013 was 550. It has now increased to 680; that is interest rate on payments and not the debt alone. So, the total domestic debt without the Congo is about Shs 5 trillion. 

These matters are very serious, and this is contrary to Article 159 of the Constitution, Article 154 of the Constitution which says, anybody who concurs or uses Government funds contrary to established procedure or parliamentary approval must make good the loss.So, I expected the chairperson of the committee to lead us to these accounting officers who have violated the Constitution so that we recommend their expulsion. Why haven’t you taken action?

7.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I have a law here, which we passed on 9 April 2010, entitled “the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Act, 2010”.Clause 14A says, “Use of Government or public resources for political party or organisation activities”. Under this law, it was passed that day-to-day activities of political parties will be funded. Three years down the road, the law has not been operationalised and yet, we have been practicing multi-party politics for the last nine years. 

I have been talking to my colleagues across and I think they also see the urgency of this issue. I was trying to move a proposal here that for this year under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, if the minister does not mind, we can create a budget line for political parties’ funding of Shs 1 billion per month, which translates to Shs12 billion. 

I want to tell my colleagues across not to get worried. The people who will get the lion’s share are you. So, you should be the first people to support it because it is going to even assist you in your campaigns, if they do not take you. 

So, we are telling you this so that you may understand. It could help you pay rent and do a lot of other activities. Some of you can even eat all your money that you are making because this money will assist you during the campaigns. So, Madam Speaker, I want to propose – (Interruption)

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, my Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. I am a member of the National Consultative Forum, a forum that brings together political parties in the country. Hon. Migereko and I were also members of IPOD, so we have already discussed this issue. 

Ever since we enacted this law, political parties must be nurtured. Unless we fund political parties, the democratic process we are trying to go through will be in vain. I am requesting you to support the Leader of the Opposition’s proposal that at least Shs1 billion be earmarked for us. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. One of the cardinal responsibilities we have as Members of Parliament here in a multi-party dispensation is to nurture and support democracy. That was the spirit under which we passed this law, that we try as much as possible to support these parties. Those which are crawling should be lifted up and those which are running given some glucose to continue running. That was the spirit in which we passed this law. 

Madam Speaker, I have two clarifications that I want this House to know. One, every time a Bill comes here, it comes with a certificate of financial implications and if it passes, it means actually that Government has accepted that it should be within the budgetary framework. 

The second point is that we normally give, and I raised this point here, a time of commencement of what we pass here. Sometimes we leave it open to the ministers and sometimes we provide for a date of commencement. I think in future, we need to continue being strict on the time of commencement of these laws, given the fact that they have been given certificates of financial implications. 

The Leader of the Opposition is proposing that we provide for Shs 12 billion.When we discussed this, we agreed that if this is provided, it will probably be distributed according to the numerical strength within the House. This means that even the least party like the CP of hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi will have a share in this House. (Laughter)

However, Leader of the Opposition, you know how difficult it can be at this time of the budgeting process to raise such an amount of money. However, at least we should provide for something, even if it is Shs I billion, so that next financial year we shall create a vote for this activity and we fund parties.In this way, we will nurture democracy in this country as we support parties to grow. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to tell my brother, hon. David Bahati, that at the time they brought the law, there was a financial implication and they promised to fund it. The day of assent was 17 March 2010 and the date of commencement was9 April 2010. It, therefore, means that the law commenced long time ago. 

When we are talking about this – in fact, we have created problems for the parties. You have mentioned a good statement, that we need to nurture them so that they grow. If that is the case, your proposal of Shs 1 billion is not enough; you are going to take the lion’s share because if you took 90 percent, you would have taken all the money, which is dangerous. 

I would like to propose something. First of all, there is money which we can get; for example, the money the President is donating in form of tractors and whatever –(Interjections)- Listen to me; at least, give me a chance. 

By the way, we are trying to help the system. (Interjections) You may say, “Ha” but it is because you do not understand. (Laughter) What we are trying to say is that tomorrow, a question will be asked: If you say that you donated this money yourself, where did you get it from? These are the issues we are trying to avoid in future. So, we want – (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The President of the Republic of Uganda is the fountain of honour and has the right and all the powers to donate to Ugandans. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, there are some corrections we have to make; donating is not bad. However, there are two kinds of donations. There is where you donate on behalf of the people of Uganda, and that is allowed. However, there is where you also donate as an individual – your own money. 

The current donations the President is making, he says, are “I”. If he has made such donations, it means he has sold his cows and he is donating the proceeds. But if he is donating, say Shs 100 million, on behalf of the people of Uganda, it will be a different thing.

The reason it will be a problem tomorrow is because people will identify the word –(Interjections) – I am going to give you the reasons so that you understand and I always give way. The reason we are saying that donation is very important is because if you are analysed and they found that you kept saying, “I” but the resources were not marching with your “I”, then it will mean that you abused the office. That is the situation we are trying to avoid.

Madam Speaker, I would be very happy if the Prime Minister, the vice chair of the NRM caucus and the caucus chairperson support this. The Shs 1 billion which I proposed per month, which translates to Shs 12 billion, is peanuts compared to some of the budgets we are talking about. I beg that you agree with me and we move on, so that we can be able to identify this money to avoid crippling parties. This is the reason I am raising this point.It is in that regard, and I am sure that the chairperson is comfortable with the Shs 12 billion because he is nodding his head.

As a member of the Parliamentary Commission, I have heard very many issues raised to the effect that recruitment was done badly. Since there was an investigation carried out, we need that report to be presented to the public urgently. If there is a problem, we must clean our house because we shall not have the moral authority to hold others accountable if we are also having a problem. I think as a Commission, we shall accept that. 

Regarding rent for one year, I hope the government will be serious. They are saying that even after completing the building, you will still lack 81 offices. That means you will still need offices for Members of Parliament. I think there must be a general way to deal with Parliament so that we can have accommodation for all.

Finally, Police is not barred from Parliamentary offices, but I think we have been having a police station here.The police officers were present, but I think we have gone further to even remove the work of the Sergeant-at-Arms and handed it over to the Police. That is where we made a huge mistake. I think we, as the Commission, should revisit that policy. 

Here a police station is good enough for usand we can have people guard us from there. But for us to move the functions of the Sergeant-at-Arms and handthem over to the Police - (Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the laws that established the Parliamentary Commission and even the amended ones, the Leader of the Opposition is a member of the Commission and part of the Commission’s work is welfare and security. So, is the honourable member, who is a member of the Parliamentary Commission, in order to come and raise issues of the Commission here so that we give orders? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Leader of the Opposition is a member of the Commission and is bound by all the Commission’s decision. So, he should not actually come here and start distancing himself from what the Commission has done. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your ruling. For that, we shall take it up at another level. 

I now want to thank the chairperson and the committee for their report, but we should not take the issue of land casually. In Uganda, I have seen that when an investor comes and wants land, it is availed within a second but if it is a government institution which wants land, it does not get because it will not part with anything. Now I am confirming that these investors must be doing something wrong to enable them get land as quickly as possible.

If Government is serious about cutting costs by allowing government institutions to have their own buildings so that we can cut on rent, I am sure they should give priority to government institutions rather than the investors. Investors are profit-makers while institutions of Government are saving the taxpayers’ money in form of rent. If you cannot convince me that corruption is involved in allocating land to investors, then confirm to me that you can give Government institutions land immediately because Uganda –(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want the Minister to respond. Please, close.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. The registration board, which is also income-generating, should have already been given land and then we would have utilised this US$10 million for construction. We havemoney for construction and this should have been done long ago. If you did not do it, then something is definitely wrong. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity, but I would like to ask the Minister of Justice, the Prime Minister and the Government Chief Whip to agree on the proposal of creating a budget line under the Ministry for Constitutional Affairs with Shs 12 billion to cater for the political parties. 

7.53
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also aware that this matter has gone very far and both sides are agreeable. It is now a question of creating a vote in this financial year. As to how much, we cannot decide here; this is subject to discussion with the Minister of Finance. Otherwise, there is no objection from our side. 

However, the committee must go back to finance to discuss as to how much, not the Shs 1 billion as we were saying here. This argument of Shs 1 billion being good because we are going to get a bigger share is not acceptable; that is a kind of bribery and corruption. Whatever little the Opposition will get will help them. 

Do not talk just because you hope to get the bigger share. Just say, “It is agreeable, and the law was passed here so we should implement it”.That is the argument; each one knows how much they are going to get and that is it. I cannot say yes to the Shs 1 billion because we have to consult –Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Honourable Deputy Prime Minister, you are right; we are not saying that so that we can get more.We are not bribing you; you are entitled to a bigger share by virtue of who you are. The most important thing I want to say is that the funds provided to political parties under this Act shall be subject to audit by the Auditor-General. 

I also want to warn parties in advance; the moment you get this money, you will be subjected to audit by the Auditor-General. It is not money you can play with anyhow because tomorrow, you must account for it. I want to allay your fears because the money will be subject to audit. I also call upon NRM to be careful with spending this money because it could lead them to prison. (Laughter)

7.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will just try to make a few clarifications because the bulk of questions are to the minister. 

On the matter of office space, Madam Speaker, you ruled very well. The Leader of the Opposition knows that the decision you wisely took in the Commission was meant to alleviate the problem of office accommodation for all Members. If that is done and Development House is renovated, all the Members of Parliament will be accommodated, which I think was a good recommendation from the Parliamentary Commission. 

On the matter raised by my friend, hon. Ekanya, on the loans, the indebtedness of the Ministry of Finance and Government let me first address the issue of indebtedness. I think hon. Ekanya being more senior than me in Parliament knows that this is not a matter falling under this portfolio. I think he will raise it with the appropriate committee when it comes up. 

The same applies to the matter of Congo. What we have been reading about in Congo is a judgment as to the quantum and as to when it is supposed to be paid; I do not think hon. Ekanya has authority about that indebtedness. I think it is not within the mandate of the committee; it is with other ministries.

Let me talk briefly on the recruitment of judges, a matter raised by hon. Bakaluba. His allusion to the way judges are recruited and other judicial officers is not really correct. First of all, judicial officers from chief magistrates and above are appointed by the Judicial Service Commission; it is not the President. 

I should also inform this House that we are happy as a committee with the work of the Judicial Service Commission, and particularly this year. They recruited more than 40 magistrates; so, they did very well in filling those positions. As for judges, they recruited 29 judges in one year and some judges for the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal were also recruited. 

However, our position and recommendation is that all positions should be filled possibly in this financial year, so that there is no matter of insufficient judicial officers. The Chief Justice has already reported to work. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.59
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker.May I take this opportunity to congratulate you, like my colleagues have done. I have one sentence for you, “nothing succeeds like success.” You made us proud. 

Let me address myself to the question of court awards. Court awards are as a result of legitimate litigation against individuals and government departments that break the law. Litigants, when successful, are awarded costs, and these costs must be paid. Court awards are not negotiable; they must be paid. 

Right now, the system is such that the Ministry of Justice will pay. We shall pay our obligation as commanded by the Constitution, but we do not have enough resources. Resources allowing, we shall pay all our court awards fairly and squarely. 

As to the administration of court awards -who comes in first or second is administrative – (Interjections) –Ndugu Lukyamuzi, I wish you could be a bit patient. There have been some mistakes; some people are paid while others are not yet paid. This is administrative.If everybody on earth was correct, there would be no Commandments. There are Commandments because there are sinners. (Laughter) So, we shall address that because it is our job. 

There was the question about the Attorney-General; the Attorney-General is a legal advisor – (Interruption)

MS ABIA BAKO: Madam Speaker, the Minister for Constitutional Affairs is insinuating that it is in order for us to break the law because there are Commandments to follow. I want to know from him whether the creation of the Commandments was preceded by violation of rules and regulations and therefore, the law. Is he in order to justify criminality based on the existence of the Commandments and laws? 

THE SPEAKER: I have not understood it; maybe the honourable member has understood you.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. I think the honourable member did not understand me. What I was trying to say is that yes, there have been mistakes and those mistakes will be addressed administratively. I know that some people have been paid ahead of others, which is not right, and I am going to deal with the people responsible for that precisely. 

What I am trying to say is, you cannot have people who are one hundred percent saints; there are sinners and sinners have to be sent to hell. Thank you very much. (Laughter)(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please. Hon. Lukyamuzi, please, let the minister answer to the debate. Honourable minister, I am directing you to answer.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Attorney-General is the principal legal advisor for Government and that is it. If he handles cases on behalf of Government and you are dissatisfied, it is your constitutional and democratic right to go and challenge his decision.

On case backlog, we are dealing with the issue of case backlog and like the honourable chairperson said, it is because we do not have sufficient judicial officers to handle these cases but we are doing our best. We do not have enough judicial officers because there was a period when we did not have a Judicial Service Commission.Now that we have the Judicial Service Commission in place, we are recruiting officers and we hope that this question will be dealt with.

Secondly, even when we have enough judicial officers, you need resources to make these officers functional.Our judges still write by hand and we do not have recording equipment. These are things that exist in developing countries and Uganda is not an exception.

Concerning rent arrears for Uganda Registration Services Bureau, the bureau has done extremely well. They were given a task of collecting Shs 7 billion and they have so far been able to collect well over Shs 22 billion. I am glad to inform this House, Madam Speaker, that I am discussing with the Minister of Finance to ensure that we get what we call appropriation-in-aid from the resources they have collected so that we can ease their commitments.

On top of that, I am glad to announce that we are rolling out services, like one Member proposed. We have started with Gulu; recently, we were in Gulu launching a branch of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau office. We are going to Mbarara, Mbale, Arua and Jinja and as resources allow, we shall try to reach as much of the country as possible –(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, please, continue.

MR OTAFIIRE: Thank you very much.The country belongs to all of us. Whether it is the Opposition who does it or the Government, the country belongs to all of us and we are beneficiaries.

A concern was expressed about the recruitment of judicial officers and somebody was talking of vetting. Yes, we do vet officers but not by intelligence and not for political reasons. We vet judicial officers through the Police in order to confirm that those who are appointed to dispense justice do not have criminal records. 

I think you will all agree with me that judges and magistrates should not have criminal records. The most brilliant lawyers or those who pass interviews are not necessarily upright people. I am not saying they are raw but I think it is proper that they should be vetted in case they have criminal records.

Also, because our levels of remuneration are not competitive as opposed to private practice, occasionally, we get good people but not enough. So, sometimes certain positions are not filled because we are still looking for requisite qualifications and character.

There has been concern that compensation for big people as opposed to small ones takes precedence. That is what I was talking about. I am not denying that some of these things happen but we shall address them.

Regarding LC elections, we had prepared to hold LC elections and we thought we would achieve this by the end of this year.However, when the law concerning LC elections was brought here, instead of reducing the cost of elections, an amendment was made by the House inadvertently, which instantly raised the cost of the elections by Shs 400 billion. 

I have now gotten in touch with the Minister of Local Government and we are trying to see how, by ministerial order, he can correct that imbalance or misunderstanding, which was created.So, we should be able to hold LC elections as soon as possible. 

Regarding the Severino case of the Shs 12 billion, I can comfortably tell you that the Directorate of Civil Litigation has appealed that decision and we are waiting for a court decision. We have appealed and the appeal has been accepted. We are waiting for court’s decision. Were we to lose, I am told by the Civil Litigation Directorate that we would appeal to the Supreme Court. (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) I do not want your clarification, thank you very much. Sit down.

Regarding awards out of negligence and ministries acting irresponsibly, I would like to inform you that most of these awards are caused by officers –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order pursuant to Article 126 of the Constitution, which states that the duties of courts of law are done on behalf of the people. I am an innocent man representing the people of Rubaga South. 

I stood up on a point of clarification to seek to know from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs how the Severino case was appealed. Is the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs in order to deny me the opportunity to innocently pose a question? (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the matter of that case was already brought up by other Members in the plenary and that is why he is answering.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: But I was the one who raised it officially.

THE SPEAKER: But it does not belong to you; it belongs to the House. You raised it and it became the property of the House so anybody can address it. I know what you wanted to do. Minister, please, complete your answer.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for saving me from my friend, Ken-Lukyamuzi. With friends like hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, I do not need enemies. 

The matter of the Severino case is before the courts of law. When matters are before courts of law, it is subjudice, and I am not the Attorney-General. I am not even privy to the proceedings of the courts of law but as the chief steward of the ministry, I am telling you that I can allay your fears. 

The matter has been appealed and the courts of law are independent of my wishes and your wishes. I am saying that should we lose the case, which is a possibility because when you go to court somebody has to lose, we shall appeal until the courts finally dispose of this matter and then we shall see what to do. I am a law-abiding citizen.

Regarding the awards, which are made as a result of negligence, quite a number of cases are lost because the ministries, which commit these mistakes, do not give information. Sometimes, they do not bother to inform our people and then we end up losing the cases and the consequences are court awards. So, it is proper that the committee has recommended that the ministries should take responsibility for these omissions or commissions. 

There has been concern that some of these cases where we lose are political cases. Cases are cases and in a democracy like ours, where there is rule of law, you cannot prevent anybody from disputing a case. Somebody will come up with a political case and it is up to the courts of law to decide whether that is a worthy case or whether it is something that should not be attended to.We cannot prevent anybody from seeking redress from courts of law when they feel their rights as citizens or as individuals have been abused.  

The issue of the by-elections: by-elections are also a constitutional command and it is not a bad mark on the Electoral Commission because whoever runs for elections has got a democratic and constitutional right to participate and when they are aggrieved, to go to courts of law.  The courts of law interpret the conduct of the Electoral Commission because the Electoral Commission does its level best to conduct free and fair elections but if in the process mistakes are made, then the aggrieved parties go to court and seek redress. When they get redress in their favour, that is not a bad mark on the Electoral Commission. 

What would you want the Electoral Commission to do? What does anybody want the Electoral Commission to do? When you go to an election, somebody must win and another person must lose; even in a football match, that is why there is a referee and even the best players get red cards. Mistakes are made and the referee is the courts of law. So, that should not be a bad mark on the Electoral Commission or incompetence of the Electoral Commission.

Political parties funding: that is very legitimate. A law was passed and we should fund the political parties as and when the resources are available, because that is legitimate and that is what we have agreed. We are looking into it, resources allowing. We have no problem. 

Vacancies in the Judiciary: I think I have addressed this.The ministry is examining the possibility of establishing justice centres. We would like to establish justice centres at sub-county level, and if this cannot be done at constituency level. 

A justice centre should comprise of a courtroom, accommodation for the judicial officer, provision for the DPP and the Directorate of Civil Litigation, a holding place for suspects, a police station and probably, a prison and those other attendant requisites for the administration of justice. We hope this will help to create relief on the remand prisons because the suspects will be brought close to court. It will help investigations; it will ease on transport and then, we shall have JLOS officers in station and we hope that this will speed up the administration of justice. When we are ready, we shall bring it to Parliament for approval. 

The JLOS House: we have reached a high level of discussion between the ministries concerned. We are now consulting with the Ministry of Finance to see how best we shall carry out this project. However, we believe that by the end of this year, we shall be commencing the construction of the JLOS House. The plans are at a very advanced stage. We should be taking our decision to Cabinet to see how to commence the JLOS House. 

As for the Congo debt, there are bilateral discussions between the governments of Uganda and Congo and verification and validation of the various issues. It is now being handled by the ministries of foreign affairs of Congo and Uganda. I cannot go further than that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, the committee and the members. Honourable members, I put the question that save for the recurrent and development expenditure under vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; vote 102, Electoral Commission; vote 105, Law Reform Commission; vote 109, Law Development Centre; vote 106, Uganda Human Rights Commission; vote 101, the Judiciary; vote 133, Directorate of Public Prosecutions; vote 104, Parliamentary Commission; vote 103, Inspectorate of Government; vote 148, Judicial Service Commission; vote 119, Uganda Registration Services Bureau, the rest of the report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am not denying the reporting. Does it mean the report has gone with our amendments that we put in? 

THE SPEAKER: Did you actually move? You just spoke. Nobody supported. You made proposals but did you actually move a motion that they be effected this financial year?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, we did. Madam Speaker, now I want to move a motion that Shs 12 billion – (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I am not quite sure whether this is the right time to move such a motion. Also, the Leader of Government Business said we needed to do some consultation so that we come up with something, and that the Government is agreeable to creating a vote. However, how much money can be put on that vote is something that needs further clarification. So, I think the Leader of the Opposition should probably not hurry with this motion so that we do not mess up the process.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we do is to say we have noted the-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, before you do, I am sorry but what we are saying is not really creating a vote; it is to create a budget line. First of all, we agree that a budget line should be created; so, maybe I want to first move a motion that the budget line be created for funding political parties and then money be provided by the budget committee according to the proposals we have made this financial year.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, the conduct of business - the way we are doing business now - shows you the deficiency of how multi-partyism is operating in Uganda. I have raised my views in the Parliamentary Commission and the Leader of the Opposition knows them.

In a normal democracy, before every sitting and before important issues come on the Floor, the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of Government Business must meet behind the scenes to agree on how we must proceed. 
We have been on benchmarking trips in all civilised parliaments and I have raised these issues. 

I have asked the Leader of the Opposition to engage Government. I have asked the Leader of Government Business to talk behind the scenes to save this Parliament the acrimony that we usually go through in doing business here in the House. These are important matters, which would require even the Leader of the Opposition. 

Last time in the Commission, I asked him, “How many times have you talked to the President about these issues?” That is a very important office. We fund it as the Commission. We must encourage leaders to work by talking so that this House simplifies the work and does not getinto the acrimony that we usually go through in doing business here in the house. 

So, whereas there is a possibility -

THE SPEAKER: So, what do you propose in relation to this?

MR DOMBO: I would like to propose that as we go to appropriation, let the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition harmonise behind the scenes. When we come to the time of appropriation, it will simplify the work that we must do. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we have a motion. We have discussed -

MS SSENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Much as I appreciate the concern of hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Leader of the Opposition, I rise on a matter of procedure. After we have pronounced ourselves, how procedurally right is it for the motion to come at this material moment? I need your guidance on how we need to proceed on this matter because we have pronounced ourselves and I wonder how the motion will now sit. Are we rescinding our decision? I beg for your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: I was going to say that we note the request and the need to operationalisethe Political Parties and Organisations Bill.We also shall ask the Government to expeditiously handle it and report to this House, because even if we do it here, we need the support of the Government in order to actualise it. Honourable Leader of the Opposition, it is important and we have noted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank my sister who raised it. By the way, we have not passed the whole report because the figures are there. We still have time for appropriation.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is why hon. Dombo is suggesting that you and the Prime Minister go and take some coffee at some stage to organise before the Budget Committee reports.

Thank you very much, honourable members. Let us receive the next report. I do not see the ministers for works; I do not know whether they are here.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPOR OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think I do not see your sector ministers– (Interjections) - Works and lands? But we cannot receive a portion and then not receive the other portion. We want you together. Can we invite agriculture because they are here.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

8.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Matthias Kasamba): I submitted the copies and I think they are there. The copies are around. Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: I hope you are using the executive summary.

MR KASSAMBA: Yes, I am using the executive summary. Allow me to first of all congratulate you on the well won position at the international level. We are all proud and we continue to support you locally, internationally and regionally to make sure that you successfully sustain the pride of this country by your repositioning. 

In accordance with Article 155 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, sectoral committees are mandated to:  examine and comment on the policy matters affecting ministries anddepartments under their jurisdiction; and to critically examine the recurrent and the capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House. 

We considered the following votes:
    • Vote 110, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries;
    • Vote 142, National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO);
    • Vote 152, National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS);
    • Vote 155, Cotton Development Organisation (CDO);
    • Vote 160, Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA);
    • Vote 121, Diary Development Authority;
    • Vote 125, National Agricultural Genetic Resource Centre and Databank (NAGRC); 
    • Votes 500-850, a combination of local government votes for district extension services and the district agricultural production and advisory services.

The methodology, which we applied, is all well laid out in the report.

Background 

The National Development Plan identified a series of structural bottlenecks to create a social economic transformation of the country. Among them is the limited access to quality and critical production inputs in agriculture. In order to generate employment opportunities –(Interruption)

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not really intend to disrupt my good colleague and brother for embarking on his presentation starting with the background. However, I thought that with your proposal and guidance, he should go to the observations and recommendations. We shall read the background ourselves.

THE SPEAKER: Go to the subject and recommendations.

MR KASAMBA: The observations are on page 9. Currently, the sector is operating without a holistic agricultural policy to guide specific subsector policies and strategies. Lack of policies for all key cropsand enterprises has led to underinvestment and poor management of challenges faced by such crops and enterprises. 

The sector is relying on DSIP to drive the sector, but it is greatly underfunded as reflected in this year’s requirements. According to the ministerial presentation, they required Shs 589 billion but only Shs 59 billion was availed. 

Out-dated legal frameworks and absence of a number of them in place has rendered the regulation of the sector difficult, making the relevant institution in- effective. 

Non implementation of policies like establishment of plant clinics at every sub county is constraining the sector in combating crop diseases. The planning of the entire sector is hinged on the sector development strategy and investment plan whose results have gaps. Climatic change effects have also not been accommodated in the plan in the agricultural sector, which is not prioritized despite its value. 

The committee welcomes the financing of land’s gravity mapping, which is provided under the soil land management project under UNDP. The wage release performance clearly demonstrates the gap in the operationalisation of the structure for Ministry of Agriculture. This has constrained the service delivery demonstrated by poor regulation of the agricultural sector. 

Newly created departments and directorates under fisheries do not have an additional non-wage recurrent budget to undertake certain activities. The reason for dismal growth in the sector includes: limited fertiliser application, weak farmers’ institutions like  cooperatives, business ventures and public corporations that could empower smallholders to own the value chain benefits. 

Under contract farming, among the biggest challenges observed is the weakness of farmers’ organisations to bargain effectively with the investor companies. This is especially witnessed under the sugarcane industry where out-growers’ schemes are grossly abused by the nucleus plantations/factory owners. 

Recommendations
    • Integrate results from the soil suitability mapping funded by UNDP to guide enterprise based selection and fertiliser application. 

    • Recruit staff as budgeted to enable the operationalisation of the existing structure.

    • Establish an agricultural policy to guide investment and clearly apportion roles for the private and the public sector. 

    • In addition to other policies like irrigation, a seed and fertiliser policy should be established to guide use of irrigation technology, seed and fertiliser regulation.

    • There should be an agricultural loan facility to invest in the DSIP component, which is grossly underfunded as reflected earlier on in the observations.

    • Expedite the implementation of all projects under its jurisdiction to improve on their performance. 

    • Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should present to Parliament all pending laws in the crop, animal and fisheries resources subsectors to improve regulation in the sector e.g. the livestock Bills, the Fisheries Act, the Food and NutritionBill and water for irrigation and production Bill -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chair, I think just read the subject and the recommendations because the report will be fully integrated into the Hansard.

MR KASAMBA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 

Water for Production 

Recommendations
    • The ministry should establish an irrigation policy to guide irrigation investments and activities. Irrigation is a new technology practice to most farmers and extension staff should pay attention to providing requisite skills to farmers to improve technology uptake. 

    • Government should sensitise people on land ownership rights for communal land to enable MAAIF establish irrigation demonstration sites. 

    • Local Government should recruit and fill up all established posts of senior agricultural engineers in the production department to ensure continued technical support to farmers in irrigation, mechanisation and agro-food processing. 

    • MAAIF should design community based solar irrigation systems that can serve up to 10 households in addition to drilling of production boreholes. The Minister of Water and Environment should expedite the process of handing over the irrigation scheme to MAAIF before the close of 2013. 

Livestock

Recommendations 
    • The ministry should expedite the introduction of the Bills affecting the livestock industry in Parliament in the financial year 2013/2014.

    • Under the performance of the vegetable oil project, legitimate landowners should be compensated if they are interested in participating in the project.

Fisheries

Recommendations
    • Government should operationalize the public hatcheries that were established to provide fish fingerlings to the farming communities. 

    • Government should strengthen fisheries regulations to make them more punitive for persons who break the law and regulations for good fishing practices. 

    • The fish market should be regulated to avoid entry of immature fish into the market and for export.

    • The budget resources for the fisheries certification should be used for certifying export consignments and any cost borne by the private sector should be refunded by Government. 

    • Management of the BMUs should be reviewed to enable proper regulation of fishing practices to ensure hygiene of the fisheries infrastructure. 

Mechanisation

Recommendations
    • MAAIF should expedite the procurement process of securing partners to handle mechanical repairs of the heavy equipment which were recently acquired in this financial year. 
    • The procured tractors should be delivered within the first half of the 2013/2014 - these are the 20 tractors which were mentioned during the interaction - and be distributed to various users across the country in an equitable manner. 

    • MAAIF should mobilise farmers to be able to access the heavy machinery to improve their productivity.

    • The ministry should streamline the management of heavy machinery equipment by formulating an independent specialised management unit different from the one of MAAIF so as to create efficiency. 

    • Policy guidelines for mechanisation and animal traction should be developed to guide proper investment in the agricultural sector. 

    • Equitable distribution of these tractors and heavy earthmoving equipment should be considered and implemented. 

The Diary Development Authority(DDA)

Recommendations
    • The DDA should fill the vacant positions in the structure and implement it to improve service delivery. 

    • Government should reinstate the milk levy for processors as other stakeholders along the value chain are already contributing, else the government should compensate DDA for the lost revenue through the national budget. 

    • The Diary Development Authority should increase its presence countrywide through opening regional offices and improve regulation of the milk industry. 

    • The DDA should enhance linkages with NAGRCand databank together with NARO and NAADS to ensure that high yielding breeds are fast-tracked especially under specific commodity approaches to improve modern milk production. 

    • Government should empower DDA to ensure that all stakeholders are equitably affected by the law. The levy should be harmonised and not discriminative. 

    • Diary famers and stock traders and processors associations should be strengthened to improve the performance of the entire value chain. Strict supervision and on-spot checks of milk vendors, transporters to verify adulteration should be routinely undertaken by DDA inspectors. 

    • With the additional Shs1.1 billion funds to DDA, 40 percent of this land should be relocated to securing and tilting these properties. 

National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) Recommendations 
    • Poor release performance of development and recurrent budget for NARO undermines service delivery. Government should always release all funds for agricultural research in time for NARO to deliver the budgeted outputs. 

    • NARO should provide disease-resistant varieties of various commodities to all local governments and ensure their multiplication is done based on good agronomical practices. 

    • Government should expedite the passing of the Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill currently before Parliament, to regulate the current biotechnology being used in agricultural research. More research is required on traceability of poor quality seeds for all commodities and such culprits are apprehended. 

    • NARO, in collaboration with NEMA and other government agencies, should establish joint standards on utilisation of lake shores and effluent management systems by factories. More public-private partnerships should be developed between NARO and the private sector to increase seed multiplication of quality seeds such that seed shortage is addressed. 

    • NARO should undertake to improve the operational function of the ZARIs in the seed,plant and livestock breed generation and multiplication for varying agricultural zones. This can be done through public-private or public-public partnerships among farmer organisations and government institutions with production units like prisons, the Army and schools.

    • Adequate staffing and equipping of all the ZARIs should be done to improve operational efficiency.

National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS)

Recommendations 
    • NAADS should restructure its expenditure to allow increased investments in provision of production inputs and value addition support. Government needs to establish an extension policy to remove service duplication by NAADS and agricultural extension services. 

    • NAADS should embark on early procurements like is done in National Medical Stores,which kick-starts procurement in advance to ensure timely delivery of medicines. The procurement and leases should follow seasons in NAADS. 

National Animal Genetic Resource Centre (NAGRC)

Recommendations
    • Since NAGRC has secured a vote, it should be adequately financed so as to operationalise its structures. 
    • NAGRC should recruit staff to fill the current organisational structures in order to improve service delivery. 

    • NAGRC should establish a mechanism of making livestock semen affordable to farmers to improve quality of breeds. 

    • NAGRC should embark on rehabilitating all their farms, including fencing, to expand the national breeding programmes. 

    • Government should adequately finance training of more artificial insemination technicians who should be based at sub-county level.

Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA)

Recommendations
    • Government should establish a coffee policy to guide public investment in the sector to overcome low coffee outputs. 
    • With opportunities of increased coffee prices at the international market, UCDA should implement the100-million seedlings programme to double output and income to the economy.
    • UCDA should encourage more players in the coffee export business and support a start-up in that area.

Cotton Development Organisation (CDO)

Recommendations
    • To overcome price fluctuation, CDO should organise farmers in formal groupings to add value to their crops to benefit from the international prices of lint.

    • CDO should regulate the industry to get rid of middlemen who offer low prices to farmers through announcements of the indicative prices countrywide.

    • Government should support the private sector in establishing textilespinning factories to add value on the cotton.

Agricultural Credit

These are some of the final observations and recommendations:
    • The additional financing to regulate fisheries should be used to increase fish production like investing in commercial fishfarming, restocking water bodies and operationalising the fish hatcheries to be able to provide fish fingerlings countrywide.

    • The fund earmarked for the agricultural police and vessel number plates should be reallocated.

    • Salaries for lawenforcement staff should be paid by the institutions where the lawenforcers operate rather than creating parallel payment structures. This allocation should be reallocated to other priority areas of the sector.

    • The vessel identification plates should be issued upon payment of licensing fees for each vessel. The Ministry of Agriculture should be allowed to retain the fees obtained from such exercises to enable it procure the vessel plates.

    • The Ministry of Agriculture should recruit staff to operationalise the Directorate of Fisheries structure in order to improve regulation of the sector.

    • The Ministry of Agriculture should formulate an aquaculture policy to guide commercial fish production activities and map out clear roles of both the public and private sectors.

    • Since the full impact of cage farming on lakes is still under investigation, the ministry should concentrate on operationalising public hatcheries and providing fish fingerlings to farmers. In the meantime, the ministry should develop guidelines for cage farming as a policy is being developed.

    • Government should reinstate the levy on processed milk or compensate DDA by allocating the equivalent to the revenue that would have accrued from the collection. 

    • DDA should find resources within the budget to kick-start the process of tilting their land to secure its assets.
    • DDA should mobilise farmers to form institutions to improve their skills in milk production, handling, bulk marketing and valueaddition.

National Agricultural Research Organisation
    • With the introduction of biotechnology in the sector and in the absence of the regulatory framework, domestic finances need to be stepped up to safeguard and protect national indigenous species from extinction.

    • Uganda Land Commission should register all land under the jurisdiction of the NARO in the names of NARO. 

    • There is need to strengthen/establish infrastructure for increased application of biotechnology in fisheries and livestock, which is only now currently predominantly used by crop researchers. 

    • Government should make efforts to review the National Agricultural Research Act, 2005, in order to address emerging challenges. 

National Animal Genetic Resource Centre
    • NAGRC should develop a number of development projects to kick-start infrastructure development in all its farms. 

    • Additional financing should be geared towards provision of artificial insemination to the majority of farmers countrywide and increase production of nitrogen to distribute to farmers.

    • Government should enhance the salaries and other emoluments for scientists to reduce their attrition. 

    • NAGRC should be changed so that each independent stock farm has its own administrative unit. Current budget programmes should be turned into budget outputs within different task forms. 

Uganda Coffee Development Authority
    • Government should establish the coffee policy guidelines to overcome the low coffee outputs. 

    • The 100 million seedlings, which were highlighted for the next three years, should be emphasised in the next three years. 

    • UCDA should engage more players in the coffee export sector and give start-up, especially for the local exporters who are still limited in the area.

    • Government should provide extra resources to increase coffee production in the medium term and cover the Shs 7 billion gap required under 2013/2014 season. 

    • To mitigate climatic change effects, UCDA should introduce coffee growing in areas that previously used not to grow coffee to increase coffee production in non-coffee producing areas.

    • Government should avail appropriate technologies to mitigate climatic change that affects coffee farmers. In addition, control of coffee diseases needs to have a holistic approach among key sector institutions.

    • UCDA should sensitise farmers on fertiliser application and also encourage youths to participate in coffee production and other activities along the value chain.

    • Government should invest in the soluble plant as an incubation to encourage the private sector to get interested in such plants to add value to coffee production.

Cotton Development Organisation
    • The committee recommends that as a means of increasing domestic value, additional and increased production and productivity, Government should consider provision of school uniforms under the UPE and public sector through local sourcing for clothing requirements.

    • Creation of a technology up-grade fund to enhance local cotton processing capacity expansion as a means of mitigating cotton farmgate prices’ volatility that results from dependence on unstable international cotton markets.

    • CDO should intensify mobilisation of farmers to form groups and strengthen existing ones to facilitate easy access to inputs, extension services and better marketing opportunities. In addition, cooperatives need to be developed to enable farmers add value to their crops to fetch better prices along the value chain.

    • Promoting medium and large scale cotton production by scaling up tractor hire services, animal traction and provision of affordable inputs, especially in areas where land is available, in order for farmers to benefit from economies of scale.

    • The liberalisation policy in the cotton industry needs to be reviewed with the view of regaining state control in production, seed and other input provision and valueaddition. 
    • Government should expedite the process of establishing a cotton stabilisation fund to cushion farmers against fluctuation.

Local Governments

Local governments, which are the most important facets for service delivery, are financially constrained to extend vital services required by various stakeholders. 

Government should re-visit the decentralisation policy with the aim of increasing autonomy in revenue collection to finance gaps left by the central government.

The Ministry of Agriculture should establish permanent plant clinics in every sub-county to create an interface between research institutions, advisory services, extension with the farming communities.

Government should consider increasing production and marketing grants across all districts as the recurrent provision is insignificant to undertake meaningful capital development activities. 

Inter-sectoral Reallocation under the Agricultural Sector
Annex II indicates the intra-sectoral re-allocation proposed by the committee to the House to increase production especially coffee, to increase the incomes and export revenue, which will impact on the trade balances and the economy as a whole. 

In addition, the re-allocation signifies the need to reduce unproductive expenditures to increase levels of investment in various sectors, and to improve on efficiency in allocations within the sector.

Conclusion

Subject to the above observations and recommendations, I beg to move that this august House approves the budget estimates for votes under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries as follows:

Proposed Budget for the Agricultural Sector 
    • Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries - the recurrent budget is Shs 25,439,823,000 and the development budget is Shs 62,023,247,000, which makes a total of Shs 87,463,070,000. 

    • Vote 121, Diary Development Authority, - the total is Shs 5,044,202,000; 

    • Vote 125, National Animal Generic Resource Centre, Shs 6,350,000,000; 

    • Vote 142, National Agricultural Research Organisation, Shs 93,874,909,000;

    • NAADS Secretariat, Shs 47,618,877,000; 

    • Uganda Cotton Development Organisation, Shs 6,633,481,000;

    • Uganda Coffee Development Authority, Shs 23,123,300,000. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. Allow me to lay on the Table the minutes of the proceedings of the various interactions we held. 


THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chair and the committee. Is the shadow minister here? Honourable members, I direct the Clerk to reflect the entire report in the Hansard. Shall we hear from the shadow minister for five minutes; only the highlights.

(Full report appear in the bound volume of September 2013)

8.56
MS FLORENCE EKWAU IBI(FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing in for Dr Epetait who is indisposed. I want to thank the committee for this report, which they have presented to the House. We are very grateful. 

The House will agree with me that if it is a question of recommendations, honestly, this Parliament has tried its best. However, our greatest problem is that we have been let down by members of the frontbench. The Executive has never paid attention to the agricultural sector as the backbone and the possible solution to most of the problems of this country. 

If you look at the budget of the Ministry of Agriculture – how can you commit less than Shs 100 billion to an important sector like the Ministry of Agriculture? We should be frank with each other; a mere Shs 87 billion for this financial year! We have even experienced a reduction in the budget of the Ministry of Agriculture.  

Madam Speaker, much as we would like Government to work on infrastructure in terms of the road network and railways, we would also like to see equity as far as budgeting is concerned. You cannot concentrate all the funds to the same ministries year in, year out. Priority is always given to education and works, even when they are not able to utilise the funds. One time the Ministry of Works could not even absorb the trillions that were at their disposal. 

In my opinion, therefore, we should do better in the agricultural sector, especially in the area of budgeting. We cannot continue with this laissez faire attitude in handling our agricultural sector. At the end of the day, it is our poor constituents who will suffer. 

You remember when NAADS came here, it was not well planned for and most of the money was just eaten. If you asked for accountability for NAADS funds – You have structures under the Ministry of Agriculture, if this money had been put in the line ministry and not the NAADS services, we would have realised better results. 

Madam Speaker, I urge the Ministry of Agriculture to go back to the drawing board. I think the problem also is that you cannot expect resources where you do not have good plans in place. So, if it is not lack of plans and activities, where is the problem? We cannot continue talking about the ceiling always, and it affects only the Ministry of Agriculture year in, year out and not other ministries.

Madam Speaker, the other issue I want to talk about is cotton growing. When I look at the Cotton Development Authority (CDA), I feel a lot of pain in my heart. Most districts in the country grew a lot of cotton but CDA has been allowed to kill the cotton sector completely. 

One time, we had problems in the Eighth Parliament over cotton growing, handling, marketing and the processing. Do you know what CDA management did? The Office of the Prime Minister had made a commitment – it was in the Ninth Parliament – that Members of Parliament go for a meeting. When we got there, without shame the Cotton Development Authority organised ginners from upcountry to come and masquerade as cotton farmers. We just lost it like that. Up to this day, the question of cotton pricing and marketing has never been solved. 

We cannot continue giving hand-outs to our voters,to the farmers, when we cannot help them to promote their own welfare. I am happy for the case of coffee; there is something that can be seen but on the issue of cotton, it is a raw deal.If improved, this would go a long way to help improve the welfare of the common man and woman.

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on the fisheries department. Up to this day, all lakes in this country are surrounded by suffering fishermen because of the harassment being directed at them. I have only seen fishermen; I have not seen any woman fishing, much as they sell the fish. Very many men have drowned due to harassment in the lakes. Most of the fishermen are arrested; those from Lake Kyoga are arrested on the other side of the lake and brought to Bukungu, and this side Kidera – all those landing sites. They extort money from them and they are not even tried. A lot of money is wasted; they release them just like that when they have lost a lot of money, and the same trend continues. 

The number of men drowning in the lake is uncountable. Government should come out and explain this issue of the marines harassing the men in the lake to the whole country. It has become a big business.These fishermen are harassed and yet most of them are operating on loans; they get loans to purchase the boats and the fishing nets but at the end of the day, they are left with completely nothing. 

What is the problem? When we helped with the process of the law, we expected this to solve some of these problems but at the end of the day, it has not solved any problem. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, now we go to the two minutes. Hon. Oboth, I hope you are not interrupting my work.

9.03
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): No, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Agriculture is a very important sector and I want to thank the committee for quite an elaborate and comprehensive report.As the shadow minister said, I believe that the views that she has put out will be able to help the sector to improve, taking into consideration the observations and recommendations made here.

Madam Speaker, my people rely on cassava, and I did not see that discussed here. Honourable minister, you know how many times some of us have come to your office looking for cassava cuttings. This is a matter that I do not want to join others in lamenting about. As hon. Ibi Florence said, it is not a question of good recommendations; it is about implementation. I hope that this time round, it will help us improve and serve this country diligently as we develop and promote agriculture in a better way.

I wanted to use one minute to say the few words I have said. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

9.05
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on water for production still under the Ministry of Water and Environment. I happen to have chaired the Committee on Agriculture for some time and we talked about this issue. Water for production should be under the Ministry of Agriculture and up to date, the concern is still there. I do not know what we are doing.

Next is about agricultural credit. Madam Speaker, most Ugandans are not aware about this facility and accessing it, as the committee has stated, is not easy. At an appropriate time, I think it will be necessary for the committee to work with the Committee on Finance and come up with a list of people who have accessed this credit.

The other issue is on value addition. We have talked about value addition but when I look at my farmers in Kabarole, they grow a lot of matooke or banana but value addition is almost at zero. 

My concluding point is on mechanisation. We are buying tractors in this country but the rate at which we are buying is the same rate at which they are going out to the Kenyan farmers. I think the ministry is fully aware that Kenyans are buying the Massey Ferguson tractors from this country, reason being the way we are giving them out. 

We talked this afternoon about the tractors that were given by the President. I do not see any reason why things should not be done in the proper way. Really, we cannot run a country like this. We have to be very clear on this –(Member timed out.)

9.08
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to use this opportunity to accord my congratulations to you on ascending to the presidency of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentary Association. You truly do us proud.

I find it laughable that we are saying that irrigation is new technology. Of course, we know it is because it is new technology to Ugandans, but my question to the minister is: when will Uganda begin to use irrigation so as to improve on production?

In addition, we need to overhaul NAADS. A lot of money goes to allowances for co-ordinators when it should go to real agricultural inputs. Extension workers are demoralised because the NAADS staff are paid so highly and yet it is the extension staff that do the bulk of the work. When a NAADS person goes to look for pigs, it is pigs; whether there is banana wilt or the beans are dying, he is not concerned. So, we need to see this money go to production.

Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on UCDA. I want to support the recommendations of the committee and to thank them for the entire report. We need to have nurseries in every sub county in Uganda.As Members of Parliament, I think we have tried to encourage our people to resume the growing of coffee as an important cash earner but we lack extension workers - (Member timed out.)

9.10
MRS SLYVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues and Parliament to congratulate you on the very important achievement, which you attained for this country. 

I thank the committee for the very good report. I observe that agriculture has consistently been getting a four per cent share of the budget despite the fact that the African heads of state recommended that agriculture gets 10 per cent of the national budget.

I believe that this recommendation of agriculture getting 10 per cent was because agriculture, more than anything else, is what gives us the competitive edge over other countries. However much we invest in industries, however much we think about oil, we can never beat the Arab League in oil or even Kenya when they begin mining. However, we can beat Kenya, Tanzania and all our neighbours in agriculture.

Madam Speaker, agriculture has the potential of turning around the economy of this country because 60 per cent of the population is engaged in agriculture. Personally, I believe if we are to turn Uganda into the middle income country we want it to be, we must engage everybody in production.If we think that only a few will provide employment and employ the majority of the population, I do not think we can turn this economy around.

Madam Speaker, I am always hurt when I see institutions like World Food Programme purchasing beans and maize from Tanzania and Zimbabwe to come and supply to Karamoja region. I am always amazed when I see that we cannot tap into the markets of South Sudan, Somalia, all our neighbours. (Member timed out.)

9.12
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me join my colleagues to thank the chairperson of the committee for the work well done. 

As much as recommendations are good, it seems that we will continue recommending and as a policy maybe by the Executive, they do not respond to our recommendations. Last financial year, we gave the same recommendations but nothing was done.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to invite the minister to also move around the country to pick the interest of the farmers. In Bunyole, that is Butaleja, we used to grow millet as our staple food crop but nowadays we no longer grow millet; we changed to rice. However, when I read the committee report, they are saying the metric tonnes of rice have increased a little bit. 

In Butaleja, we are growing rice massively and also in parts of Busoga. We have another scheme in Kibimba, which is producing a lot of rice. At every function in Uganda, rice is the first staple food everybody will mention. Therefore we need to support our farmers who are involved in growing rice.

Information in this sector: We recently passed a Bill concerning the meteorology department and information which is meant to be provided to farmers. I wanted the committee to recommend on this because there is no human resource in this department. We passed the Bill but the board is not in place and farmers need information. (Member timed out_)

9.14
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative, Female): Madam Speaker, I also want to use this opportunity, since I did not get it yesterday, to congratulate you on that very important achievement. As an individual, this excites me greatly.

I want to thank this committee for this very good report. I also want to thank them particularly for the fact that they have emphasised the importance of this very important sector which we are discussing here. 

They have highlighted a very important factor, which I want to talk about- the reductions in allocations to this ministry. This implies, as they note here, that we are switching to the industry and services sector. I want to ask the Minister of Finance if she really thinks that Uganda can compete with the tiger economies of the world that right now we are debating, like China and the others. Historically, of course, they have a comparative advantage. 

We have agreed many times as a nation that the agriculture sector is our number one sector, but we do not seem to reflect it in our planning. Here we are discussing a budget that is going to award the sector only Shs 100 billion; a sector with the largest potential to give over 60 per cent more. It has 80 percent of Uganda’s population employment opportunity.

Madam Speaker, I am perturbed as a Member. Why does this Ministry of Finance, our good ministry, allocate very little money to this very important sector year in, year out? In fact, the budget is even reducing further. 

I think this is a very sad moment for us as a nation because we do not seem to have our priorities right as a country. Even if we are discussing that Uganda is a potential food basket in the region of East Africa, it is also in the entire continent because half of the African continent is dry and Uganda is gifted by nature.

Madam Speaker I think the Ministry Of Agriculture is underestimating the potential that they have- (Member timed out.)

9.17
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for the report. I stand also to support the recommendations in the report especially on the issue of irrigation. I would urge the ministry to try to spearhead the issue of irrigation in order to curb the harvest losses we have in our country. 

The Government has been promoting bulk water projects with a view to promoting irrigation, but there are so many challenges. One of the biggest irrigation projects in Kooki - the bulk water harvesting which is worth Shs8 billion - has stalled for two years now yet this is an innovation that could perhaps help many Ugandans curb the losses on their harvests. 

If a farmer is supported with Shs1.5 million to get just a water pump, he can harvest crops worth over Shs 15 million say if he goes into growing water melon, tomatoes and others. Some few farmers in my constituency, Kooki, have tried this and it is viable.  So I would urge the ministry to try this and fund this intervention.

Secondly, I want to support the funding of NAGRC in order to enable gene multiplication. There has been a very crazy excuse in NAGRIC; sometime back the ministry tried to sensitise Ugandans on kroiler birds but what is surprising is that when you go to NAGRIC, they say the demand is too high – (Member timed out.)

9.19
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to use this opportunity to also congratulate you upon your election to the post of Chairperson of Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians. 

Madam Speaker, I think I am more concerned about a point which was left out by the committee. In the previous report we talked about renting of office space. The Ministry of Agriculture is still renting office space and yet they have their premises in Entebbe. Recently, I visited Entebbe and I saw that the ministry itself has very many structures which can accommodate many offices. These offices can accommodate DDA, CDO, NAADS and the ministry itself. So, I see no reason why Government should continue renting offices here in this country. (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, Ministry of Agriculture tabled this book here - Agriculture for Food and Income Security: Agricultural Sector Development Strategy and Investment Plan 2010-2015. 

Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries relocated from Entebbe to Kampala to rent – (Interjections)- Yes, they decided to rent. If I read it, perhaps it will take a lot of time. However, at that time they aligned it with the National Development Plan to say that it relocates MAAIF headquarters to Kampala. 

What is funny is that in Wandegeya where Ministry of Public Service is, they have got premises near there and they have even got fisheries in Bugolobi. I think it is high time, since the Minister of Finance is here saying he is not going to give money, instead of giving these people money for rent they should start constructing in Bugolobi- (Applause)- so that even the cost effective analysis–

THE SPEAKER: Now you are smuggling. I thought it was information to hon. Chemutai. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, you can imagine if a minister leaves here at 8.00a.m.and he arrives in Entebbe at around 10.00a.m and then he leaves at 4.00p.m.to come back to the House -the jam, the cost of fuel and transport; why don’t they construct buildings just here in Bugolobi? They have got premises there. We should give them money now so that they can start constructing. With Shs 1.2 billion, you can start a floor and occupy the premises instead of wasting a lot of money on rent.

MS CHEMUTAI: Madam Speaker, another point is about fish farming. This is a very important activity for all farmers in Uganda. I want to report that Kapchorwa is a very unique district. Some people have never seen fish with their naked eyes. However, we would like to encourage fish farming in that district and Sebei region as a whole. 

Many youths have developed interest in fish farming. They have dug ponds and they are only looking for a hatchery for that zone. This is because most of the fish that grows in lowland districts may not survive in Kapchorwa because of the cold weather in the district – 
(Member timed out.)

9.23
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me start with an observation. It is quite unique this year – I do not know why the heads or the executive directors of NARO, CDO, UCDA are not in the House as we debate this very important budget. I have observed it and I think we should not take it lightly. The Minister of Agriculture must really warn the heads of these institutions about abandoning this very important process.

Madam Speaker, on Monday, I read an article in the New Vision newspaper saying that the milk processors in this country have started adding formalin to the milk. This will affect the lives of people who take it. We do not want a situation like the one that happened in China where a number of children died because their milk processors added unwanted ingredients into the milk. I do not know what the ministry has to say about this.

Yesterday, the Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industry said that oranges grown in Teso are not compliant; they are not good. I asked her to tell us the right variety of the oranges that should be grown there. This is because in Teso we grow four types of oranges – the American tangerine, Washington Naval, Hamlin and Valencia; so, which ones should we grow? I hope the minister got that question because I would like them to respond.

There is the issue of Serere Research Station. Why are you not rehabilitating that station and now, you are moving the activities to Karamoja and Tororo while Serere Research Station is getting dilapidated and degraded. What –(Member timed out.)

9.25
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Uganda experiences a lot of drought. The lowlands have a big problem and we inject a lot of money in boreholes. However, there are areas like part of the West – Buhweju, Kabale and Kisoro – where we have a lot of water just gushing down from the hills. I wonder why the agricultural department cannot tap this water to help farmers irrigate their gardens. 

I tried to do that but I was frustrated. I went to the Ministry of Agriculture and I injected a lot of my money in this area. It is simple piping and simple things, which can be done, so that during the dry season people can access food. During the dry season, food prices go up and yet we could use irrigation in the high altitude areas, which have springs gushing from the hills, to help people grow a lot of food.

I would like to tell the minister – I have complained and I think some of you are aware – that you are frustrating some of us who are small farmers, maybe because you look at us as people in the Opposition; but the food is eaten by everybody. I am really concerned about this, Madam Speaker. It is causing a problem in these areas. During the dry season, in the highlands, water is wasted when it can be tapped – (Member timed out.)

9.28
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also take this opportunity to congratulate you. The people of Busia also send you greetings and warm congratulations upon being elected to that international office.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for a very good report made. In the 2011/12 financial year, the agriculture sector was given only four per cent of the budget allocation. In 2012/2013, it was reduced to 3.8 per cent. Despite the reduction, it contributed 13 per cent of the GDP and it grew by only 1.4 per cent. In a nutshell, it contributed about 29.2 per cent performance even with that little funding.

The population is growing every day, but the production in agriculture and funding to that sector is diminishing. If we were to fund agriculture with 10 per cent of the budget, we would receive about 77 per cent of GDP. So, I urge this House to look at funding the budget for agriculture so that the sector can expand. We –(Member timed out.)

9.30
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for producing this report. 

I have been following NAADS in my district and specifically, in my constituency, for the last six to seven years. I am aware that my district receives about Shs 1 billion a year for NAADS. However, when I move through the district, I do not see the results of NAADS. I do not know whether the Ministry of Agriculture has ever given out reports on the outputs of NAADS - what it has done. I also wonder whether my fellow MPs see the results in their constituencies. Otherwise, I do not see NAADS. 

I think NAADS was badly designed. I think the money that the Ministry of Finance gives to NAADS is wasted because it is badly designed. If you ask any peasant what NAADS means, they will tell you that it is free money given to some selected few, who are lucky and connected. It is not known to the people as a programme where maybe there is a good farmer and we all go and learn from them or where a farmer has become rich because of NAADS. We do not see things like that.

I, therefore, appeal to the minister to please, review NAADS and overhaul it. The recommendations of the committee are good, but I think we should review NAADS so that we can get value for money out of this programme.

Secondly, let me talk about water. I come from Busoga, an area with boundaries of water. We have a lake in the south, a big lake in the north, another lake in Bugiri and rivers in the east and west. Busoga is an island full of water but we cannot be helped. We do not have water - (Member timed out.)

9.32
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I want to appreciate the committee for the report. 

As the Secretary-General of the Parliamentary Forum on Food Security, Population and Development, I led a team to Kween and Katakwi districts to assess the status of food security in those districts.We were encountered with a very big question when it came to provision of implements that NAADS normally provides. There is a farmer in Kween who told us that he had been identified as a model farmer and was given one cock –(technical glitch _)

THE SPEAKER: Is that a short circuit? Is it okay? Use the next one.

MR MUWUMA: I thank you very much. I was just saying that the farmer was testifying to the Members of Parliament that he was given one cock, one he-goat and one bull as a model farmer. He asked us,parliamentarians, what we were promoting. This Parliament has been known for fighting the gay –that Bill. So, they were asking what message we were sending. I said that I could not answer that question but we shall take it back to Parliament. 

One cock, one he-goat and one bull; we were talking of multiplication and how to do that. (Laughter) That was the question raised in Kween.  So –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute. It is the cock which took the time. (Laughter) 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much. There is this issue to do with the PPP. This is fourth sector pushing for PPP. 

The PPP Bill is before the Committee on Finance. I want to appeal to this House to expedite this Bill because very many ministries are staling and failing to work because of this law.  It is just an appeal to us that we handle it expeditiously to allow ministries to operate expeditiously because this law was required more than yesterday.  

Finally, the Uganda Land Commission is being accused of the continuous allocation of public land. I am happy that the Uganda Land Commission has expired and a new one is being put in place.It is unfortunate that my senior brother, hon. Migereko, is not here but this Uganda Land Commission is letting this country down. A lot of public land is being given –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am told that the last two rows are off and so, if I give you an opportunity you have to move down. On the last two rows, the machines are not working. Hon. Werikhe, I think where you are, you can speak. I have seen everybody; do not stand.  

9.36
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like also to acknowledge and appreciate the committee’s work with regard to this report.

I would like to comment on the issue of NAADS. I remember when we were handling the budget framework paper, we made a recommendation after observing that the funds under NAADS were not being properly utilised. I do not know what the ministry is doing about this.The recommendation was to actually have a single spine, so that we have this money channelled to extension services and we get value for money, rather than spending money on capacity building. So, I would like the minister to tell us where we stand on this matter.  

Two, on the issue of water for production, we have talked about this issue for some time now. There has been some pulling between the Ministry of Water and Environment and Ministry of Agriculture for many years. I do not know when Government is going harmonise this; moreover,both these ministries sit around the Cabinet table. Why can’t this be followed up so that we really have management under one ministry or department? We would then know whom to look at when it comes to accounting for the funds in as far production for water is concerned.

The other issue I would like to talk about is financial support to the agricultural sector. I do not know whether we have any special arrangement to support farming in this country from the financial point of view. Many people who are struggling to engage in agriculture do not get support from the financial institutions adequately, if we have any. 

So, what plans are in place to have the agricultural sector supported, because it is one thing to say that this sector is very critical to our economy and another to see how best it is supported from all – (Member timed out_)

9.38
MR IGNATIUS MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join colleagues to congratulate you upon your achievement. 

I would like to talk about an irrigation policy. I do not know what is happening in the country but from the previous budgets, Government has been announcing that they are rehabilitating Mubuku, Doho and otherschemes. I do not know which framework they are using because there is no policy. 

Recently, a friend from China wanted to partner with me to do agriculture on a large scale. We wanted to establish that facility in my constituency but we failed.The man had to go back because they were saying there is no policy and we have to wait because Government is coming up with a policy. The man went back frustrated. I think it is high time that the Minister for Agriculture does something. You have seen that we have already lost a season because of drought.  

The issue of agriculture credit facilities: I have seen here they say that there are banks which charge 10 percent. I want to know which bank, particularly in Kampala here, charges that amount of interest on those credits. We tried banks - I tried dfcu, Post Bank, and we failed; actually, they said that they did have such facilities. The Ministry of Finance said that they have signed partnerships with commercial banks. The Minister of Finance is here; I want him to tell us which banks and then we explore those opportunities. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wamakuyu, maybe for your information, even me, as the Speaker, I failed to find where that money is. They have money for agriculture but I tried so many times until I gave up. 

9.41
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. I want to thank the members of the committee for the good report. 

I think it is a good time to make this point because the Minister for Finance is here to hear this. In this country, we have now got seven mobile phone service providers. However, our farmers have not been facilitated with a farmers’ electronic strategy in which they can be joined directly to the buyers of the farm products.  

I think it is high time that a farmers’ electronic marketing platform was formed for our farmers, since they are now moving away from subsistence to commercial farming. Madam Speaker, I am available to help the Ministry of Finance or the ministries of agricultureor trade to have this done. 

Secondly, I want to comment on land fragmentation.We cannot do agriculture on fragmented land. We are slowly and steadily losing agricultural land through sale and inheritance. I think in a short time, we should stopthis. 

In Mubende, we have been attacked by the bean wilt disease in the last two seasons. When you gave us a holiday recently, Ivisited our farmers and many of them have been heavily affected by the wilt for beans.(Member timed out_)

9.41
MR MARGARET MAKHOHA (NRM, Woman representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, I did not get the opportunity to congratulate you. Congratulations; you are surely my role model. How I wish I can get some sessions of being mentored so that one day I will be like you.(Laughter)

I want to appreciate the committee for the work well done. Surely, agriculture is the backbone of our economy - more than 60 percent of the population is engaged in agriculture - but every day we talk of agriculture not performing well and severally, we have been on the Floor recommending. I wonder whether the recommendations we make are implemented or we just recommend and it ends there year in, year out.

It is very important for us emphasize value addition because however much we grow all the crops,if we donot addvalue we may not fetch a lot of money to facilitate development of our country. I come from Namayingo; we borderKenya and we export whole grain. Instead of adding value to our crops, we just exportthem and at the end of the day we get less than we should. 

We do not have electricity; for example in Namayingo we are in a blackout. So, how can we talk about value addition when we cannot even get a single electricity pole? It is important for all these ministries to co-ordinate so that at the end of theday, we are able to improve our crops so that we can fetch a lot of money. 

In Namayingo District, we only grow short-term or seasonalcrops; we do not have a single perennial crop. So, in case of any calamity, the people go hungry simply because they cannot afford to have income out of the perennial crops. (Member timed out.)

9.43
MS TOPHACE KAHWA (NRM, Woman representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee members for a detailed report and for the good recommendations.I always wonderwhy this sector is not supported and yet we know it contributes the biggest percentage. 

I want to thank the committee for over-emphasising coffee growing. We all know very well that coffee has been our major cash crop in this country. I want to thank UCDA for giving us coffee seedlings, especially for Bunyoro.Bunyoro has very good soils. We grow coffee and it does very well in our area, and UCDA has tried to give us seedlings but they cannot meet the demand. The demand is very high.I support hon. Jovah Kamateeka’s suggestion that we need to develop our own nursery beds at sub-county level, so that we can manage to distribute enough coffee seedlings to our people.

I want to talk about tobacco, which is another important crop.I did not hear anything being said about this crop. Many of our farmers are still involved ingrowing this crop. I do not know whether the Government supports this or not. I want to hear from Government because my people are still involved in this business. 

Although the number is increasing, people are now turning to growing rice. Rice is now becoming the cash crop in our area but our farmers are not being helped. Last season, for example, the price went as low as Shs 1000.People had rice and the price was very low, so they suffered with it. We, therefore, need assistance. If farmers come up with another crop, they should be helped –(Member timed out.)

9.46
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, MadamSpeaker, for the opportunity. I also want to thank the committee for the report. 

To begin with, I have two questions for the minister: What happened to the soil suitability marking programme? Secondly, I would like to know if there is any special programme for the farmers, especially the ones bordering the oil production areas in Bunyoro.

I am asking this question because the people of Bunyoro are not able to supply onions, tomatoes, meat, eggs and other foodstuffs; they all come from Kampala. When we asked these oil companies what the reason was, they said they do not meet the standards. So, we wonder why the Minister of Agriculture does not make sure that these onions, tomatoes or matooke attain the standards of these oil companies. It is not fair for the people of Bunyoro.

I also want to speak about fish farming. In my district, we do not have any lake but I do have a passion for fish. I have actually tried to do a lot in as far as fish is concerned, but one day when I went with my agricultural adviser to get fish fries in Kajjansi, the fish were stunted; I was later advised that those fish from Kajjansi are stunted and the good ones are in Jinja. Now, can the honourable minister tell us where to get good fish fries or fish fingerlings? Some of us have our money and are willing to invest but we do not have such services.

I want to talk about value addition and the technologies involved in agricultural production.I would like to thank NARO for the work it is doing and other research organisations. However, the seeds for drought-resistant and pest and disease-resistant crops are on very high demand –(Member timed out.)

9.51
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. 

I want to start with a coffee policy. We do not have a coffee policy in place and yet coffee is a leading cash crop in Uganda. I request the minister to put this policy in place.

Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries bought heavy earthmoving equipment but the community and the people arenot aware. Can we have informationso that users of these machines are informed and are aware?

Madam Speaker, we also have the resistant coffee seedlingsbeing tested but they are very expensive. I request the minister to have the distribution of these seedlings done at sub-county level. We know we are moving to growing coffee and we want coffee to be one of the leading crops but the seedlings are very expensive.

Madam Speaker, I want to talk about GMOs. We have a lot of genetically modified foods and I am so scared that generations to come may live a shorter life because the foods we take are not up to standard. Are they tested for the market? These products are not allowed to cross some countries to move to other countries for sale because they do not meet the required quality and standard. They are not sold in the US and in the UK, for example; their importation is limited in those countries. So, I request the minister also to commenton this –(Member timed out.)

9.53
MR EPHRAIM BIRAALO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like comment on the issue of the number of crops named in the report. While the Uganda we know grows a variety of crops, only a few, like cotton and coffee are mentioned, and then in the animal industry only diary and fisheries are mentioned; others have been strategically left out. 

We grow and export ginger, for example, and we import apples from South Africa. We know, and Madam Speaker and you have witnessed, that we grow a lot of tea.All these crops lack support and actually, when people want seedlings and plantlets, they have to go like beggars to the ministry and to NAADS. A crop like tea, which I grow, does not have an authority to advocate for prices and to advocate for quality. So, I think the ministry should create an authority for some of these crops. 

There is an outright lack of funding for the majority of these crops which renders the farmers incapable of improving in confidence in what they do.These crops are not mentioned in the national documents, they are not attended to and there is no extension staff for them. So, I think when you want to improve agriculture, you should mention all your crops because they all earn money. 

I will give an example of tea, which I know very well.Last year alone, the tea farmers in the villages, excluding the estates, earned Uganda an equivalent of Shs70 billion in dollars. Now if that crop had support in terms of advocacy, input distribution and subsidies, then we would be earning very much. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

9.55
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have many issues I want to talk about and one of them is the issue of vaccines. There are diseases which we must vaccinate against; we have East Coast fever, foot and mouth disease and mastitis. Right now, in my constituency, Kashari, we are at risk because of the foot and mouth disease in Kiruhura District and these ministers are aware.

When we try to get vaccines, however, some doctors refer us to some unscrupulous business on Nkrumah Road. These people importthese vaccines from Kenya, they transport these vaccines by road and there are issues of storage. We are actually very sad. I can see the minister shaking his head but I can tell you that is what one of your directors in the ministry told me to do.

Secondly, in the last financial year alone, in my constituency we lost between 12 to 17 percent of our animals due to East Coast fever. The problem arose out of the fact that farmers had used the same pesticides for a long time. The extension workers are there at the sub-counties but they are not advising the farmers because they are not facilitated. It is a shame. Even the President lost animals; he had to fly abroad to find out what was wrong only to be told by the people abroad that it was because they had been using the pesticides for a long time. So, -(Member timed out.)

9.57
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue I would like to raise is directly concerned with the planned activities for all the crops, which have been laid out on page 36 of the report. I happen to come from a district where we grow cocoa but there is nothing that has been mentioned under the planned activities for cocoa growing in the country.This is one of the biggest sources of income for my district. 

On page 13, the money got from cocoa for this nation has been indicated but there is nothing that the Government, under this ministry, has put in place to promote cocoa growing. They have not even brought seedlings to supply to the farmers and yet Kibaale District is trying to establish cocoa as a cash crop to fill the gap left by tobacco. 

I do not know whether the ministry did this deliberately or they actually did not have good information on cocoa. My suggestion is, if we cannot institute an authority to look after cocoa like you have the Coffee Development Authority, then let the Coffee Development Authority take over cocoa growing, so that we can really incorporate cocoa with coffee growing and promote both of them. 

The other point is on NAADS. When the President announced that he was going to abandon the idea of NAADS and embark on another programme, extension workers were laid off. Their term had already expired. In districts like Katakwi, they have not recruited; there are sub-counties where there are no NAADS extension workers. I donot know -(Member timed out.)

10.00
MS FREEDOM KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report.

I am going to comment on NAADS. I expected this report to also highlight what form of modernisation, how long the modernisation is going to take, what our role is and what the role of the stakeholders is. This is because the way activities of NAADS have been presented here, it is business as usual. So, at what point is this modernisation going to start and when will it stop? Otherwise, we shall run through this financial year with the usual activities under NAADS. 

However, I want to thank the committee for coming up with some of these proposals. We want to understand the procedures, the methodologies, the issues around this modernisation. Is this going to be phased out or is it going to be integrated into the normal agricultural practices? 

My second point is about the recommendation on agricultural loan facilities. I would have loved to hear more about the policy of financing agriculture in the commercial sector.Some developing countries have a clear policy and they say, “In this commercial bank, we will put maybe 40 percent to agriculture.” All financial institutions have a clear strategy and a clear target to support agriculture in these countries.So, I also want to know where ours is.

I have heard about some money in UDB that was allocated for agriculture but I do not know who accesses that money. I wish we could also be informed of how many people have accesses it and what impact it has made. Thank you.

10.01
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Finance, hon. Omach, is here and the Minister of Agriculture is here. May I request that before we go to appropriation, the ministers of finance and agriculture table to this House the names of all the beneficiaries of the agriculture credit fund? Why is the Ministry of Finance holding over Shs 240 billion on its account, which has not even been transferred to the Bank of Uganda? Are there no applicants? 

If there is no corruption in this system, why is it that even your own minister of state has failed to access this money? Madam Speaker has failed to access this money. Very many people who have applied for this money are being asked for bribes; if you do not submit a bribe, you cannot get this money. So, Madam Speaker, may I request that this House, unless it gets to know the details, does not appropriate more money.

Lastly, can the Minister of Agriculture give us the zoning plan for this country - how we are going to plant beans here, sorghum there, cowpeas and all other crops. Unless we zone this country and have economies of scale to control production and marketing – (Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, hon. Ekanya, for yielding the Floor. I think this is a great opportunity for the Minister of Agriculture to tell the country whether Busoga sub-region has been gazetted or zoned for sugarcane. This is because we are suffering from food shortage and yet sugarcane is being emphasised and pushed to Busoga. Maybe it is a policy by Government. Thank you. 

MR EKANYA: Honourable minister, are we going to be lamenting yearin, yearout about this issue? I have seen three letters from the President about zoning; are you people competent or incompetent? I beg to seek clarification. 

10.04
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I want the Minister of Agriculture to explain to us why he is now taking coffee to Northern Uganda, which is well known for cotton and has Lira Spinning Mill, which I know you went and destroyed. Why are you taking coffee instead of cotton there? (Interjection) Yes, you do not understand these things. (Interruption)

MS AMUGE OTENGO: Madam Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is somebody I respect very much because I was once his deputy. However, he has mentioned twice that “she does not understand”. (Interjections) Of course, he mentioned it twice while pointing at me and in both cases, I kept my cool. 

Madam Speaker, I worked with the Leader of the Opposition and at no time did he get me hiding in my office; he knows that I understand that I should not receive bribes because I understand it is bad. I understand that when you are speaking, I must respect you. I understand your chair. But how do you gauge my level of understanding, and you have said it several times?

Madam Speaker, is the Leader of the Opposition in order to keep on undermining me and saying that I do not understand? How has he measured my IQ? Is he in order, when I have said nothing negative about him?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should not really denigrate colleagues and concentrate on personal insults. I am convinced that many of the people here are qualified to be in this House; they have the qualifications and the intelligence. So, please, Leader of the Opposition, do not continue denigrating colleagues; it is against our rules.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I do not know why she says she is the one I meant. I never referred to any particular person here; it seems she is the one who does not understand because she is the one who got up. I never mentioned her name but now, she has told you that she does not understand.

On page 74, I see here that they sold 3.05 million kilogrammes of coffee at US$450 million. When I compute, it means that each kilogramme went for about Shs 7,500, but our farmers are being paid Shs 2,500 to Shs 3,000. Now, who is taking the difference between that price and the price you are giving the farmers? That clearly shows that our farmers – (Interjections) - Yes, I am telling you because I am a farmer; after processing, that is what we get. So, who is taking the difference; is it the middlemen? If the government cannot assist the farmers to get the maximum value, where are we?

I have read here that UCDA is going to give us 100 million seedlings, that ison page 78. Now, according to the budget, you have only Shs 10 billion and yet I know that on average, each seedling is Shs 500. That means 100 million seedlings will cost Shs 50 billion. Where are you going to get all this money? We need to understand; is it just political gymnastics or what? 

For your information, 100 million seedlings can be planted in the whole country and some will still remain. Even if you just planted 1,000 seedlings, you will see how large the quantity is.(Member timed out)

10.09
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to congratulate you upon ascending to the office of the presidency of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Association. 

Secondly, I thank the chairperson and his committee for this beautiful report, both in form and content. I also wish to thank members of this august House for expressions of support. When you were making remarks, I did not take these as criticisms but rather as contributions towards the betterment of agriculture. 

I will first deal with issues of a general nature, which have been on the Floor for quite some time. One of them is the relocation of the ministry’s headquarters. As you all know, I was one of the people who refused to move and I never moved an inch. Since that time, I have been advocating for the return of the ministry and I am glad to report that the ministry has been rehabilitated and the staff are coming back. However, the current contract is running up to December and so in order to avoid litigation, they are going to return gradually as we finish rehabilitation of the buildings. (Applause)

I also want to say something about restructuring of NAADS. This is one of the issues that have been on my heart as a professional extension worker for many years, and I want to report that this is being done. Tomorrow we have a scheduled meeting with the Minister of Finance to receive the report and critique it and take decisions. However, briefly, this is what is likely to happen: First of all, we want to establish the single spine extension system. The spine refers to this column here, the backbone, but what it means is, this is an interim word being usedbut in the final analysis, once we have done that, we are going to have one national extension service. We are going to remove all these superfluous words of “advisory” and so on because extension has nothing else to do but to advise. 

What is likely to happen is something like this: We think that the traditional extension staff are going to be the backbone of the extension service because they have got the experience; they are already part of the system. Now, those employed by NAADS will gradually phase out because we do not want to cause a stampede by cancelling all their contracts; this will attract a lot of litigation. So, we will see a gradual phase out. Those who qualify will then join the traditional system on public service terms. With this kind of arrangement, over time – three to four years - we shall have finished. 

Again, we also have to take care of the legalities involved. One is with staff and another with World Bank. We want to be sure that the way we organise this does not break the law, and it does not. We have this project called ATAS, for example, which is there to strengthen research and extension; both the strengthened research and extension will enable us to reach an ordinary farmer. This is the way we are approaching this reform. 

I want to comment on the issue of zoning. This is another issue of general nature. This country has been zoned. I am sure hon. Nandala-Mafabi has heard about the cattle corridor, Arabica Coffee in the highlands of Bugisu and Kigezi - We are carrying out this kind of production arrangement and this is a function of zonal production. 

On the issue of value addition, this is one of the things the ministry is already doing. You have seen tomato paste, you have seen wine produced by our local people, and coffee is being processed although not yet to the final product. You have also heard about the tea factories, cotton processing plants and so on. All this is aimed at value addition. I want to submit that agriculture represents 40 per cent of the total manufacturing industries we have. Last Monday, we passed another policy level regarding value addition in totality and we are now going to look for funds to enhance that process. 

A lot of questions have been raised on specific crops. Clearly, going through each of them would take us up to tomorrow morning, but let me start with those which were raised yesterday and are at the heart of my brother over there – the Teso issues. 

With regard to citrus, I want to inform you that in Teso, we have now got 6 million trees of citrus. There are three varieties from which we can extract juice; one of them is called Valencia, another is called Washington Naval and Hamlin. These can produce juice and therefore, are suitable for the factories. The fourth one known as American tangerine is purely for the table.  That question was raised yesterday and I was not here to answer that. It was posed to the Minister of Trade and Industry, but that is the position. 

When it comes to the factory, I want to assure this House that as far as I am aware, electricity is on site, water is on site, and the road is being constructed right now. A plot is also available near Arapai Agricultural College or university now.  The South Koreans will build a turnkey factory and according to projections, this factory should be ready by next year, towards December. 

Another issue that was raised, which also concerns Teso, is the question of Serere. Hon. Alaso wrote to me about this and I gave a reply, to which she acknowledged receipt with appreciation. Nobody is moving Serere Research Station. What is happening is that when there were problems in Karamoja, the staff who were posted at Nabwin in Karamoja came to Serere temporarily to work there. Now, because we are rehabilitating Nabwin, we are now shifting these research scientists back to where they belong so that they can continue carrying out research in that area. 

We have zonal research centres everywhere. We have Buginyanya, we have Mukono, Ngetta and others. It is only Nabwin that had that problem and the only place we had to accommodate those people was in Serere. Definitely, Serere Research Station is clearly one of the key stations we have and it is a very old station. It is of the same rank as Kawanda and Namulonge. Those three used to be the best in the country. So, the fears of the people in that area should be allayed. We have not abandoned the place;if anything, we have strengthened it with better materials. 

When it comes to specific crops, let me start with cotton. Cotton production has not been abandoned but it is affected by fluctuation of the world price. Two years ago, the world price went up to Shs 3000 per kilogramme and then the following year, it came down very significantly and farmers are very sensitive to price fluctuations. 

When it comes to coffee, I must say it is doing reasonably well. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, when we talk about raising 100 million, you did not read it closely; it was 100 million in five years; so, if you reduce that to one year, you can see what it means. As we speak, we have 31 million coffee seedlings ready in the field – (Interjections) – they are there, I am sure. That is a fact. 

Unfortunately, the production of seedlings is done by nursery operators in the villages. Fortunately, the demand for seedlings is so high that we are also encouraged. This is a positive trend. I can tell you that as a function of that, last year alone we harvested and exported 3 million bags of coffee each weighing 60 kilogrammes. Now, the coffee year begins in October and ends in September. I looked at the figures before I came here and production this year has increased by 49 percent; so this year, we are getting higher crop yields than we harvested last year. 

Someone from Bunyole raised a question about millet versus rice. First of all, I want to say both are cereals; one can be interchanged with other. When you look at the input and output ratios, rice pays better than millet, even in terms of labour. So, farmers must be allowed to deal with what they consider most economic. 

Someone raised the question of sugarcanes in Busoga. This is a private investment. I worked with sugar when I was the managing director of Kinyara Sugar Works. Sugar production is profitable. The first crop meets the cost of production, but the second crop which is called latoon – the first and second latoon - pays. 

Another fact we have to consider is the economy of scale. If farmers appreciate the economies of scale – (Interjections) - We cannot discourage them from growing sugarcanes. I like the decision taken by the leaders in Busoga; they took a decision not to discourage the production of sugarcane. There is a lot of investment put in already. I visited some of them recently and I appreciated what is going on there.

Someone asked about the general financing of agriculture. You put up a case for an increment. I would not say that we have enough; but again, as a Cabinet member, I cannot say that we were cheated because we were together sharing the resources as they were and understood the rationale used. 

Additionally, apart from what we get from Government for public good – that is for research and extension - we have a lot of money coming into agriculture through private investments. So, I would not quarrel with my sister in finance because I understand the rationale used in sharing the resources. The key issue is not the amount of money but rather the use of that money availed; it has to be used reasonably well. 

On the question of taking coffee to Northern Uganda, this is appropriate because certain areas of Northern Uganda can grow coffee. Some areas in Lango and Gulu have got adequate rainfall. Some other areas like Lututuru are high and can support Arabica coffee production. So, it is part and parcel of that zonal programme that we are talking about.

So, without taking much of your time, some of these things must be understood in a wider context. If you are talking about seed availability, for instance, - people asking about beans, maize, coffee seedlings, vines and cassava -the whole range of seed is very wide. In fact, we wrote a Cabinet Paper on seed and planting materials. It was justified and we were able to make a case for about Shs 880 billion. However, when it came to the practical reality of budget allocation, we got about Shs 37 billion. So, from Shs 880 billion to Shs 37 billion, there is a big difference; but the key thing, as I said, is not the quantum of money but to use what you are given appropriately.

Madam Speaker, I want to rest my case. I thank you, ladies and gentlemen.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister and Members. I want to put the question that- Honourable minister, question on the adulteration of milk; I do not know whether it is yours.

10.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL HUSBANDRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate you for the achievement and also to thank the caucus, which chose you. Yesterday was a moment of truth when I saw people who were opposed at the time now appreciating. (Laughter)I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It was so interesting. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to join my senior colleague and thank the committee and Members for their enormous contributions. There were several issues raised from the livestock sector. My senior colleague has answered some of them; let me briefly answer those, which were not answered.

The first one was raised by hon. Okupa, about milk processors adding formalin to the milk. It is true we have poured milk being transported to processing plants, but the milk which is on the shelf is safe and we have carried out tests. I saw some report in the papers talking about formalin found in UHT milk. It is not correct. The process does not allow UHT, and our Diary Development Authority is very vigilant. They are testing batches for both milk processed here and milk imported.

I would also like to take this opportunity to inform the honourable colleagues that it is not safe for you to drink lose milk, milk which is vended. This is because the vendors have a tendency of prolonging shelf life.Milk gets sour, so they use some chemicals, mainly hydrogen peroxide, to prolong its life. We are moving on with a programme to de-register all of them because they are risky. So, you are better off buying packed milk.

The second issue was raised by hon. Yaguma about East Coast Fever (ECF) and Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) vaccine. The vaccine for FMD by policy is free and compulsory. Mbarara District has not had an outbreak of FMD for the last four years due to the fact that the district adopted a policy of partial quarantine throughout. Partial quarantine means that people can sell livestock and they can deal in livestock products but they do not allow stock markets to gather, where mingling and mixing of animals takes place. We salute Mbarara District for that achievement.

It is true that we have sent some doses of vaccines - I think 20,000 doses - to vaccinate animals in those strategic areas that we think are risky. Now, for ECF, this occurs as a result of tick control. It arises both from failure of acaricides, when the tick becomes resistant, but mainly arises from inappropriate use of acaricides. One, the equipment being used may be weak. The design of the pumps used for agriculture are such that they should not rapture the leaves that are being sprayed whereas the spray pumps for cattle have high pressure because they are supposed to penetrate. Some farmers use those weak pumps and they do not spray effectively. Some farmers, on the other hand, spray and they do not actually reach the cows or the livestock they are spraying.So, we have had a programme to teach farmers how to use the acaricides, and we advise the farmers to use veterinary officers and to change acaricides when they become ineffective.

As for the vaccine of ECF, it exists. We have some internal conflicts between Ministry of Health and Ministry of Agriculture but we have ironed them out and very soon, the vaccine will be on the market. The tests for this vaccine were done in Uganda and our veterinary scientists actually contributed to this research.However, because National Drug Authority belongs to another ministry and is the one responsible for this, they did not allow this vaccine. This is because the place where it was being manufactured was not certified. We have worked together and ensured that the source of vaccines is certified and we shall soon have it on the market.

There was an issue of zoning. My senior colleague did not handle it, but we are zoning and as you heard from the Committee on Agriculture, we are planning to do soil suitability mapping.This means that the soils around this country are going to be mapped so that there is no gamble on any crop or enterprise choice. For beef and livestock, we have zoned Uganda into seven ecological zones. We have a disease control zone and we are targeting the export market.

I also want to inform this House that because of our increased regulation and promoting better methods of farming, our milk has hit the world market. A litre of milk costs Shs 1200 at farmgate in some places. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I now put the question that save for the recurrent and development expenditure under vote 010, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; vote 121, Diary Development Authority; vote 125, National Animal Genetics Resource Centre;vote 142, National Agriculture Research Organisation;vote 152, NAADS Secretariat; vote 155, Uganda Cotton Development Organisation;vote 160, Uganda Coffee Development Authority, I put the question that the rest of this report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work done today. Tomorrow is the last day for considering these budget reports, so we start with the Ministry of Education at 10.00a.m, followed by Ministry of Health, Committee on Physical Infrastructure and then the Committee on Finance.We also expect the corrigenda to be presented tomorrow so that by the end of the day, we send the figures to the Government Printer to print the Bills. I want to really thank you for the stamina for today and for your staying power. Thank you.

I also want to inform you, as I had indicated earlier, the Chairman, who is the Speaker of the National People’s Congress of China, is arriving here on Monday. He will be here for a working visit on Monday and Tuesday. He will be accompanied by 48 members in the delegation, including his wife. 

On 17th September, he will meet the President. On 16th in the afternoon at 5.00 p.m., I shall hold bilateral talks here with him in the Conference Hall. I will be accompanied by 20 people; I do not have 48. I will have 20 people to accompany me to those talks. On the morning of the 17th, we will go and meet the Prime Minister but on 16th, we shall host a banquet at Serena Hotel in his honour. 

I have invited the chairpersons and vice-chairpersons of all the committees to attend the banquet and other leaders of the institution. Your cards have been put in your pigeonholes. Please, bring them along because these people are very security conscious even if they are in our country. I have also communicated to other Members who will be receiving the guests at the airport and those to participate in other activities like accompanying him on the boat ride and so on.  

Because of this visit, our car park for that day, on 16th, will be used for the guests. We shall secure accommodation elsewhere for the Members’ cars. 

That is what I wantto inform you about. The House is adjourned to 10 o’clock tomorrow morning. Please, ensure that all the sector ministers are present. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 10.34 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 13 September 2013 at 10.00 a.m.) 
