Friday, 20 September 2013

Parliament met at 11.51 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to welcome you to this morning’s sitting and to thank you very much for coming back to do the national duty. I want again, to thank Members who were here up to late last night to complete the statutory Bills. What remains is the Appropriation Bill and the Committee of Supply.

So, I want to just ask that we work expeditiously to supply this morning, perhaps adjourn for 30 minutes to receive the Appropriation Bill and then we can call it a day. We really should finish the process before 2.00 O’clock this afternoon. I want to appeal to you.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

    (1) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2013/14
    (2) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2013/14

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

11.55
2013/2014 Central Votes, Recurrent Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 3,301,148,865,000 Vote 001 to Vote 162, Central Government Vote, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2013/14.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure, Central Vote

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 6,582,922,783,000 under Vote 001 to Vote 162, Central Vote, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2013/14.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recurrent Expenditure, Referral Hospitals

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 55,820,661,000 under Votes 163 to 176, Referral Hospitals, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2013/14.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure, Referral Hospitals

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 17,741,180,000 under Votes 163 to 176, Referral Hospitals, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2013/14.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Missions Abroad, Recurrent Expenditure 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 72,648,183,000 Votes 201 to 234, Missions Abroad, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2013/14.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Missions Abroad, Development Expenditure 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 15,644,200,000 Votes 201 to 234, Missions Abroad, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2013/14.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Local Governments, Recurrent Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,656,141,518,000 Votes 501 to 778, Local Governments, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2013/14.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Local Governments, Development Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 352, 988,131,000 Votes 501 to 778, Local Governments, be provide for as development expenditure for the financial year 2013/14.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chair, I beg to move a motion that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The House resumed, and the Speaker Presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

12.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Budget of Shs 12,055,055, 521,000 for the financial year 2013/14 and supplied it without amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

12.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question pout and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Can I now direct the Minister of Finance to go and print the Appropriation Bill and return in one hour – will you be ready in one hour?

MR OMACH: Yes, Madam Speaker, we will be ready within one hour.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that the minister might be ready within an hour as he has promised. However, I would like to request – after an hour we shall go for prayers. So, why don’t we come back at exactly 2.00 O’clock so that we can be able to go for prayers in time to attend today’s important business?

THE SPEAKER: Let me think about it. Yes, hon. Peter Ogwang. 

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, before the minister goes to do that, I have an issue on the Committee of Presidency –

THE SPEAKER: Not on the figures, not on the Committee of Supply; that is closed.

MR OGWANG: Okay, Madam Speaker.

SPEAKER: We have already supplied. You cannot reopen it now.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, we would like to support the view of the Imam, hon. Latif Sebagala that we converge at 2.00 p.m.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Minister for ICT.

MR NASASIRA: I thought, Madam Speaker, that the Imam would be praying for us as we appropriate. (Laughter)

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, we already agreed that when we have plenary on Fridays, we should put into consideration, Juma Prayers. It is in that line that I am requesting your Office to implement what we agreed upon.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall reconvene at 2.00p.m. but there were some small maters that Members wanted to raise. Hon. Okony had a matter. Also hon. Oboth had something. Okay, two minutes, hon. Okony, but the Minister of Finance should go.

12.08
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to raise two issues of urgent national importance. One is that on 28 of this September, 2013, St Aloysius College Nyapeya will be celebrating its Diamond Jubilee, which is 75 years of existence. 
On that day, all roads will lead to St Aloysius College, Nyapeya, which is in Zombo District. All are invited.

Madam Speaker, however, the road leading to the college is in a very sorry state. That road starts from Nebbi Town to Gooli, through Paidha and Zewu up to Vura. As I said, on that day many people will be moving along that road. So, if it is not worked on, I am afraid most vehicles will get stuck on the way.

I have already talked to the responsible minister about it. He promised to talk to UNRA staff in Arua –(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, I just want to give the hon. colleague and the minister some information that in the whole of West Nile Region, these are the only two roads that have now been left in their natural state yet they link Uganda to Democratic Republic of Congo and earning this country a lot of revenue. 

Vura to Oraba Road is now tarmacked and we give credit to the honourable minister here. But still we appeal to Government that these two roads, being international exit and entry routes, be added onto those to be handled in the next financial year, so that they can also be tarmacked because they bring revenue to this country. They are short distances - the kilometres are not many – it is a short distance from Nebbi to Zombo, actually to Zewu and from Arua to Lira totals to only 35 kilometres.

So, hon. Minister, I urge you to plan for that so that when the President visits St Aloysius College, he does not fall into some of the ditches that the rains have created on the road. Thank you. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR OMWONYA: Thank you very much, hon. Bernard Atiku, for that information. Madam Speaker, as hon. Atiku has already said, we expect very high level dignitaries to come to us on that day. I don’t want us to be embarrassed by them not being able to reach the venue – and especially, I would like to ask the minister to instruct his staff in Arua to just work on some spots that are really very bad. That is Jukiya Hill; Adopich at Nyagak; and at Bbuna, which is actually near Nyapeya College.

The second issue is about the storm, which destroyed homes, houses, crops and bridges in Njangukor Sub County, which is also in Zombo District. The areas that are particularly affected are: Abavi Sub Parish, Jobalindo Parish and Atek Parish.

As I speak, most of the people whose houses had their roofs blown off are actually sleeping in the open. They do not have anywhere to sleep; they do not have food; and they do not have any livelihood.

12.11
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County, Tororo): Thank you, the Rt. Hon. Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, risking to be labelled with several names. However, if I do not stand up for what I believe in, I will fall for everything.

We all know that there is a public strike by teachers. We all know that Government has got limitations in providing for the 20 per cent salary increment. In my constituency - I do not about others - the schools have no teachers. As leaders, we request and seek guidance from you if we could be permitted, at individual level as leaders, to go and try to persuade our teachers and the pupils to go back to school.

I know that even as an independent Member of Parliament, I did seek to know the other side but this is what should be appropriate. We cannot leave the situation to remain the same; we have to be counted. We sympathise with teachers, all our hearts go out to them, but even more we sympathise with these little innocent children that are being punished for what they cannot be able to do anything about.

Right now in some schools, the pupils are not there. They tried to go for a few days and they have failed to go back. I am requesting for your guidance on whether it would be proper for some of us who feel indebted to go and sit around with the leaders, sit around with the teachers, sit around with the communities so that we resume the teaching, especially given that this is a third term. 

DR OMONA: Honourable colleague, I do not stand to dissuade you from regarding the plight of the teachers neither do I disassociate myself from the challenge that Government finds itself in. However, I want to say that with or without the permission of the Speaker, it is just our duty to help inform the country and the public about these issues.

I want to inform you that it may be proper for you, in your capacity, to ask the Minister of Education to inform the House about the developments as far as the reopening of the school term is concerned, and the response of the children and the teachers. Maybe there are other steps that we can take, other than what is obvious of us as leaders. Thank you, honourable colleague.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable colleague for giving way.

Yesterday the leaders of the teachers’ association met and they agreed that their industrial action continues. Indeed, we need a response from the Government because they depended on Parliament and when the outcome was as it was, they said they are now going to continue with their industrial action. 

Unfortunately, as we talk, all our children, as leaders, are in school and learning but the children of our voters are not in school; they are not learning. I think the minister should come back and tell us the next step. If the teachers continue with their industrial action, it is doing a very big disservice to this nation. So, what next? The teachers are not in school, children are not being taught, parents have stopped sending children to school; can we really, as Parliament, just continue as if everything is normal.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the point raised by the honourable member is very important. At this point in time, we should be mourning because of a section of education, namely primary education, which is the cornerstone of all education facilities in Uganda. I expected the Government to have expressed concern over what is happening because it is one thing not have money, it is another to be concerned about the plight of our children. 

Sometime back in Kenya, there was a strike by the teachers when President Uhuru Kenyatta had just come to power. He persuaded the teachers, talked to them amicably and surrendered what he had to make sure that the strike stops. I have been hearing words of arrogance from the top leadership of this country, instead of talking to teachers amicably with a view of finding a solution. 

I therefore support what he has said, that this Government should demonstrate that it exists by finding a formula to solve the problem. This problem is a giant problem; you cannot postpone it.

MR OBOTH: Thank you for your information. Madam Speaker, we are aware that we even just supplied; should we continue expecting a lot from Government? Maybe we could take a leaf and we challenge ourselves that before we seek help from Government, we could start by helping ourselves and helping our communities and convince them. –(Interjections)– I do not know what information I can take.

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, that is my concern. I am seeking for your guidance on whether it would not be proper. We are the ones who were here in the House; the teachers are waiting to see and hear from Members of Parliament. We are better placed to explain the dilemma that Government found itself in.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course, the matter is important but since we are going to reconvene at 2.00p.m., I will ask the Leader of Government Business to discuss with the Ministry of Education and they can update us in the afternoon. I do not have answers for now. So, I want to suspend the House until 2.00 O’clock in the afternoon when we come to complete the Appropriation Bill.

(House was suspended at 12.20 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.00 p.m. the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I wish to inform you that the International Day of the Older Persons will be celebrated on 1st October in Kaberamaido. We have received a request to invite you, Members, to go to Kaberamaido but I am sure the Minister for Gender will be communicating to you officially about it.

Secondly, we have noted that the Budget Call Circular will be issued in a few days’ time for the commencement of consultations for the new financial year. So, if, as the government indicated that they intend to enhance the welfare of the teachers and the other civil servants, that must be included in the budget call ceilings and they are issued early October. So, I am alerting the Members of Parliament to be on the lookout to see whether those ceilings are actually included, because it is starting next October. So, I hope that she will be able to keep to that commitment. Let me now invite the Minister of Finance to give the Bill a first reading.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE APPROPRIATIONS BILL, 2013

2.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Appropriations Bill, 2013” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Seconded.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, in line with Section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001, I beg to also lay on Table the certificate of financial implications.

MOTION MOVED UNDER RULE 15 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE TO SUSPEND RULE 118 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE TO ALLOW THE SECOND READING OF THE APPROPRIATIONS BILL, 2013

MR FRED OMACH: Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion under Rule 15 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament to suspend Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure to allow for the second reading of the Appropriations Bill, 2013. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded. Hon. Members, I put the question that the Appropriations Bill, 2013 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE APPROPRIATIONS BILL, 2013

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Appropriations Bill, 2013 be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MR OMACH: The object of this Bill is to provide for the authorisation of public expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the sum of Shs 12,055,055,521,000 for the financial year ending 30 June 2014. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you may recall, we supplied the money this morning. I think we can just go to the committee stage. I put the question that the Appropriations Bill, 2013 be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE APPROPRIATIONS BILL, 2013

2.45
Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2 agreed to.

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4 agreed to.

The Schedule agreed to.

The Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Appropriations Bill, 2013” and has supplied it without amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered and approved the Appropriations Bill, 2013 and I pray that it be adopted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the House adopts the report of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE APPROPRIATIONS BILL, 2013

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriations Bill, 2013” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2013”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause) 

Honourable members, I want to thank you all for the work done. It has been a very long journey but we are finally there. For the record, we need to improve on the speed at which the policy statements arrive here. We need to improve on how we respond to the invitations to come to the meetings. The members also need to be committed and attend to the committee work expeditiously; that is what has caused all this. So, I do hope that next financial year we shall be able to do it within the time expected under the Budget Act. Particularly, I want to thank you especially for coming back on a Friday afternoon, but it is national duty.

Honourable members, this morning there were some queries about what to say to the teachers. I see the Minister of Education; I do not know whether there is a message for the people now that members are going for the weekend.

2.51
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I need protection from hon. Ssewungu. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that when some members have some wrong thinking about some other friends of theirs, they tend to even fear looking at them. (Laughter) I am seated here, I am watching the Minister of Education who is in charge of this sector where teachers are not teaching, looking at me thinking that I might be the source of the solutions of teachers. So, is she in order to look at me with fear and intimidation? (Laughter) Yes, she is a soldier and I am a private; though we are both putting on military titles, is she in order, Madam Speaker? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think she is just interested in you; that is all. (Laughter)

Honourable members, we have pupils and teachers of Mother Care Primary School in Ntungamo, represented by hon. Yona Musinguzi and hon. Naome Kabasharira. Please stand up. You are welcome. (Applause)

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, I would like to encourage members of this House that as they go to their constituencies, they continue persuading teachers to return to school and the parents to send their children to school. 

Madam Speaker, we have also received formal communication from UNATU addressed to me that they would like to have a meeting with us on Monday at 10 o’clock in the morning, with the view to finding a comprehensive solution to matters relating to the on-going strike. However, in the meantime, all schools are opened and the school calendar remains the same. 

We expect a lot of support from colleagues as they go out to their constituencies over the weekend. Continue encouraging the teaching and learning to continue in our schools on Monday or to resume in those schools where learning and teaching has not been taking place. Thank you very much Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, she has finished. She is no longer on the Floor. 

Honourable members, the Minister has said they have a meeting on Monday. Parliament will be sitting again on Tuesday. If there are other issues we want to listen to, we will hear from them after their meeting. For now, I really want to release Members so that they can go for the weekend.  Just to alert the Leader of Government Business that we shall be watching the Budget Call Circular to see whether that money is actually going to be put there. I want members really to be awake to that issue. 

Honourable members, thank you very much. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 2.55 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 24 September 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
