Thursday, 19 September 2013

Parliament met at 3.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I do not have much to communicate except to urge that Members try to work expeditiously so that we can go to the Committee of Supply today and conclude the budget process tomorrow. I also want to alert Members that we shall sit tomorrow morning to try and see what else is remaining. In the mean time, hon. Mateke had something small to raise.

3.03
MS SARAH MATEKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On 10 August 2013, we had a serious tragedy along Kampala-Masaka Road; one of our buses coming from Kisoro District carrying various business people was stopped alongside the road and passengers were taken to the bush, stripped naked and they removed all that they had. 

This was not the first time this was taking place. We had had a similar incident the previous month where two other buses in the names of Ubumwe Coaches and Bismarkan had been hijacked and passengers robbed. This last one was Baby Coach. 

It is at the same spot in Lwengo District where buses are being taken off the road and being robbed. People are robbing them with guns; in this particular case, they had two big guns and two small ones. Everybody is removed from the bus and they strip you naked and take whatever you have.

I would like to request the responsible officers and the minister; I want to know how far they have gone with this case because the robbers were arrested with the cars that they were using to steal and with some money. However, according to our sources, there is some allegation that policemen were working with these thieves and up to now, nothing has been done.

Another plea is to request Government to beef up the security along Kampala-Masaka Road. I want an assurance from the government on whether it is safe for us to move at night.

3.05
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County, Mayuge): I thank you, Madam Speaker. In Busoga, there is a disease which has been eating us. (Laughter) This disease has been killing us and for some time now, we have been hiding our heads in the sand for fear of embarrassment because they say it is because of lack of cleanliness. 

It is time for us not hide our heads. The more we hide our heads in the sand, the more we are suffering. We have started burying people and this disease has now become an epidemic. The disease is that of jiggers. (Laughter) It is no longer a laughing matter because we are burying people; even schools are now being affected.

My prayer is that Ministry of Health, in conjunction with the Ministry of Education because schools are affected, come up with immediate measures to ensure that we eradicate jiggers in Busoga. We need immediate and long term measures. When there was need in Northern Uganda, the Ministry of Health commanded all the NGOs to go to Northern Uganda. When there was need in Karamoja, Government commanded all NGOs to go to there – (Interruption) 

MS ROSE IRIAMA: Is it in order for the honourable member to mention Karamoja - Can I give some information that jiggers have been in Karamoja but it is about personal hygiene; there is nothing Government can do. They are also in our place; it is personal hygiene and not an issue of government. Is it in order for you to mention Karamoja when talking about that?

3.09
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to what is happening in Kasese where we have witnessed UPDF and Police forces manning extrajudicial killing of peasants, raping women, torturing people in one area called Kihara.
 
There is a piece of land in Kasese, which is over 4,000 acres, and there is a conflict between someone called Kasagama and about 450 peasants. This case is before court and they secured an interim court order that the peasants can continue cultivating the part where they have been living and then Kasagama also utilises the other part until this case is disposed of. However, seven months on, women have been raped as I have said, people have been killed and the Police has not executed this order from court.

My request, Madam Speaker, is that you direct the Ministry of Internal Affairs that the interim court order, which I will lay before you, be executed and that UPDF is restrained from managing that land. There is a barracks there and when these peasants cultivate their crops, a one Lt Col Ssejabi has cattle which feed on the crops.
 
We have talked to the RDC, we have been to the Police but people are dying. Two days ago, a one Mumbere was killed. The RDC has gone ahead in writing to exonerate the killers, claiming that it has been done by unscrupulous people that he does not know. However, in the same area, there is a police unit and a barracks and all of them are protecting one side.

Madam Speaker, I request that you allow me lay on the Table the interim order and investigative report by the Police.

THE SPEAKER: As he comes, join me in welcoming teachers and pupils of Sunlight Learning Centre, Kikubamutwe in Buikwe. Please, stand up. They are represented by hon. Kakoba Onyango.

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to lay on the Table an interim order from the High Court in Kampala restraining the defendant in this case from mishandling the peasants who are on this land. Allow me also to lay on the Table a report from CIID, land division, who carried out investigations about this land.

3.12
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following the nationwide recruitment into the UPDF, the UPDF medical team has discovered in their recruitment process within Lango sub-region, Acholi sub-region and Karamoja sub-region, that over 80 young people who turned up for the recruitment process into the UPDF tested positive for Hepatitis B. This was confirmed by Col Mugerwa, the head of the recruitment process, and Dr Maj. Rusiba who is heading the medical team.

I had the opportunity to interact with them together with hon. Tony Ayoo, the MP for Kwania, and they confirmed this to us. This is a wakeup call to Government of Uganda and the Ministry of Health because according to them, this disease stays with somebody for a period of 10 to 30 years before it manifests itself. The end result is that it causes cancer of the liver. This calls for action. 

As leaders from the North, we demand for a statement from the Ministry of Heath, which was demanded for by this House some time back. All action points should be taken to save our people who will die anytime from now.

I would like to request that if possible, the ministry in that statement should highlight what is happening in all those districts in the sub-regions mentioned. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: I think that is important; just take half a minute to conclude.

MR DENNIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, finally, the ministry should go to the sub-regions and call for meetings with all the leaders with a solution and a plan of action on what should be done to fight this silent killer. 

3.15
MS JUDITH AMOIT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the UPDF recruitment which has been concluded. 

The people of Pallisa and Bukedea as a region are very disgruntled with the indiscipline of the UPDF. I want to report to this House that there was a lot of exploitation and extortion of money from the recruits. There was a lot of corruption during the exercise. There was a lot of discrimination in the exercise. 

It was discovered that this team ferried people from other areas to come and recruit them from Pallisa. This time, it was Budaka where the recruitment was taking place. When the people complained – I am happy the minister was around - she requested the team to zone these people according to the sub-counties and the team of people whom they had brought fell nowhere. This exposed the highest exploitation of the people. 

In Pallisa, we were supposed to have 15 people recruited but we had only eight qualified people. I am calling upon Government and the Ministry of Defence to cancel this exercise because even in Teso, I have heard it was the same story. The whole region is affected. This means that the people who were recruited were from other places and this will compromise security in our areas. You can give it -

THE SPEAKER: But she only has two minutes.

MR SSEBAGALA: This is vital information, Madam Speaker. The information I am giving is that it was not only in your constituency or in your district but even here in the city; we were informed the exercise took place at Kololo Airstrip but all those who came found the list with names almost complete.

When they were reading the names, those who were registering were saying “No, we have enough numbers.” Those people who were registered in Kampala, we were not sure that they are residents of the five divisions of Kampala. So it was the same even in Kampala District here.

MS AMOIT: I wanted to conclude this way - (Member timed out.)

3.18
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to register a matter of national importance concerning a very devastating hailstorm that ravaged through the villages of my constituency. 

Two weeks ago, after a very heavy downpour in some of the villages of Bugaya Sub-County and Kaguli Sub-County in Budiope East constituency, plantations and buildings were destroyed. After an on-spot assessment by the technical team that came from the district, it was established that close to 1,243 acres of crops were destroyed and this includes beans, cassava, groundnuts among many other crops.

Madam Speaker, I want to request the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness to urgently come to the rescue of the people of Budiope East in the villages of Butubi, Bubanda, Buwaza, Bulegeya, Bukwaya, Nabigwo, Buyomba, Nakatwe and Igwaya. 

The damage was so extensive and we also made efforts to have it captured in pictures. Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the pictorial impression of the extent of the damage that was caused by this hailstorm. 
 
I also want to appeal to the donors, both national and international, to come to the aid of this suffering population. I know as Christians and all other believers, it is said that giving is more blessed than receiving. May the Almighty – (Member timed out)  

THE SPEAKER: Let hon. Balyejjusa lay on the Table the pictures of the situation in Bugaya.  

MR BALYEJJUSA: Madam Speaker, I want to lay on the Table the pictorial impression of the damage caused by the hailstorm in Budiope East Constituency. I beg to lay.  

3.21 
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. It may not specifically be about Buvuma, but it concerns the islands and I am raising it on behalf hon. Fred Badda who is away on other business. 

Madam Speaker, the issue concerns the ferry facility, which is MV Pearl, operating from Bukakata in Masaka to Luuku Landing Site in Kalangala. This ferry is the only gateway to Kalangala which is at least okay because this is the only road. There may be another gateway but which is not free.  

This ferry has two engines that it uses to operate but then one broke down and it started using one. Now, finally, even the one remaining engine has also broken down and the other day, the people aboard this ferry spent the whole night on the lake. As we talk now, this ferry is still grounded, hindering a lot of businesses. 

This is not new because I remember that even in Buvuma, we had a similar problem; actually, I was a victim when one day the ferry disintegrated halfway the journey and  the locals were coming to me asking for what to do and yet I was also asking the same question.  

Time and again, ferry services have broken down and then later on, they tend to take the ferry to fix the mess but there is no explanation as to what the cause of the problem is, and these same problems are re-occurring. So our request is that the Minister for Transport gives us a clear explanation on when this will be sorted and if possible, what the problem is. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

3.24
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance, on the issue of murders that have now taken over the whole country.  

Madam Speaker, from Rakai, Mityana, Mubende, Ntinda, Kisaasi, it has now caught up with Mbale Municipality. A week ago, a son who went to answer a stressing alarm from his parents’ house was murdered at the entrance of his father’s house. Two people were hacked to death in Kiteso in Northern Division. Last week, a body was found dumped in a nearby forest of Mbale. 

My people now go to bed at 7.00 p.m.; like chicken that go frolicking for food, they make sure that by 7 O’clock they have entered their places of abode. This is the situation in Mbale. In Namakwekwe, people are so worried. 

Murders have taken over the whole country and I do not know what the Government is doing to come to the rescue of people because people are living in fear. What is the cause? 

Recently, when I was in Dallas, Ugandans living in the diaspora raised the issue of killings in Uganda, and of course the answers were not so convincing. The problem is unemployment. Eighty-four percent of the youth are not employed and there is poverty that is biting very hard. So all these combined together are causing the murders. 

I appeal to Government to wake up and make sure that our people enjoy the peace – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, and then the Minister for Health was supposed to give us a statement on Hepatitis B but now a new dimension has come up; I hope they can make a commitment.

3.26
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, we have always known Soroti Flying School as the East African School of Aviation and as a centre of excellence. This week, a workshop was held by the Ministry of East African Community Affairs here on the oversight of the Education Policy Framework on Partner States between 16th and 18th. We were taken aback when they presented to us the list of centres of excellence and Soroti Flying School, the only flying school that we have here, and which has been supported, has been removed from the list.  

I demand to know from the Government and we demand to know from that ministry why Soroti Flying School has been removed from the list, moreover at this time where we have Uganda as the chair. This was communicated by the Principal Education Officer who presented a paper on behalf of the ministry. He informed the workshop members that the Council of Ministers has adopted new centres of excellence and Soroti Flying School had been excluded. 

This is the only school where we train pilots in this country as a government institution and as an East African institution. Now it has been substituted with the Uganda Industrial Research Institute, National Agriculture Research Organisation and Makerere University College of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences. 

The people of this country and the people of Teso are demanding to know why there is this type of discrimination. Why this type of marginalization? Even the little that we have had is being taken away. Can we know whether we are not part of this country?  

THE SPEAKER: I do not know where the Minister of Health is because the issue of Hepatitis was raised and we were expecting a statement. Maybe he is still busy. The Minister for Works, I do not know what you want to say about the ferry in Kalangala.

3.28
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANPSORT (Mr Abraham Byandala) I thank you, Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, fellow MPs. I thank those who have brought up these issues of national importance here. 

First of all, I will talk about the Kalangala ferry. My ministry apologises for the reduced service for some days. For those who were observant, we put information in the papers showing the schedule of the reduced number of trips to be made. 

This was because, as the MP for Buvuma said, this ferry uses two propeller engines and one had problems. I had to make a decision whether to totally ground the ferry or use one engine with fewer trips but use that time to repair the other one. I am happy to say, Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, that as I speak now, from yesterday the ferry is totally repaired and it is in operation.  

On Soroti Flying School, I must thank the Government of Uganda for having maintained, equipped and paid for the people working in this school since the collapse of the first East African Community. I also thank this Parliament for the amount of money they have allocated to the purchase of a number of training planes.  

The problem with this place is that the people working there as trainers are on high demand worldwide. Unfortunately, since the collapse of the EAC and it came under Uganda’s authority, the salaries are very low and it is very difficult to retain the staff there. That is why this year, His Excellency the President made a very wise move and wrote to the Minister for Public Service requesting that these trainers’ salaries be enhanced to be in a position to retain them. 
 
At the same time, I am working around the clock to see that I document what is there now. I have already talked to the Secretary-General of the East African Community so that we can hand back this school to the Community because during the collapse of the Community – 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, about five or six years ago, Government assured Ugandans that Soroti Flying School was to be a centre of excellence, at least in this country, in regard to the East African Community. Today, we hear from hon. Okupa that it is no longer on the list of centres of excellence, at least from Uganda. Soroti Flying School is not one of the centres of excellence now housed by Uganda. 

Hon. Byandala is trying to tell us other things other than why Soroti Flying School has been removed from the list of centres of excellence for Uganda. He is even trying to be diversionary; does he want me to understand that because Government has failed to provide aircrafts for training, – well, they used to be five then they crashed, then one got spoilt and now I think that they have only two - that is the reason they decided to remove Soroti Flying School? We had actually hoped that by making it a centre of excellence, the Community was going to find the resources to revamp that institution. 

Is he, therefore, in order to be diversionary and mislead Parliament and not tell us why they have removed it from the centres of excellence and divert us to their failure to pay the instructors? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, why is the school no longer a centre of excellence? I think that is what the Members want to know.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I wish my colleague, hon. Alice Alaso, could also try to be patient and wait when people are talking. I had not concluded; I was still talking and then she came in. Please, learn to be patient and listen to people. I had not finished - (Interjections) -

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of order. 

Madam Speaker, you have just directed the honourable minister to respond to the honourable colleague on the issue of why the flying school is no longer a centre of excellence. Moreover, as Members of Parliament, we are here to seek clarification from the honourable ministers on various issues. Is the honourable minister in order to divert again and ask the colleague not to ask when the colleague wanted further clarification? Is the honourable minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think what he is saying is that he had the answers but he was not given time to give them. So please give the answers which the Members want.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, it is extremely difficult to retain personnel there - the calibre of personnel needed for the school to be in the line of excellence.  

Secondly, we did not have the proper programmes because of the absence of the necessary calibre of staff. When the ICAO came to audit, they found that some of these were lacking and we were not compliant with the ICAO standards. That is why it was removed. 

However, as I was saying, Government is working round the clock, and I am glad hon. Alaso also knows that the Government of Uganda bought four new planes for the training of our people. I think that was in the direction of fulfilling the ICAO conditionalities.

I want to assure you, Madam Speaker, as I was saying, that I am working round the clock - I have already talked to the Secretary-General of the East African Community – so that Uganda hands over this school back to the Community. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from a former director, hon. Wakikona, about what happened, very briefly.

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague, hon. Byandala. 

The flying school, the East African Civil Aviation Academy, we all know remained under the ownership of the East African Community. However, it was declared in this House, when I was also around, and it was recognised as a centre of excellence within that time before the Protocol was signed. 

About two weeks ago, again the matter came up in the Council of the East African Community and we talked about the same institution. It is still recognised as the only institution in the East African region of that level recognised by ICAO and approved by ICAO, although it fell short of having certain qualified people to instruct in the school. 

On the equipment, the school had been given six new aeroplanes, not four. These were bought by the Government of Uganda as a contribution towards maintaining what they are keeping for the East African Community. 

Right now, the salary is very poor but recently, they recruited eight assistant instructors who have just passed out. They are also looking for another five full instructors with qualifications of at least ATPL and full instructors’ ratings. 

That issue of excellence was due to some people within here who did not quite understand the qualifications involved in that and they were actually stranded. However, it still remains, and even when it goes to the Community, it is going as a centre of excellence within the region. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Can we hear from the Ministry of Health very quickly on hepatitis. 

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Madam Speaker, I must say that tomorrow I will be marking the end of two months since being appointed Minister of State for Health; therefore, in case I do not exhaustively explain the programmes that are in the Ministry of Health to respond to the honourable member’s concerns, I should be forgiven.

One, hon. Majegere talked about a disease that is affecting people in his constituency. I want to say this is an issue of serious concern. He cannot sit there while many Ugandans continue to suffer. However, Madam Speaker, you are also aware that the Ministry of Health has in the past carried out a number of programmes with the help of some Members of Parliament from Busoga, including supporting the spraying with potassium and other chemicals that have been used. So, we shall continue to do so. 

I know hon. Majegere was talking about the need for eradication of that problem. I also know very well that eradication of jiggers in any given area requires a multi-sectoral approach, not only from the health sector but also other sectors of government. I want to say that we shall work out a multi-pronged approach to handle this problem. 

I think it is not expensive to buy the chemicals that are required for spraying, although I also know that this is not sustainable. What can be sustainable in the long run is to ensure that people use natural things that they can spread on the ground. In many parts, people use cow dung; I do not know what they use in his area. So, it goes back to having good sanitation in homes. However, in the beginning, we need to have big interventions including spraying the areas concerned.

MR SSSEBUNYA: Thank you, Minister, for yielding the Floor. I want to say that this matter of jiggers might be taken lightly especially when someone says that it a hygiene issue, that people should just clean up. It is not as simple as that. This issue needs a lot of mobilisation from especially the leaders. 

I notice that in your approach, you are not mentioning the role of MPs like the one who raised it because he may not be the only one. They might be many but they fear to say that they are also going through a similar problem. So, in your approach, are you planning to make use of the leaders in a transparent way, rather just sending health workers there?

DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE: I think hon. Sebunya must have heard me in my remarks mentioning Members of Parliament and how the Ministry of Health has been working with these Members; I mentioned that. I think we need to step up those innovations. 

What I must say is that we need a comprehensive plan. I am going back to the ministry and we shall work with the leaders to come out clearly with a comprehensive plan on how we can address this problem in the short run and also put in place measures, including education, for a sustainable response to this problem.

The second issue came from hon. Hamson Obua and it was in regard to hepatitis B. This is also a big problem in some parts of the country. It is not very clear why the prevalence of hepatitis B is much higher particularly in Northern Uganda than in some other areas. I think work is going on to study why this trend. 

I must say that we already have some good news because science has been able to advance and we now have the hepatitis B vaccine. We are now vaccinating children against hepatitis B. Therefore, in the future, we are unlikely to have this problem if we are able to mobilise our people and children to get immunized. We also have an adult vaccine for hepatitis B. So, I agree with hon. Obua that we – (an hon. Member rose _) - Okay.

THE SPEAKER: No, please, you are entering into my time. You answer the questions asked.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Okay, Madam Speaker. I am going to work on a comprehensive statement on how to use a multipronged approach to handling hepatitis B in Northern Uganda, but also hepatitis B for all health workers in the country and any other actions that are needed, including the drawing of a plan of action with leaders to address this problem. 

This will also include following up with the UPDF to ascertain the magnitude of the problem they encountered when they were registering people, and the assessment of the cancer of the liver and other effects of hepatitis B. We will also look at what actions we can take to screen people for those diseases so that we are able to provide appropriate treatment and guidance. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. I do not see the ministers of defence and internal affairs. Okay, the Leader of Government Business is coming to say something.

3.46
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen.(Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, there were questions raised concerning the ministers of internal affairs and defence. They are not here but we are going to convey these questions to them so that they prepare answers. There was a report that there are bus robberies along Masaka Road around Lwengo District and that security should be beefed up. We will ask the Police to take that up.

As for the report from Kasese that people are being killed and raped in the presence of the Police and the Army, we will find out why they presided over the commission of crimes. We will find out if that is true.

There was also a report, which we shall inform the Minister of Defence about, regarding the unfairness in the recent recruitment into the UPDF. According to the report, in Palisa, for example, there was a lot of corruption and sectarianism that took place. This was supplemented by the Imam of Parliament when he said that this also happened here in the city. So, we will ask the Minister of Defence to explain that.

On the report that crops have been destroyed in Budiope East, I will ask the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to not only make a report but to also go there and see what assistance is urgently required and inform us on what action has been taken. Those are the unanswered questions.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Third Deputy Prime Minister. We can now move on to item No. 3.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE RETIREMENT BENEFITS SECTOR LIBERALISATION BILL, 2011

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “The Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011” be read for the first time. This Bill was saved from the Eighth Parliament. It is hereby supported by a certificate of financial implications.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it has been seconded. It is committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back and also the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to assist them in discussing it.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.28
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Madam Speaker and colleagues, this is about the one-year road maintenance expenditure plan and performance statement for the financial year 2013/14. By the powers conferred upon me by Section 28 of the Uganda Road Fund Act, 2008, I hereby lay before this House the one-year road maintenance and expenditure plan and associated performance statement of the Uganda Road Fund for the financial year 2013/14.

The plan envisages expenditure of Shs 352.852 billion over the next 12 months to finance routine and periodic maintenance of public roads and the associated administrative costs undertaken by UNRA, KCCA, 111 districts and 22 municipalities, collectively known as designated agencies. At the end of the 12 months, the key outputs are expected to be: 

    • Under UNRA, term maintenance of 814.4 kilometres, periodic maintenance of 1,417 kilometres, maintenance of 284 bridges, routine maintenance of 16,500 kilometres and mechanized maintenance of 7000 kilometres.

    • Under DUCA agencies, including KCCA: KCCA, periodic maintenance of 18.43 kilometres; districts and municipal councils shall undertake routine mechanised maintenance using the newly acquired road equipment totalling to 4,175 kilometres and routine manual maintenance using gang system of 20,371 kilometers.

The Uganda Road Fund shall also fund the removal of bottlenecks from the community access roads in the amounts of Shs 6.968 billion. Also, Shs 7 billion will be used for the operations of the various ferries we have in this country.  

Madam Speaker, I urge Members to support and approve this plan so we may continue to consolidate on the gains already made on the improvement of the roads for the betterment of our people. I beg to lay copies of this plan before the House. I have laid more than one copy because I know this is very important information that many people may want to get copies. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, we shall ask the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to look at them. They are also available for Members to study and understand what the programmes are.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

Clause 5

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we stood over this matter yesterday. Can I now invite the minister to say something?

MR OMACH: Madam Chair and honourable colleagues, we did pass clause 5 but I was proposing to introduce a new amendment immediately thereafter. I am proposing to amend Section 117 (2) of the Income Tax Act with regard to the interest paid by listed institutions. We stood over this because I had not supplied the text but with your permission, Madam Chair, I propose to:
1. 	Amend Section 117(2) of the Income Tax Act by inserting, under subsection (2), “(e) interest paid by a listed institution.”

2. 	Amend Section 120 of the Income Tax Act, Principal Act, by inserting subsection (4) – “(4) or where payment is made by a listed institution.”

Madam Chair and colleagues, this section of the Income Tax Act imposes an obligation on a person who pays interest to a resident person to withhold tax from that person. 

Equally, Section 121 provides that any person who pays interest to a non-resident must withhold tax on the payment. There are a number of international institutions like the World Bank, IMF, African Development Bank and the East African Development Bank, which because of the nature of the instrument that we have signed with them establishing them, are not subject to tax in Uganda, therefore the proposal to have this amendment inserted.

The justification is that these multilateral agreements or conventions with international financial institutions like the World Bank, IMF, African Development Bank and the East African Development Bank provide inter alia that the organisation’s property, assets, income operations and transactions be exempt from all taxation and all custom duties. It also provides that the institutions are exempt from any obligations relating to the payment, withholding and collection of any tax or duty. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday we did not complete this because the minister had not brought the text. Now that he has brought it, I think it is clear.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, we have Schedule I, which shows institutions that are exempted from taxes. I think the best he can do is to move this amendment under Schedule I of the Income Tax Act to add onto the list. 

I have been looking through the lists and I have seen African Development Bank, the East African Development Bank but not the World Bank. In other words, the list is already there. Just take this to Schedule I. Otherwise, when you do it this way, it will not be acceptable.

Also, who is paying? It is Government paying. There are also institutions that you pay to, for example, in cases where the government borrows from another government. Will you deduct? That is why you should sort out that under Schedule I.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, that is okay, but it can only be possible after we have inserted the word “interest paid by a listed institution” and “or where payment is made by a listed institution.” So, some of these were not listed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Which interest? Madam Chair, he has to help us understand which interest he is talking about. If Government of Uganda, for example, borrows money from the World Bank and it is paying, it cannot deduct. If IMF is paying Uganda, it cannot deduct because it is under exemption, even World Bank. 

I do not know, but what the minister is bringing in is not applicable. He should insert any institution missing in the first schedule of the Income Tax Act. I can also help you amend here and put in World Bank since IMF is already there. It is only World Bank which is missing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing he wants to add other institutions at a later stage; what will happen? They will require you to have the cover of the provision in the main law.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let us list them; we have African Development Bank, African Development Fund, Aga Khan Foundation, East African Development Bank, European Union – they are so many here. So if he wants them, then he should carry all of them and put them under the same section. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I thought this is describing all of them in the Act and then he can amend this schedule and bring in Exim Bank, Tropical Bank and the others. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, I support the Leader of the Opposition. In the Income Tax Act, particularly the section being talked, these are on international payments. The schedule which the Leader of the Opposition is proposing to amend, we can amend it once we get to it. However, in the main law, that section should be put in the first schedule where the list of other banks is, not in the middle of the section of the Income Tax Act. 

When you look at where we stopped yesterday in the Bill, we stopped on clause 7, which does not say anything about this. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We stopped at clause 7, but we had stood over his proposal to introduce this small amendment. He had proposed to bring it but he had not written it. That was our problem. 

MR KAKOOZA: Then it should be handled at the end of the Income Tax Act, in the first schedule; that would include a new section in the first schedule. 

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, what the Leader of the Opposition is referring to – the listing in Schedule 1- is only limited to income tax, which does not include this interest incomes. So that is why we are proposing this amendment. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Income tax is a tax on income; interest is income for the institution or individual. I think the Minister of Finance has not done good work. There is no tax called interest tax. 

Honourable minister, for your good, please withdraw this. It would be better for us to proceed and you bring this next year. But if you insist on this, I think you would be treading on soft ground. I can advise you more if you so wish. 

MR OMACH: I said, “Interest income”; I did not say, “income tax”.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chair, it looks like this amendment was not well thought-out and the minister is not doing this House a service from his submission. I would suggest that the minister gets more information from the technocrats to support the amendment. Even the justification you are giving does not justify this amendment; it is already catered for. 

I suggest, Madam Chair, that we go to the next one, and then he can sort his house out. We do not need to come here and look at each other when the minister is not making any progress. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what would happen if you left this out?

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, as I explained when I was reading the text, we have signed obligations with these listed institutions that they are exempt. So, what we are proposing is to ensure that there is no obligation imposed on them to collect or to withhold taxes on behalf of the Government of Uganda. If we do not make this amendment, that would mean that they are subject to collect withholding tax on behalf of this government and this would offend the agreements and protocols that we signed with them.

MR TANNA: Madam Chair, I seek clarification. There seems to be a mix-up of things here. 

In my understanding, this amendment is trying to rectify a problem that is currently on the ground. You have domestic suppliers to these foreign organisations that are doing business in Uganda. You have IMF, ADB, EADB and others which do business here. If I supply to them, they will reduce money that is due to me and they withhold tax, but they have no framework under which they can submit that withheld money to the Government of Uganda. 

Therefore, I think, by doing this, it is relieving them of their duties of withholding this tax. Therefore, I would like to ask the honourable minister to clarify whether my understanding is correct or as explained by hon. Nandala. I think what hon. Nandala is trying to tell us is that irrespective of whether its corporate tax or its withholding tax, the tax must be withheld and then submitted to URA. I am seeking clarification, Madam Chair.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, maybe before the honourable minister comes, I want hon. Tanna to read the proposals. 

In the first one, the minister mentions interest paid by listed institutions. That means the interest and not the supplies. Let us assume that World Bank lends to Uganda Government money and Uganda Government is paying interest, because this is an exempt institution, you cannot withhold tax on it; you will pay it. On the other hand, assuming Uganda has lent World Bank money and World Bank is paying interest, since it is paying it cannot withhold because even if it withheld, it would transfer the same money to the Government of Uganda. So that cannot apply. 

What we are trying to say is that the moment an institution is exempt as under Schedule I, it means it cannot pay any tax, it cannot withhold tax. That is what I was telling you.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, this is the section that we intend to amend - Section 117 on page 106.  It reads as follows: 
“Payment of interest to resident persons 
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a resident person who pays interest to another resident person shall withhold tax on the gross amount of the payment at the rate prescribed in Part V of the Third Schedule to this Act.”

What we are saying is that the listed institutions should be exempt from withholding tax under this Section 117 of the Income Tax Act.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Minister, who are they paying?

MR OMACH: Under the tax, the Government of Uganda is saying, “withhold tax on behalf of Government” and the Protocol we have signed is saying that they will not be subject to taxation. This is not about the income of the organisations but their role to collect taxes on behalf of Government of Uganda. That is where I would want them to be exempted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if you have the Act itself, all those listed from 2 (a) to (d) are exempted in different categories: interests payable by a natural person, interest other than from the government securities paid to a financial institution, interest paid by a company or associated company, interest paid which is exempt from tax in the hands of the recipient. Now he wants to add, “interest paid by a listed institution”. He is just adding another category of those exempted. This is under 117(2).

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I seek to get a simple example or illustration from the minister in this case where the World Bank, East African Development Bank or IMF would pay interest to a resident person here such that we can understand exactly what you are saying. Can you give us an illustration where for instance IMF can pay interest to a resident Ugandan so that we can understand and appreciate what you are trying to drive at? Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the minister should give us a live example of an instance where the World Bank would have to pay or withhold.

MR OMACH: Where they have issued bonds, for example, on which interest is payable. If you take the East African Development Bank or the African Development Bank, the World Bank issues a bond, which attracts interest. So we are saying that under Section 117, it is an obligation to all persons to withhold taxes. So if they have issued bonds on which interest is payable, they should not be liable to this tax.

MR FUNGAROO: Honourable minister, there was a question asked by hon. Sanjay. There are these international organisations like the World Bank operating in Uganda; in their operations, they consume goods and services supplied to them by Ugandans. These Ugandans supply goods and services to other institutions and pay taxes and the taxes are collected by those institutions, which they supply, and the institutions remit to Uganda Revenue Authority and therefore to Government. 

In this case, if the World Bank is supplying some goods and services, are they not obliged to collect on behalf of the Government of Uganda the taxes from that trading and then remit to Uganda through Uganda Revenue Authority? We would like to get an answer from you. If you take the example of fuel and electricity; if they are supplied, will they not collect the taxes and remit? Thank you.

MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, after the explanation of the honourable minister and after your guidance, I understand the spirit in which this amendment has been crafted. I support the spirit but the wording or drafting leaves a lot of loopholes.

The spirit of this amendment is that if IMF or any of these institutions has lent to the Government of Uganda, many times this lending is at concessional rates and if we are paying them back, then the interest paid shall not be taxed again. So that is the spirit of this amendment, which I appreciate.

Madam Chairperson, if I zero in on my question and what my honourable colleague has just been trying to elaborate, many of these organisations use non-citizens to come and execute contracts. The way the Government of Uganda has been controlling that or earning out of it is by levying withholding tax. If you exempt them fully, then how will we be able to collect that little that we have been collecting? That question still stands, Madam Chairperson.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, maybe we could look at the two sections that we were referred to in the explanation that was given to us; Section 120(1), international payments: “Any person making a payment of the kind referred to in section 83 or 85 shall withhold from the payment the tax levied under the relevant section.” When we go to (3) it says, “This section does not apply where the payment is exempt from tax.” That means if any of these organisations is among the listed, then they are not allowed to pay tax.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, in fact when you look at section 117, you are amending payment of interest on resident persons. Section 120 is on listed institutions. 

If listed institutions are exempted, then they must go to the schedule where they are exempted but not in the main body. When somebody reads the whole law and he reads “international listed institutions, which are exempted”, he will go to the first schedule where the minister wants to put those which are within the Protocol of East Africa. So when you come to that schedule where the listed institutions are, that is where this amendment of the institutions goes.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I am very confused. If we, the lawmakers, do not understand exactly what we are trying to do, just imagine those who are going to implement it. It is this sort of confusion that may lead to litigation from people who do not actually appreciate what we intended to do.

A law should be so clear and those of us who are making this law should be convinced and clear in our minds that this is the mischief, which we intend to cure and this is the objective we intend to achieve. As it is now, Madam Chair, I have been trying to appreciate this amendment in light of the exemption section under the Income Tax Act, the first schedule, and I do not see its relevance. If the minister thinks this thing is so important, then it has to be redrafted. 

I have just been looking at some of the documents coming around from people who are trying to assist us. The law is already clear in the exemptions including the Charter itself. Article 49 of the East African Development Bank Charter, for example, is very clear. We are not achieving anything as of now unless you convince us. As of now, this thing is just confusing. Let the minister go ahead and have it well thought out and you come and we amend it. As of now, personally, I am not convinced.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, may I propose - (Mr Byandala rose_) Have you come with a solution? Minister of Works, do you have a solution?

MR BYANDALA: Madam Chair, as you know, I am an engineer but I also want to try to be a paralegal. (Laughter) What I see on these contracts we sign with the World Bank or all those banks is, “The World Bank...”- you can put another institution there- “...shall also be immune from liability for the collection or payment of any tax or duty.” I think this is what they are trying to cure here because these are the laws governing us.

So, Madam Chairperson, that is why I am thinking that one of the principles of the privileges is not to be obliged to collect the money of the beneficiary for the Government of Uganda. That is what the minister, I think, is trying to do, to follow what is here because we signed that these people are not supposed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what the minister is saying is that the World Bank cannot act as an agent of the Uganda Revenue Authority.

MR BYANDALA: Exactly. That is what they are saying.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, we have photocopies which have come up, and I am sure that this is the only way hon. Byandala has just got a copy. This is the one about these Bretton Woods Agreements. One of them is about IMF. Let me read for you the one for IMF. It says: “Immunity from taxation: the fund, its assets, property, income and its operations and transactions authorised by this agreement shall be immune from all...” - (Interjections) – immune, which is exempt - “...from all taxation and from all custom duties. The fund shall also be immune from liability for the collection or payment of any tax or duty.” That is for IMF. Then the one for World Bank is the same under section 9. 

That means when World Bank makes its profit in Uganda - we are assuming the World Bank branch here had made profit - it would not be subjected to tax. Are you getting it? That is what it means. They are immune. That means the income for World Bank is interest, and whom do they lend to - governments. Now they have lent Government of Uganda money and they want their interest. According to the agreement, they are immune to taxation. That is why they are listed in schedule I of the Income Tax Act. 
 
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification because he just raised something that maybe what we are trying to cure is to avoid a situation where, for instance, the East African Development Bank or the World Bank collects withholding tax on behalf of Government. Is that contained in what you are trying to say? Because they can be immune to taxation but what about them transferring this withholding tax on behalf of Government of Uganda?  

THE CHAIRPERSON: They cannot. From what has been read, actually, they are not obliged. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: They are not obliged anywhere. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: And they should not even –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, that is why in Uganda, we put them under a schedule. If you read very well, “interest paid by these institutions...” - by the way, even now, when will World Bank pay Uganda Government? Already, the agreement says they are not liable to tax. 

So, Mr Engineer of works, the best we can do is if there are any of these institutions missing, we put them under schedule I. If there is anything to be done on anything, you need to go back and educate us for another one year so that we can understand. Failure to do that means we are still having a problem here.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, following the submission from the hon. Abdu Katuntu, maybe we have submitted this in the King’s English and possibly next financial year, we can bring it back in the Queen’s English. So I would like to withdraw the proposed amendment. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we now proceed to clause 7.

Clause 7 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, you remember we left clause 7 at capital gains tax. To begin with, you cannot say, “withholding of capital gains tax”. This section is talking about withholding tax. My argument is that I think we must change the wording. 

I want to propose that for these non-residents who are selling property, they should get a clearance from Uganda Revenue Authority. The reasoning here is that you are going to try to tax somebody on a capital asset which he has been using in Uganda maybe for rental or whatever. Uganda Revenue Authority should be able to assess whether there is capital gains tax or there is withholding tax due. So, I want to propose that we withdraw the whole sentence and say, “A resident person who purchases a commercial building from a non-resident person shall get clearance from Uganda Revenue Authority.”  

The justification is: to ensure that Uganda Revenue Authority can deal with anything, whether tax outstanding or capital gains tax if they are applying capital gains tax, which they can compute accordingly.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala, just hold on. Children wait. Honourable members, there are children sitting there and we have just got to know their identity. They are teachers and students of Mengya Parents Moyok Bright Primary School represented by hon. Lydia Chekwel and hon. Kisos. They are from Kween. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable member, you are saying that you need clearance.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Chair. You cannot say, withholding of capital gains tax. Capital gains tax is a computation; you compute the tax from this property you have held, for example. You may have bought it 30 years ago and now it has appreciated in value. You take into consideration inflation and the value of money and from there you knock off that. If you invested US$ 1,000,000 20 years ago, now it is worth US$ 50 million but you have sold it at US$ 60 million. The difference between the US$ 50 million and US$ 60 million will be the capital gains. 

It is Uganda Revenue Authority that can compute that by setting the system in place. But if you do this and think you are going to withhold on the gross, you are even not taking into consideration the cost of the investment and the value of money due to inflation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We had changed it to net. I think we had removed gross and replaced it with net amount. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, even if you replace it with net, you cannot just say, withholding of capital gains tax. It must be computed. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, the technical people had proposed to us that if the problem is capital gains, then we delete the words “capital gains” in the headnote and say, “withholding of tax by the purchaser of a commercial building.” 

Secondly, the word “gross” stays because the intention is if you want to get tax from a foreign person, how do you compute his tax using the net when you do not have his books yet? So, what they propose is that once somebody comes here and does business, before he leaves this country you must levy taxes on him because you have no time to look into his books because his books are not here. That is the genesis of that clause.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we are talking of a building. You have a cost for the building. You are not talking of his trading activities. Let us say he has constructed a building for US$ 2 million and is selling it at US$ 10 million; of course, the difference between US$ 10 million and the US$ 2 million first of all is on the building. We are not talking of trading; we are talking of a building. You can only talk of gross if his business is trading in properties but this one is not trading in properties.

Secondly, you have not taken into consideration the value of money. What about the inflation? If a man invested 20 years ago and is selling now, are you telling me that the difference between the money of 1960 and now is the same? I don’t think so. 

I think we must be fair to these people. If you do not do this, then these non-residents are not going to sell properties to residents. They might even withhold or they may decide to collude with the buyer and reduce the price and say, “this is what you should declare but I will pay you this”. We do not want that. You know we have made the Anti-Money Laundering law – (Interruption) 

MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, I disagree with my honourable colleague. All over the world, it is good practice that capital gains tax or whatever we want to call it is calculated in the manner it is. For a citizen doing business within Uganda, he can be got through his annual returns, like my honourable colleague notes. 

However, this is specifically for those offshore investors that invest in Uganda, and we have got a lot of that happening now. We have non Ugandans investing in property in Uganda and have no accounts in URA. So, the only way you can get them is when they are going to sell that property. I think the law is in good faith; if you sell your property and you have earned a difference, then pay the Government of Uganda what is due to the Government of Uganda. Therefore, I support the proposal by the committee and the minister in the manner it is and it is good for this country. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Sanjay Tanna, for giving way. I was privileged to have chaired a committee investigating the energy sub-sector, which report we have already submitted here, and the issue of capital gains tax was comprehensively covered. I think this proposal by the committee is a clear testimony that they have been having difficulty. 

In Umeme, shares were sold and URA collected zero tax because the law was not as foresighted as the one being proposed now. So, this really settles it and I would ask, politely, that we concede to allow URA catch these other people who evade the tax.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you backing the proposal by the minister as it is?

MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, I was on the Floor when I allowed the information. To go on further to disagree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi, especially about the value of the currency and value of money and improvements on property, the international laws cater for all that. When we do business, increment in stock value is not actually declared as profit. So, these are business norms that are catered for in good accounting practice. 

Therefore, this piece of legislation or this section in the law that we are trying to pass now is extremely good because it has been contested in the past; URA has had problems especially when these foreign businessmen who have invested in Uganda get profit and take out their profit. They say because Uganda is signatory to the double taxation treaty, they are already paying tax in their country of residence and therefore, they are not entitled to pay tax in Uganda. 

With this law, that is very clear. When the investor is coming in, it shall be clear that when you sell, we will tax you on the appreciation that you shall have gained on the date of sale. So, I strongly support and urge my honourable learned colleague and accountant to concede on this matter. I thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, when hon. Sanjay Tanna brought something up, he even opened my mind again in a different direction. Yes, I want you to understand that if I form company Y and it owns property and I am a non-resident, I will not sell the property; I will only sell the shares. When I sell the shares, I have sold the property of the company – (Interjections)– listen, please. 

I know you do not have the law but I have it. It says, “a resident person who purchases a commercial building”; here, it is limiting. It has not mentioned shares and when hon. Tanna brought that out, it brought in another dimension. So, if we are talking about people selling property, then it should not be a commercial building. It should be something like shares, property or whatever so that you are able to capture – (Interruption) 

MR TANNA: You see, when you register a company in Uganda, then that company is subjected to the taxation laws of Uganda and therefore, they must submit annual returns. Not only annual returns as in accounts but also status of the directors must be submitted annually. So, when you sell those shares, URA will get you because it is still a company and they register an account. This is only specific, honourable colleagues, for these non-residents who have bought properties and are selling and earning an income and not for companies.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we want to amend. I know what hon. Sanjay Tanna has brought and I think he does not have the law, but the non-resident person includes even a company, for your information. A company is also a non-resident person; it is not majorly a human being. 

So, I want to propose that if we are trying to capture that a resident person who purchases assets from a non-resident person shall withhold tax on the gross amount of this, then I think we should make a rate slightly better for favorable terms, maybe at six per cent, so that they do not undervalue. If the tax is high, they will try to undervalue so that they pay less. So, I propose that we move from commercial buildings to assets, and of course assets include, shares, buildings – (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, I was a member of the committee and we interacted with the Minister of Finance. The problem, which is on the ground, is that these are people who come, they do not have accounts here but they come to sell their properties. When they do that, URA is not able to net them and get the tax due to them. So the best way is that if anybody comes as it is here, we must seek a tax clearance from URA so that what is owed is paid. That way, we can cure the problem of those who do not want to pay taxes. 

What has been happening is that people buy commercial buildings and they do not pay taxes because URA has no law. So the best way to get taxes is to make it mandatory for someone to get a tax clearance from URA so that they know that if a tax is due – All these properties are known because there is rental, which you pay and URA registers with them. So if you are selling it, you must get clearance from them so that they get what is owed to them. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think what hon. Nandala is asking for is that instead of the commercial buildings where they are avoiding paying, we consider using “assets”.

MR KAKOOZA: But assets are in different forms – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is the same reason I am asking you: Why are you focusing on commercial buildings? Suppose it is a residential building or a car?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I am talking of commercial buildings because residential buildings are known. (Interjections) Yes, when you list assets, they include your house. (Interjections) What I am trying to say is that by law, when you are selling your building, you might sell it at a loss and it is then tax exempted. However, if it is a commercial building, you are looking at that gain you made with the capital. With a residential building, if you include assets, it is general that even your house will be included and you will pay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the minister who is the mover.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, the heading will now read, “Withholding of tax by the purchaser of a commercial building.” We will eliminate the capital gains part. I will also concede to the amendment raised by the Leader of the Opposition, save for the rates, which will not be mentioned here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So we shall now call them “assets”?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, let it be “assets and shares”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: A share is an asset. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Questioned put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I want to move an amendment on clause 9.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we finished with clause 9.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Chair, but you remember that I raised an issue that we were supposed to go to part (4) and (8)(i) but the issue was on –(Interjections)- oh, so we have to re-commit.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013” and has passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

4.46
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I want to re-commit clause 9(8)(i), where it reads, “The withholding tax applicable for goods and services transaction and for imported goods, under sections 118(a) and 119, is six per cent.”

Madam Speaker, the withholding tax is an advance tax and it is basically meant to get those who are non-compliant taxpayers. If we leave it as it is, we are punishing also those who are tax compliant. I would like to re-commit this so that we add, “six per cent to non-compliant taxpayers”. 

The justification is that the six per cent will be applicable only to non-compliant taxpayers because for those taxpayers who are compliant, there is no need for it. It is like borrowing money from the bank and you lend it to Government, hence reducing on your working capital.

THE SPEAKER: Have you understood his proposal, honourable minister? Yes, hon. Sebunya?

MR SSEBUNYA: I do not know whether it is not a common practice that those people who are tax-compliant are gazetted and that they do not have to pay withholding tax. The experts here will –(Interjections)– please go ahead. 

MR TANNA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The current practice has been that those who are compliant are entirely at the mercy of URA. You apply to URA and then they vet; if you are a good taxpayer, then they give you an exempt on withholding tax. You can thereby present that certificate to the people you do business with so that they do not withhold your tax. However, it is entirely at the mercy of the URA officers since there is no legal framework on the same. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be recommitted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

Clause 9

THE CHAIRPERSON: Repeat your amendment

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, when we say 6 per cent and stop there, it is charged on everybody; whether you have filed returns and are up-to-date with taxes, you would still be subjected to this six per cent. The purpose of the six per cent withholding tax is an advance tax, which is applied to people who may not be compliant, those who do not file their returns and are not up-to-date with their taxes. 

In URA, there are taxes like VAT which require one to file monthly returns of their business; you must file your income tax returns at the end of every financial year and you have to file PAYE on a monthly basis. So the moment somebody is up-to-date with their taxes, PAYE, VAT and income tax, and has filed a return, then such a person is a compliant taxpayer. Such a person should not be left at the mercy of one officer in URA who may say, “I allow” or “I disallow you”. 

So I propose to amend this to say, that the six percent will be applicable to non-compliant taxpayers. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what do you say about the proposal?

MR OMACH: Madam Chair and colleagues, under section 119(5)(f), the supplier or importer who is exempt from tax under this Act or whom the Commissioner has been satisfied has regularly complied with the obligation imposed on the supplier or importer, shall not be subject to this tax. So the proposal that –(Interjections)– it is already provided for in the law; it would be superfluous –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, we are proposing so because whoever has filed income tax returns knows that unless you apply, the onus is upon the Commissioner-General to issue a certificate at the end of the year to everyone who is compliant. 

As you do business, you file your returns. So I bring this to ensure that this is only applicable to non-compliant taxpayers. Short of that, they will always say that you must apply even when you are up-to-date. It should not be like that. The moment I am up-to-date with my tax returns, I should automatically qualify. So this should be applicable to only non-compliant taxpayers. 

Madam Chair, this is a serious matter. Even in the statement, they talk of imported goods, but we also import services. So they should add and say, “imported goods and services”. 

MS ONGOM: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want clarification on the issue to which the Leader of the Opposition is saying that we should not charge those who are compliant. There are situations where organisations or companies comply with these rules, but are cheating the revenue authority. They may have two receipt books and they only compile and submit the ones which are understated. The reality is hidden where the revenue authority may never reach. So how shall we handle such a situation? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I am sorry that our colleague knows such people and has not reported them to URA; this is very dangerous. If you know something like that and have not reported it, then you are part of the tax evasion racket. A compliant taxpayer is cleared until URA establishes that that person has evaded tax. That is when they cease to be compliant. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, what do you say about this amendment?

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, I implore my friend and colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, to withdraw the proposed amendment. Even under the current arrangement where we are using e-tax, it automatically shows who is compliant without people having to apply. So the revenue authority is already implementing this and the way it is proposed in the Bill is more appropriate. So I request that he withdraws it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, the good thing is that the Minister of Finance does not know what we are talking about because he is busy in his office and is not in business. You can only be exempted from the six per cent if you have got a letter from the Commissioner-General. We want to eliminate the issue of a letter; why should you subject me to a letter when I am up-to-date? 

It is very dangerous for them to give a letter. We are trying to eliminate the idea of giving a letter to taxpayer “A” and leaving out “B”. Unless you want to amend the part where the Commissioner-General has to certify compliance, then I would have no problem with it. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, I understand what the Leader of the Opposition is saying, but this is part of the powers of the Commissioner-General. So it is at the discretion of the Commissioner-General to certify that a customer is compliant. One may be compliant today and not tomorrow. 

MR TANNA: Madam Chair, on this one, I support the Leader of the Opposition. I think the honourable minister and the chair of the committee have not understood what we are trying to say here; let me shade some more light. 

What happens is, I am a regular taxpayer and I submit all my taxes at the end of the year, and the following year, I continue doing business, I supply to big companies. The problem here is that these multi-national companies, once your cheque is more than Shs 1 million, they reduce six percent from it. The law provides that I can then swap that six per cent value against my annual income tax, my corporate tax. So if I am taxed, say Shs 10 million at the end of the year and the accrued six per cent is Shs 8 million, then I can offset that Shs 8 million against the Shs 10 million and pay only Shs 2 million. 

Now, the problem is getting a receipt from URA of the six per cent from that person you have supplied to is almost impossible in the current scenario, and getting an exemption letter from URA is equally hard. Therefore, the question on the Floor now is: can the honourable minister explain to us how this system can be streamlined if we are to support the current form it is in? 

He has now told us that under the e-tax system, it is easily reflected and we can easily access the exempt certificates or the receipts can be electronically generated so that if my six per cent is reduced at source, then I get the receipt.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, why don’t you just move an amendment so that we finish with this?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we need the six per cent but only for non-compliant taxpayers. He has said a receipt, but that is not the issue mostly. One can get a receipt of one year but to have a business, which generates more than six per cent on gross, means one must be smuggling.

If Government is already withdrawing six per cent from you and your profit is not even close to six per cent, where are you? So you are keeping money in the coffers of government. You may have acquired a loan and at the end of the year, you have made a profit, which is minimal, and even the tax you are going to pay cannot cover the money you have left. So, Madam Chairperson –(Interruption)

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, hon. Nandala. I am seeking clarification because a good law must be universal. You are proposing that we insert the provision for six per cent for non-compliance, but is this a penalty or a tax?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, when you look at the third schedule and the rate for those who are transacting business, that means when you put a condition, it becomes different. If I transact business and I am within that rate of application of income tax, the rates are stipulated for resident individuals and non-residents. So URA will use this law to apply whatever is gained or lost. If they find that the withholding tax is more than what they are demanding from you, they will pay you back. It is already catered for in the third schedule.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The honourable member has asked me a question as to whether it is a penalty or an advance tax payment. You have lent government money in advance and when you lend money in advance, it is a penalty because that money should have earned interest, but since you have given government and you are not getting anything, you have lost. The opportunity cost is the interest and losing your money.

So the argument we are putting up is that for those who are up-to-date - By the way, if you are up-to-date this year and next year you are not up-to-date, automatically the system will put you off because they will say you do not have your returns up-to-date. So we are trying to cure this business of allowing one individual to determine that you should not pay withholding tax and allowing another one to pay. Why do you penalise me who is up-to-date with my records and at the same time you are charging the one who is not up-to-date the same rate? That is the argument we are putting across.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are saying you do not like the discretion of the Commissioner-General over this matter?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the discretion of the commissioner is very important in the sense that the moment someone does not file returns, you have already become non-compliant. This is because nowadays with e-tax, which the minister talked about, the system will indicate that you are not up-to-date and the moment you are not up-to-date, you are non-complaint. What we are trying to bring out is that there is a letter always issued to you but the system should do it.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I thought I was tall enough for the minister to see me. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, when you continue to explain, it gives me the impression that we actually do not need the amendment. 

I said yesterday, and I am glad to say it today, nobody wants to pay tax. The moment you question the discretion or the powers of a tax collector, you are weakening that tax collector. When you try to distinguish between compliant and non-compliant, you are actually defeating the purpose of the discretionary powers that the Commissioner-General has. Whoever would love to benefit from that has to remove the Commissioner-General. 

I find that the current provision is sufficient and it would not even require the distinction that six per cent be applicable to those who are non-compliant because nobody wants to pay tax, including those who do business. It especially makes it difficult for those who are doing business and they are the ones advancing this proposal for amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and negatived.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013” and has passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

5.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2013”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

5.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the object of this Bill is to amend the Excise Tariff Act to provide for excise duty, value added services, incoming international call services, money transfer services and to replace the schedule prescribing the rates of excise duty payable under the Act and for related methods. I beg to move.

5.09
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Anthony Okello): Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2013. 

The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2013 was read for the first time on 24 July 2013 and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for scrutiny. The committee has, in accordance with rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, scrutinised the Bill and now presents its findings to the House. 

The committee held consultative discussions with the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Uganda Revenue Authority, the Leaf Tobacco and Commodities (U) Ltd and the Uganda Alcohol Industry Association. Their submissions informed the content of this report.

The Object of the Bill 

The object of the Bill is to amend the Excise Tariff Act Cap.338: 
    (a) To provide for excise duty on value added services, incoming international call services, money transfer services; 
    (b) To vary the rate of excise duty payable on:
    i. Cigarettes: Excise duty on cigarettes whose local content is over 70 percent of its constituents has been increased by 45.5 percent.
    ii. Undenatured spirits: Excise duty on imported undenatured spirits has been increased from 70 percent to 140 percent. 
    iii. Non-alcoholic beverages; and
    iv. Fuel: 
    • Petrol and diesel: tax on each litre increased by Shs50 (petrol from Shs 850 to Shs 900 and diesel from Shs 530 to 580).
    • Excise duty on kerosene has been reinstated at Shs 200 per litre. Tax had been removed two years ago.

Observations by the committee

Statement to justify new fiscal policy

The committee observes that most of these tax measures are not backed by research studies on the implications of measures taken. This fact is evidenced by the minister’s submission to the committee, reconsidering her own tax proposals, for example, on undenatured spirits, VAT on hotels, and VAT on the supply of goods and services to the contractors of hydro-power projects.

The committee reiterates its recommendation made last year to the effect that tax related Bills should always be accompanied by a detailed research report to justify the new fiscal policy. This position is akin to clause 11 of the Public Finance Bill, 2013 which seeks to mandate the minister to supply detailed information on fiscal developments and forecasts for a given period. 

Excise duty on undenatured Spirits

Clause 3 seeks to increase the rate of duty on undenatured spirits from Shs 2, 000 per litre or 80 percent to Shs 4,000 per litre or 140 percent. This presents an 100 percent increase in the tax payable.

The Uganda Alcohol Industry Association petitioned the committee and made the following submissions:
1. 	Loss of revenue: that when the price of the local spirit is increased as a result of the increase in tax, it becomes more expensive and unattractive to consumers. The companies therefore were concerned about loss of revenue.

2. 	Increased importation of finished spirits: That since the excise duty on finished imported spirits has been maintained at 70 percent, this means that it becomes cheaper to manufacture spirits outside Uganda and then export into Uganda.

3. 	Increased smuggling of finished products: That the increase in excise duty reduces the working capital of the companies and results in shortage of locally produced finished products. This shortage encourages smuggling.

4. 	Increase in untaxed spirits: Increase in price of refined spirits will discourage their purchase and rather encourage consumption of locally produced spirits whose manufacturers do not pay tax.
The minister also informed the committee that Government had reconsidered its decision on this proposal. The ministry contends that charging 140 percent on undenatured spirits which is a raw material will complicate tax administration. Most genuine manufacturers of spirits will always be in a refund position on the final product.


On the basis of the above, the committee agrees with the minister’s proposal to revise the rate to 100 percent or Shs 2500 per litre whichever is higher. The justification is that there is no direct revenue loss arising from this revision because importers who are registered for excise duty are entitled to a rebate when filing returns on their output manufactured from imported undenatured spirits since the duty on local spirits is 80 percent.

Increased excise duty on cigarettes
Clause 3 items 1 (a),(b) and (c) seeks to increase the rate of duty on cigarettes as follows:
    a) Soft cup (whose local content is more than 70 percent of its constituents) from Shs 22,000 per 1,000 sticks to Shs 32,000 per 1,000 sticks. 
    b) Other soft cup from Shs 25,000 per 1,000 sticks to Shs 35,000 per 1,000 sticks
    c) Hinge lid from Shs 55,000 per 1,000 sticks to Shs 69,000 per 1,000 sticks.

These cigarettes have been categorised according to the packaging. The soft cup whose local content is more than 70 percent, for instance, is in a soft pack and opens by tearing. The cover cannot be replaced after tearing; for example, Super match or Sportsman. And when we talk of “other soft cup” this implies those types of cigarettes that are imported into the country. Hinge lid are hard packs with opening and closing options. So it is about packaging, Madam Speaker. 

In the previous years, there has been a 5 to 10 percent steady increase in the tax imposed. Clause 3 now proposes to increase tax payable by over 45 percent.

Leaf Tobacco & Commodities (U) Ltd petitioned the committee and made the following submissions:
1. 	Leaf Tobacco & Commodities (U) Ltd is the only Company manufacturing cigarettes in Uganda at the moment. 

2. 	Other companies like BAT(U) have relocated to Kenya and now only export unprocessed tobacco leaf which is tax free. 

3. 	The company currently employs over 14,000 people. A 45 percent increase in tax is too drastic a measure and causes serious economic imbalances and the company is bound to lay off several workers.

4. 	The company has invested worth $20 million in Northern Uganda to add value to tobacco before export.

5. 	That dumping of cigarettes to the country through porous borders has increased. Several cigarettes supposedly in transit to neighbouring countries like South Sudan and Congo end up on the Ugandan market.
6. 	That smuggling of the company’s product “Super match” has not been contained.

7. 	That the proposals do not distinguish between a locally made product and an imported finished product with a view of protecting local investment. 

The committee has examined the above submissions and makes the following observations:
1. 	There is need to promote local investment and also preserve employment opportunities for workers. 
2. 	Taxes should be increased progressively. This allows the local companies and those who directly and indirectly earn from tobacco to seek alternative jobs and sources of revenue gradually.
3. 	Higher taxes will encourage people to smuggle illegal cigarettes and avoid paying the taxes.
4. 	If it is a government policy to discourage smoking, import duty on imported tobacco should be very high to discourage further importation of cigarettes and other tobacco products into the country.
5. 	Government should introduce a tax or save on the tobacco leaf (unprocessed tobacco) which is being exported free of tax to neighbouring countries. It is important to note that this leaf is imported back into the country as a finished product and is increasingly becoming cheaper on the local market, thereby pushing our own local producers out of the market while encouraging foreign companies to flourish. 

Madam Speaker, the committee will make appropriate amendments in line with the above observations. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the committee. Members of the committee will not contribute. 

5.22
MS EVELYNE KABUULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Committee on Finance for the report. I would like to start by reminding the committee that Uganda signed and ratified the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, which is the world’s first global public health treaty, in 2007. This treaty provides a set of legally binding measures to be implemented, which include, among others, the issue of adopting tax and price measures to reduce tobacco consumption. 

Under the committee’s observations and recommendations, they say that higher taxes will encourage people to smuggle illegal cigarettes and avoid paying tax. According to the World Bank report of 2012, it was demonstrated that levels of smuggling tend to increase with the degree of corruption in a country, not by taxes. If we want to handle smuggling of cigarettes, let us talk about fighting corruption; it is nothing to do with taxes. 

We are looking for money, we want to step up the resource envelope, but we cannot be talking of reducing a tax yet on the other hand we are talking of increasing the resource envelope. If we are reducing tax from 45.5 per cent to 15 per cent, that is a reduction of 29.5 per cent on soft cup. Even if you increase on other soft cup by 8 per cent and hinge lid by 5 per cent, the two that you have kept up, add up to 13 per cent –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Focus on the taxes. You have one minute. 

MS KAABULE: This is quite contentious. First of all, there are two issues involved here; there is an issue of revenue and there is the issue of public health. You want to reduce tax on the locally produced cigarettes and that is going to encourage our school children to become cool by smoking. They are going to get more Kuber, they are going to get more shisha, and more of those. So, if you want to reduce the health burden on Uganda, please increase taxes on even the locally produced cigarettes.  

5.25
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to support the committee’s recommendation No. 5, where they say that Government will introduce a tax on the tobacco leaf. I support this 100 per cent; it is something, which should have been done yesterday and not today. 

Government should not only look at getting revenue but must also look at the health of the people. I come from an area where climate changes. All our trees have been cut down to cure tobacco and this is a very big problem. Secondly, there are a number of cancer deaths that we get in that region that are a result of tobacco. 

Thirdly, even though people have been growing tobacco for all those centuries, we are the most poor in this country. Now, what is the impact of tobacco for the people? If I had authority, I would recommend that tobacco growing be stopped in Uganda because it really has no economic impact. Instead, it has made my people very poor. They are the poorest in this country and they are so –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, the issue of tobacco is really of concern to me. There are people saying that it is creating employment opportunities but what I know is that you can get money out of any crop grown in this country; it is not only tobacco. 

In my place, where tobacco is grown, when it is time for harvesting the men force the women and their children to sleep down and they pack the tobacco in the beds and cover it with a blanket because if you do not do all that, you will not get good quality tobacco. At the end of the day, the women may even get miscarriages because of the nicotine from the tobacco – (Member timed out.)

5.28
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you very much, for this opportunity. Madam Speaker, I would like to start by observing that amongst the people that the committee met, they should have also consulted with civil society organisations and NGOs that are fighting against tobacco. From such meetings, they would have known the advantages and disadvantages of tobacco. It is unfortunate that the committee based their argument on revenue for the country and on employment opportunities. 

I would like to inform you that I also come from a region of tobacco growers. Those who labour in the tobacco industry are the women and the children and this really affects Government policies of USE and UPE. Children are burdened and they are just in the fields. It has made people very poor because tobacco depletes soil. The issue of destruction of the environment has been mentioned already. So, I really think that we should uphold the tax that has been initiated by the ministry. 

If Leaf Tobacco decided to close up their industry in Uganda, it would even be better because for every US$ 1 dollar you get from tobacco you spend three times more to treat cancers. That means that Government is spending a lot of our revenue on treating people who are affected by tobacco. (Member timed out.)

5.30
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, I have got a few concerns with this committee’s work. First of all, when you go to the method of work, the committee claims to have met with the Minister of Finance, Uganda Revenue Authority, Leaf Tobacco and Commodities Limited and Uganda Alcohol Industry Association. They do not mention BAT, which is also an interested party.

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the colleague holding the Floor. I am a member of the finance committee and it is in our mandate – of course, we meet those who come to us and we have a fixed timeframe within which we operate. It was not our fault that BAT did not come to meet us as a committee within the said timeframe.  

When Leaf Tobacco and Commodities got to know we were in the process of discussing this, they came. So, Madam Speaker, it is not our fault that BAT did not come to meet the committee in time. That is the information I want to give you.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, before me, I have a letter written by BAT to the members of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 5 September 2013. They gave their version of grievances as far as this tax is concerned. So, I think the committee should have exhibited fairness in meeting different concerned parties. 

To show that this committee was biased – because we have to be clear – when you see what brings out the bias within the committee –(Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My friend, hon. Ruhunda, is a Member of Parliament for Fort Portal Municipality and that is the way we know him. Now he is telling us that he is holding a letter written by BAT to the finance committee. Is it in order for the Member of Parliament for Fort Portal Municipality to turn himself into a messenger of BAT? 

More so, BAT knows the committee of Parliament to address its concerns. Is the hon. Ruhunda in order to divulge the contents of a letter that has not been laid on the Table?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that the public is entitled to send their messages through anyone who can speak for them. I have not even heard what the contents of the letter are, so I cannot rule on it.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am giving information to the honourable member. I was approached a few days ago by civil society organisations that carry out anti-tobacco campaigns. They complained that they attempted to meet the committee but they were not given an opportunity. Actually, they had a petition, which I helped them to forward to your office, through your assistant. So, maybe the committee should explain to us because as Parliament, we should give an opportunity to all interested parties. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, sometimes I have seen the Clerk to Parliament publish announcements in the press that such and such a Bill or important piece of work is before a committee and stakeholders with interest are called upon to appear before it with memoranda. So, maybe the message to the committee is that once we are handling Parliament business, we should give opportunity to all those who are interested before we submit a report.

MR MICHAEL AYEPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the committee. It is indeed true that BAT wrote a letter and I also have a copy here. However, they met the members when we had already signed the report and they did not petition; it was only Leaf Tobacco that petitioned the committee, that they wanted to present themselves before the committee. So, BAT came when the committee had concluded its work. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural issue. Those letters they are talking about, if many of you say you have not received them, you are lying to yourselves. I have also received letters both from BAT and Leaf Tobacco and Commodities. 

There are two companies in Uganda that deal in tobacco. Now, it would have been fair if the committee gave both companies audience. Even if you had signed the report, it would have been very important for you to listen to BAT too; that would have been fairness. If you got new information, you would change. I will also agree that there was some bias because – 

THE SPEAKER: Is that information, hon. Nandala?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right, when you know that there are two competitors for you to listen to only one of them?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is only fair to invite the players and discuss with them. Let us hear from the committee chairperson.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I think members should listen to this: First of all, we put up an advert in the newspapers for everybody who has issues with the taxes to appear before the committee. The advert was placed in most papers, not only in the New Vision but I think also in the Monitor and others.

Secondly, we have met stakeholders from all the fields on the taxes that we have had, but some have not appeared. Concerning some taxes, there was no response from any stakeholder. This time, we had been meeting regularly with BAT over taxes, even when I was not the committee chair. They would meet us at leisure, even without any tax policy introduced by Government, if they wanted to inform us on anything. 

However, this time –(Interjections)– I am giving information then you will ask for clarification. (Interjections) Let me first give information to Members, please. This time, surprisingly, we only received one stakeholder from that industry and the Members listened to the company that appeared before us and made their conclusions because we were time-barred – after two weeks, we were supposed to close business.

Now, on the last day, BAT appeared and we asked them, “Where have you been?” They said, “We did not receive messages” and we said, “We are not the ones to approach you because we have no interest; this is a law and the law has no eyes.” So, they complained to us and then I gave them time to appear before the committee. That very morning when we had called members to sign the report, I told them that members had reached a conclusion and were signing reports. I said, “Give your information to them; if they feel they should change their report, they can do so”.

So, they came to the committee - the Members are here – and they listened to them and they said, “we are too late”. We asked how they got the information from the committee yet we were still deliberating on the issue, and they said they have friends among us. We said, “okay, since you have friends, then this is not the last stage of the deliberations; come to the Floor through your friends and argue your case on the Floor of Parliament.” So, this is the time for Members to make their input on the tax. 

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is not a procedural question but information that is vital. As West Nile Parliamentary Group, we invited BAT; hon. Huda can bear me witness. They met us as West Nile Parliamentary Group, representing tobacco growers. We defined our dos and don’ts and we agreed on very many things. 

Therefore, for the chairperson to purport to give information that they invited BAT and they did not cooperate or that they came on the last day leaves a lot to be desired. Those people are very co-operative; they have always attended our meetings with due diligence. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural issue. The evidence before us is crystal clear to the effect that the judgement was passed without listening to the other party. Natural justice demands that both parties to the matter be heard and be accorded equal opportunity and time. 

The chairperson of the committee said they met with BAT. Hon. Ruhunda said there is no evidence that they met BAT from their methodology. So, the procedural issue here is whatever Leaf Tobacco said was taken as gospel truth; for example, they said that they have 14,000 employees. Uganda Revenue Authority will bail us out; it is not possible that there is any tobacco company in this country that employs 14,000 people. What can be true in this case could be that this Leaf Tobacco could be having farmers that work with them to make up the 14,000, but certainly not employees. In any case, there should be evidence from URA. 

The issue of procedure that I seek is whether it would be procedurally right to continue considering this report knowing well that other parties – there is evidence; I even have a letter from BAT from which I get the information contrasting this. 

Taxation is a matter of equity; taxation is a matter of reason. When you look at the amendments which we are about to go to, Madam Speaker, we would not be fair to proceed with this matter without having the input of BAT.

5.44
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Rose Namayanja): Madam Speaker, before we get the information or anything else, the committee discharged its obligation by publishing in the media. Under no circumstances is the committee required to solicit beyond publishing in the media. So, for us to imagine that if they did not receive any other people, they were supposed to write and invite them is expecting much because it is not in our Rules of Procedure. 

Madam Speaker, the committee discharged its obligations and they assumed that these people – (Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Information is misinforming this House on matters of a committee, which she does not sit on. When talking of equity, the Minister of Information is insinuating that it is okay for some Ugandans and stakeholders to be left out just because there was an advert in one paper. We do not know when the advert was run, we do not know where it was done; is that in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think I have a hard solution on this one, but we are dealing with issues of taxes and these are issues that will affect employment and production. We need to take a decision on how to handle it; otherwise, we may revert to the minister’s proposals and look at it next year. 

5.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, the committee has presented its report to the plenary. It is up to the plenary, during the Committee of Supply, to accept or reject the amendment that they want to make. As the Ministry of Finance, we propose to reject the amendment – (Applause) - because if we accept it, we are likely to lose in excess of Shs 3.5 billion, which will affect revenue. So, I propose that when we get to committee stage, we can deal with this issue squarely. 

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek guidance as well. Like I said, I am a member of the committee. These are tax Bills; they are gazetted in the newspapers. Those who felt that they would be affected by these Bills came to the committee – (Interjections) – I am standing on a point of guidance –(Interruption)

MR ISABIRYE: Madam Speaker, hon. Ssasaga has said he is a member of the committee but he even objected to the report because he never signed it. Is he, therefore, in order to guide us on a report he refused to sign?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need to strike a balance in the way we do our work in committees. I am a vice-chairperson of a committee. I was confronted with a situation where an accounting officer refused to appear before the Public Accounts Committee. He said he is answerable to the President. We went further and wrote our report and then he came. So, we asked ourselves, “what do we do?” We gave him an opportunity but he did not show up and now he is coming. We said, “okay for the interest of justice, let us allow him to appear”, but we sent a strong message regarding this.

On the other hand, one of the requirements of processing a Bill is that you gazette it, and I believe there is a gazette notice where this Bill was gazetted. Two, it was accompanied with an advert, from what I have heard. In striking a balance between the way a committee of Parliament must operate and natural justice, maybe we can create time for BAT. 

Madam Speaker, with your guidance, you could direct that BAT appears before the committee. (Interjections) I know honourable members are very courteous that when another Member is speaking, one must listen. That is how I understand the term “honourable.” We want to strike a balance between how committees must operate and public interest. 

On one hand, if you just move a motion to throw away this report, of course there is a committee, which must serve Parliament. I think it does no harm if you directed, Madam Speaker, that the party, which did not have an opportunity to appear before this committee, be given an opportunity. They should appear before the committee so that their views are accommodated because that is the import of this. What we want to achieve out of this is not to say that we have thrown out a committee report; it does not add up and even goes against the morale of the committee to work. 

If a mistake has been made, we can rectify it by ordering that these people appear before the committee and they write another report. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.52
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to my honourable colleague. On the onset, I would like to stress that I am anti-tobacco; I campaign against consumption of tobacco. 

We must be extremely careful as Members of Parliament. Two things; one, we must not allow multinationals to come and use us to serve their interests. I urge my honourable colleagues, and I repeat, to desist from becoming agents of multinationals. I want us to be very cautious. I have not mentioned anybody’s name –(Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am an elected Member of Parliament who has been listening to the Government policy that encourages investors to come to this country. When we get investors into this country, they must have a condusive environment within which they operate, and these investors pay taxes. 

Is the honourable member in order to come and insinuate to this House that some Members of Parliament elected by the people are serving the interest of multinational companies, when in the real sense we are coming here to look at a tax that is paid by both local and international companies? Is that honourable member in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the laws we make are for the whole country; they are for everybody. We are not making them in secret. So, I do not see any problem with people coming to inform Members that there is a problem here because it will affect them.

MR TANNA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. To go to the point, like hon. Mwiru and the Minister for Information said, the Bills were gazetted and an advert was put in place. This committee sat down to talk about incoming international call services, money transfer services but they do not talk of anybody who appeared regarding those issues, and the chairman clarified on that. They go ahead to talk about taxes on fuel and none of the fuel companies came. 

When you look at the contentious matter, the Leaf Tobacco company came. It presented its issues and these were deliberated in the committee. When these issues were deliberated and the committee came up with a report, a second person then wakes up and says that there is something that has gone amiss and, therefore, we must now move to correct it –(Interjections)- Yes, let us look at things in perspective.

I would like to raise two issues –(Mr Ssasaga rose_)- Honourable colleague, I will take your information but let me raise the two issues. You were part of the committee, hon. Ssasaga. Please, allow me to raise my issues.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssasaga, please, sit. This is your report.

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, to substantiate what I have said, the committee goes ahead to reduce taxes on cigarettes that are manufactured locally vis-à-vis the proposal of the minister. It goes ahead to increase taxes on cigarettes that are imported and manufactured outside Uganda. Who does the report favour? The report favours a company that is manufacturing locally and is providing employment and paying taxes locally and disfavours a company that decided to shift its entire operations to Kenya.

Let us look at this in perspective of the report. This company decided to shift its entire operations and is using a loophole in the tax regimen where you can export raw tobacco out of this country, process it in Kenya and bring it as cigarettes back to Uganda and compete against a company that is manufacturing cigarettes locally. 

Honourable colleagues, let us look at things in perspective. (Mr Oboth rose_)I will take his information as he is refusing me to conclude.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Tanna. Persistence overcomes resistance. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Tanna has put it very clearly and that is the case I stand for. The very reason that there is one party who is not favoured should be the reason why that party should have been locked out. You cannot make a judgement where you know there are only two people. It would be different if there were many fuel dealers but here we are talking about two competitors and you favour one and –(Interjections)–  Madam Speaker, can I complete?

THE SPEAKER: Can we have a way forward, please?

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the way forward would be –(Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel offended. I am a member of the committee and I know we did our best as a committee within our mandate and within the timeframe we had.

When we finished the committee report, BAT came up. When they realised that we have put a tax on the tobacco leaf, they wanted to operate from outside Uganda, in Kenya, take our tobacco leaf free without a tax and outcompete anybody who comes for this in Uganda. Because of that, Madam Speaker- (Interjections) - I am going to the point of order.  Because of that, they came up wanting to influence the committee and as a committee, we said no.  

So, is the member in order to say that we, members of the committee, favoured one company against another? We stood our ground and said we cannot be compromised. Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately, I did not have the background to how the committee operated, so I cannot rule on that. I want a way forward. Let us have a way forward, please. We need to move. We have understood and now we want the way forward. 

6.00
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa West, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I would not want this House to reduce this debate - a debate on taxation of cigarettes - to competition. When you talk about taxation of cigarettes, you must think about the hundreds of people lying now in the Cancer Institute because of cigarette smoking. That is what we think about. Let no one be confused by the competition in this industry. Let us open the debate. You tax these people not because of anything but to make sure that you discourage smoking.

Now, before I give the way forward, one of the reasons why people are anxious about this report is because of some of the facts stated here. We would not mind if people can meet anybody they want, but if you use the facts stated, which are not correct, to convince the House to make a decision, that becomes dangerous. Leaf Tobacco says it is employing 14,000 people. If we went to URA now, can we find the Pay As You Earn returns of 14,000 people? Can we find it now? We cannot. 

However, let me tell you friends that the way forward, I suggest, is to let us continue the debate and we go to the committee stage. Now that the minister has a position, we can take the position of the minister and we move forward. These other issues will be sorted out. 

6.02
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like hon. Bahati has said, we should not reduce ourselves to be between supporters of BAT and Leaf Tobacco. We are going to raise technical arguments in the debate. 

Let me raise just two issues. There is a lot of politics between the tobacco companies themselves, but also there is an anti-tobacco campaign. Hon. Bahati talked about the information we have. This House approved a motion, which I moved, to seek leave of the House to introduce a private Member’s Bill on tobacco control. So, I am fairly versed with tobacco control issues. I can authoritatively state, for instance, that the number of employees by Leaf Tobacco is 80 and not 14,000 as presented –(Interjections)- 

I think the win-win position in this is that we are going to argue that we support the minister and uphold the estimates and proposals proposed by the minister to this House. If there are any other discussions, we could wait for the next financial year. For now, the win-win position, which would satisfy the different companies, would be to maintain what the minister has proposed. That will also satisfy the civil society organisations that are in the ant-tobacco campaign. That would satisfy the situation and we shall be debating along those lines when the debate comes.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that is really what I had said earlier, that let us revert to the minister’s position because it is neutral. Of course, now because of the lobby from the activists, the lobby for “end smoking” etc, I think we should focus just on the taxes. I want to put the question that this Bill be read for a second time and then we go to committee and address it from there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I am not against- (Interjections) – Give me a chance. I am very happy that the committee has given me the figures I was looking for. I will give an example. The previous tax on cigarettes on soft cup was 70 per cent, which was Shs 22,000, and the other one was Shs 25,000. What the minister did was to get Shs 10,000 and add it to each. That was not the right way because if you are increasing, the best way to increase is by the percentage. 

If you are saying you want the bare minimum to be Shs 10,000 or Shs 22,000, then the percentage of Shs 22,000 to Shs 10,000 is the one we should apply on the others across but not a bare absolute figure to be added. That is where I am going to make a proposal. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Are there any other issues?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The other thing, Madam Speaker, is that the committee has a very good issue. Why does BAT take tobacco leaf and we do not protest here? I think at the committee stage, we should propose a tax on the export of our leaf. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Is there any issue on the spirits? Spirits now and not tobacco.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We have kerosene.

6.06
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to talk about the excise duty that has been levied on kerosene and the reinstating of Shs 200 per litre, a tax which was removed two years ago. 

The issue is that most of our rural people out there use kerosene. In the slums, in urban municipalities, people use kerosene for lighting their houses. Now, to reintroduce this tax on kerosene after two years is punishing the rural people directly, the majority of whom are very poor.

The argument from the minister and the URA is that kerosene is being used to dilute petrol and diesel by the dealers. If you know very well that the dealers are using kerosene to dilute petrol and diesel, you put measures to deter them, measures to ensure that they do not dilute it. You do not punish the over 90 per cent of the poor population that are still using kerosene for lighting just because some middle men and rich people who are business people are dealing in petrol are diluting petrol with kerosene. 

Madam Speaker, I want to stand and be counted as somebody who is opposing this. (Interruption)

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I want to give to my honourable colleague is that kerosene is not only used in rural areas; even in Kampala City we have many people who use kerosene for lighting. Thank you very much and I support you.  

MS AMONGI: Thank you. Therefore, I would wish to request the honourable minister to reconsider his position on this tax because the majority of the people using this are very poor. If you had actually come up with a – (Interjection)- I am being told that actually if you go to Jonam County, you will find majority of the people who are going to the local market will sell – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank the honourable colleague. The information I want to give you to further weaken the argument advanced by the minister is that if Uganda National Bureau of Standards is facilitated and it does its work, the issue of adulterating petrol or diesel using paraffin would not arise. Therefore, the justification that there should be tax on paraffin because the dealers of petrol and diesel use it to adulterate falls along the way.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Betty Amongi. We should look at the Shs 200, which they put per litre; we should look at it this way. You know that in this country, everybody must contribute to a service that he gets. Shs 200 is going to generate Shs 15 billion in this financial year and we have been urging that to extend services, people must pay taxes. I can imagine a person who does not contribute to anything in this country because of Shs 200 but wants a service. We made a mistake –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Madam Speaker, thank you. I rise on a point of order. We are discussing increases in taxes and more especially to the rural poor; you know the people who use paraffin and not only paraffin, by the way, but even water.  We are asking that we go slow on that; is that the reason for hon. Kakooza to say that we completely have some people who do not contribute to taxes or to services in the country? 

Are you in order to say that, when we pay taxes on everything which we get from the shops? These rural people buy things from the shops; even airtime, by the way, it is the consumers who pay a lot of taxes on it and even matchboxes. Are you in order to say that we do not pay tax?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is not fair to say that the ordinary people do not contribute anything. They do contribute to many things. Let us find another way of putting it but not to say that they do not contribute. They do contribute. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Mr Kakooza rose_) - I have given you permission for information, I think let me conclude. I have now denied you the information –(Laughter)

Madam Speaker, if the minister had reduced taxes on, for example, solar energy and made solar energy very cheap for the local people to afford and probably come up with a procedure and a framework within which solar energy can reach the local people –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The information I want to give hon. Betty Amongi is that LPG – the gas which we, Members of Parliament, use is not taxed. The gas we use at our homes is not taxed but the one of the peasant, the poor woman in the village, is taxed. 

I want to give you information because I am a fuel dealer. If the minister thinks he is going to reduce on adulteration just because he has increased the tax, then that is a lie because a litre of paraffin is now at Shs 2,750 and the one they use basically on diesel is Shs 3,150. There is already motivation of Shs 400 per litre for somebody to adulterate the fuel so that he can sell diesel. 

I want to warn you people who use cars. Do not go to these petrol stations where they say the price is very low. Go to Nandala’s where the price is right. (Laughter) The information I am giving my sister is that this will not avoid the mixing. So, what we have to do is for UNBS to continue doing its work because we have funded them. 

Saying that a poor person does not pay tax is wrong; even if you died in Mulago, they will carry you on a pickup and the pickup would have consumed petrol and that petrol costs Shs 900 per litre in taxes; so, even dead people pay tax. So, I want to agree with my sister, hon. Betty Amongi, that Shs 200 will not stop people from mixing diesel with paraffin. But if you removed the Shs 200, you will be helping that poor person who uses paraffin. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am grateful that even the Leader of the Opposition, a dealer, has made it very clear that the gas that we use in our homes and the money we earn is really incomparable to even the civil servants. 

I am talking about the rural poor. If we cannot pay tax on gas and the rural poor in urban areas are being levied tax on what is very crucial - By the way, when a woman gets up at home to carry any produce to the market, first on the budget is sauce, paraffin and a matchbox. So, I oppose this Shs 200 and I want the minister to drop it. I appeal to the House to support it. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the minister to respond to the issue of kerosene and gas. Why don’t you tax the rich? Why don’t you tax the gas to raise that Shs 200, which you want or why don’t you tax Uganda Waragi?

6.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want first of all to appreciate your concerns. I want to reason that it is not true that this measure that is opposed by you, honourable members, will lead to price increase and undermine the welfare of the people. 

History shows that in 2010/2011 before kerosene was exempted from tax, the average price was Shs 2,236; in 2011/2012 when kerosene was exempted from excise duty, the average price remained the same and the market price at that time was at about Shs 2,800 by the end of June 2013. Adulterated fuel, which we are talking about, also damages car engines, which imposes an indirect extra maintenance cost to the people of Uganda and Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, hon. Aston Kajara is my very good friend and he knows it very well. We have paid money to the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. This country has got leadership, and you know it. People are adulterating fuel with paraffin. These are not poor but rich guys and you are not controlling them. Some of you own petrol stations and even some people on the front bench have got petrol stations. 

Madam Speaker, is the minister in order to tell us that you must suffocate my mother in the village by imposing a tax on paraffin and also imposing tax on this UPE teacher whom you have failed to get money for? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have alternative ways of raising this money?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I was just stating a fact; fuel that is adulterated damages car engines. I was also continuing to say that oil dealers in East Africa are determined to keep prices high in order to avoid adulteration. In Kenya, the price of paraffin – 

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The minister is on the Floor when there is a contentious issue of increase of taxes on kerosene in Uganda where the rural dwellers use it as a major source of lighting. I am raising this point of order because the minister knows very well that UNBS is no longer in charge of fuel. I sit on the Committee on Trade and I know what happens. 

Is it in order for the minister to continue without even clarifying the fact that UNBS is no longer in charge? (Interjection) No, it was an administrative instruction, and I think the minister should clarify to the House. Is it in order for you to continue when people are confused as to who checks this fuel in order to pass the quality and standard, and everyone assumes it is UNBS? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, who is in charge of that? If there is no one in charge then it is a very serious problem. Let us hear from the businessmen like hon. Tanna.

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I seek for protection from the uncouth behaviour from – (Laughter) I rise on three issues: 

First, I personally feel for the rural poor who use kerosene as the only source of lighting. Like the imam, I represent a constituency where the majority of the people use kerosene lamps in the peri-urban areas. 

While we consider that fact, I did small research on the same; the average amount of kerosene used by a household is 1.33 litres per month – that is equivalent to four 330ml soda bottles. (Interjections) That is from my constituency where I did a random sampling. (Interruption) 

MRS NYAKIKONGORO: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to continue misleading the House that the research he did in Tororo is representative of all the constituencies all over Uganda, including Sheema? (Interjections) Yes, because you are basing your presentation on that research, and you are actually telling us wrong information that a household uses 330ml of paraffin when those households I have interacted with in Sheema use more than that. Are you in order to continue telling us lies?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that sample has not been scientifically tested. 

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, to come to my point, even though we do not rely on the Tororo figures, the amount of money lost by the government due to smugglers who bring in kerosene and sell it after mixing it with diesel and petrol –(Interjections)– Allow me to complete my point. These honourable colleagues – 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the minister because he was the one on the Floor. Okay, let us hear the point of procedure from this side.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, the woman MP for Kampala made a very important statement, that there was an administrative order to stop UNBS from being in charge of checking the fuel. Indeed, she asked a question: Who is in charge? I expected that that issue should be first sorted out. So, is it procedurally right for us to start debating other issues before that clarification has been made to the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been told that the case for the Shs 200 was because of adulteration. But if there is nobody to inspect, how are we going to control adulteration of fuel? Honourable minister, please, tell us how we are going to supervise. 

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, what I know is that UNBS is the body that is charged with the mandate of checking issues like adulteration, substandard goods, and unequal scales and so on. So, I am not aware that UNBS cannot check adulteration of fuel. However, if the honourable member knows about it, she can give us that information. What I know is that UNBS is the body charged with that mandate and it is still carrying it out under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I was coming towards that particular point. The fuel in Uganda is brought in three major forms – petrol, diesel and kerosene. Uganda also acts as a conduit for fuel going to DR Congo, Rwanda and recently, South Sudan. 

There was a system and UNBS was mandated with marking the fuel. So, fuel that is supposed to go to DR Congo is marked with a particular colour that is only visible using their special features. So, that system of marking was mandated to UNBS until a few months ago – almost coming to a year now. 

There was a bitter battle between UNBS and an independent body that was established to do the marking. The problem originated from the failure of the mandated body, UNBS. Today, they are left with only the mandate. They come to my station, run out the fuel then they can check on the fuel that is already being supplied. They are not in charge of the supply chain. The point I was trying to build is about the quantities. The Shs 15 billion on Kerosene.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: What hon. Sanjay is bringing is that the Ministry of Finance and UNBS are doing us a disservice. UNBS says that they can only come and check and scale at the petrol station. If they are going to test fuel, they will need to be with the Ministry of Energy. But because they want to collect money on quarterly basis, they are very good at coming to measure but they never test the fuel and the responsibility of testing fuel to see if it is right or wrong should have been for NBS. What hon. Sanjay is bringing is true; NBS is not testing fuel.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think let us leave the question of testing. Let us deal with the taxes.

I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Anthony Okello): Madam Chair, the policy of Government at the moment is to promote industrialisation. This can be done using taxation as a policy. The committee studied the historical data on increment of taxes and proposes that:
    1) We replace item 1 (a) (b) and (c) as follows:
    a) Soft caps where local content is more than 70 percent -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are not yet there. We are on Clause 3. Clause 3 is about airtime, talk time, public pay phones and landlines.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chair, on page 4, Clause 3 is saying “replacement of schedule.”
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Ok. I think I was looking at the wrong Bill.

MR OMACH: Replacement of “schedule” to “the schedule to the excise tariff Act.” It substituted a “schedule” to this Act and then gives the schedule -

MR OKELLO: Madam Chair, a) soft cap whose local content is more than 70 percent, Shs 25,000 per 1,000 stick. This would represent a 15 percent increment and the committee feels that this would be an incentive to other companies to come and become resident factories in Uganda, for instance BAT.
    b) To make local industries competitive. The committee proposes an additional eight percent increment from Government proposal on other soft cap that translates into a rate of Shs 37,000 per 1,000 stick.

Madam Chair, on the paper, it is written “Shs 35,000” it was a typing error. It should read “Shs 37,000 per 1,000 stick” representing an eight percent increment from what the ministry has proposed.

c) 	Madam Chair, particularly on the imported ones, the committee proposes an increment from Government proposal of five percent that translates into Shs 71,775 per 1,000 stick. 

The justification is that the committee observes that there is need to promote local investment and also preserve employment opportunities for workers. For instance, leaf Tobacco and commodities Uganda Ltd currently employs over 14,000 people.

When we mention 14,000, we mention it against the background that we got a submission from Leaf Tobacco and Commodities Uganda saying that they employ over 2,000 permanent workers, over 1,000 casual workers and support over 13,000 farmers. So, these are the details of the information that we have.

A 45 percent increment in tax is too drastic a measure and causes a serious economic imbalance and the company is bound to lay off workers.

Taxes on industry should be increased progressively and this allows companies and those who directly and indirectly earn from tobacco to seek alternative jobs as a source of revenue.

    2) Replace item 3(b) as follows: 
    c) undenatured spirit

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, these are different taxes, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we dispose of one by one before moving to the next?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, let us first deal with the cigarettes, then we shall go to the Kerosene.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, we have a base of all these taxes. Last year, it was 22 and now, it is 25. If we want to maintain the Shs 10,000 for the lower cadre, we can use that to generate the percentage. You get Shs 10,000, divide by 22, you get 45.4 percent. That means that the same rate, which is applied on the lower one should be the one applied on the other one.

What will be the benefit? The increment on the one of 25 will be higher than Shs 10,000. So, Government will collect more money on that.

At a future date, when Dr Baryomunsi brings his Bill, some of us are going to make a lot of amendments in the sense that usually, the one which they said is the lower type is the one which is more dangerous to life. At a future time, we should make sure that the one which is more dangerous to life should be taxed at a higher rate. Now, for purposes of maintaining harmony, we went –

The second issue is that we should make some money, which is collected from tax to be taken to the Cancer Institute because all these people end up in the Cancer Institute. Maybe, 10 per cent of what we have collected from cigarette taxes should be taken to the Cancer Institute.

Madam Chair, if we propose 45 percent, then we shall maintain the 10,000 and this one will go, I think to 36.5 thousand and that will be the best way to tax so that there is no – this add volume tax is okay but is very dangerous whereby it is a competitive world. It makes the business inequitable and this is the only way to make it equitable.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. There is an international instrument called the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control prepared by WHO and all the countries that are part of WHO and Uganda is one of the signatories.

One of the critical provisions in this instrument is that, we should not give incentives to the tobacco industry in light of public health arguments. Therefore, I want to persuade the chair and the members of the committee ready to look at it that it is against the spirit of that convention to be seen to be giving incentives to the tobacco industry, whether they have invested locally or outside. (Applause) The reason being that there is a global campaign and Uganda is part of it to really reduce smoking because we have studies and if we had time, we would demonstrate to you that the majority of the patients who are at the Uganda Heart Institute – actually, their conditions are attributable to consumption of tobacco and other tobacco products.

The economic arguments raised by the tobacco industry that they employ Ugandans and that they pay taxes, there is a recent World Bank study that shows that for every $1 that we receive in form of taxes, we spend at least $3 to deal with health complication arising from consumption of tobacco.

So, I just wanted to persuade Members that we should not look at reducing the tax proposals, which the ministry has given to us. Our position is that we should not reduce the taxes and I want to agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that we could move from the absolute figures but we use the 10,000 as the basic and then we compute what constitutes two in terms of a percentage and then we apply it on the other cigarette brands to get the amount of taxes that we shall raise. But we also agree that we should tax the raw leaf that is being exported from the country. I want to persuade the committee to abandon that proposal of reducing the taxes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister for Works, on tobacco?

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much. I sincerely agree with hon. Baryomunsi quoting international conventions and the like. Dear colleagues, these conventions are covering the least and most developed. We should adapt a system where we say common but differential responsibility – (Interjections) - we agree about the convention but in our situation as a developing country, we cannot jump there now. We are aiming to go there but because of these other causes as brought by the minister, we should stick to that - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, can we concentrate on the taxes. Please, hon. Minister, respond to the proposals made.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, under the soft cap, whose local content is more than 70 percent of its constituents, we request the committee to accept the position that we have given; that is 32,000 per 1,000 sticks and not reduce it to 25,000 per stick. (Applause)

We agree with where they are proposing to increase the taxes on tobacco in general. The proposal by the Leader of the Opposition is acceptable but that is what we have also used to arrive at these figures that we have presented. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, for the first time, the minister has lied. If you all pay the same figure on 22, you get 10,000. On 25, you cannot get 10,000 and that is why we are saying that we should apply a percentage –

MR KYOOMA: I thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. I have actually calculated and I agree with you and disagree with the minister. If you apply the same rate, you cannot get the figures that are presented here because as hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, when you get the increment of 10,000 divide by 22 and multiply by 100 percent, you get 45.45 percent and that is for (a). If you apply the same rate for (b), then you get Shs 36,354. If you apply it on (c) on the hinge reed, you get 79,999.999 meaning 80,000. So, if we are going by the rates, which I support, then these are the new figures for B and P and not the ones presented in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, hon. Members, I thought that we agreed that we retain the proposals of the minister. Now, you are juggling. 

BRIG. GEN. KATIRIMA: The procedure that I am raising is related to the Leader of the Opposition’s proposal of a percentage charge by way of taxation and if we applied the 45.5 percent across, we would be raising more money for the minister and the minister has not budgeted for this money. What are we going to use this money for? 

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Chair, when we are discussing rates, it should be easy to collect taxes once you apply a very good rate and very good to follow. But I see Members of Parliament struggling with 9999 – why don’t we suggest that we propose to increase taxes by 50 percent across the board. This will help us raise more money but also send a strong message against smoking and also against tobacco growing. I must give you information that –

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chair, I wish to draw the attention of my colleagues, the hon. Members of Parliament, to Article 93 of the Constitution– [Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “What does it say?”]– I do not have a copy here with me – 

MR KAKOOZA: I can help read it for you. Article 93 talks about restriction on financial matters and states thus: “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of Government- (a) proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill, that makes provision for any of the following – (i) the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction; (ii) the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise by reduction.”

But in this sense, they are increasing and not reducing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. But are we not imposing an additional tax? Is the minister – I do not know – 

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, the Leader of Government Business knows very well that in Parliament, we are either standing or sitting. We never lie. So, I accept his proposal of giving more money. So, we can use your formula – but the one that was reducing, we do not accept. Thank you, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what figures would then be under the excise duty? What will be the output in shillings?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, if we take 45 per cent – yes, 45.4 percent for the 22,000, you increase by 10, the other one will be by how much? But Madam Chair, you do not need to put – just put the rate and you will be done. Just say we have increased here by 45.4 or 46 percent so that we stop there and they will compete according to that.

MS KABUULE: The information I would like to give is that according to the framework convention of tobacco control, which was mentioned by hon. Dr Baryomunsi, we are supposed to have an upper limit of 70 percent. So, we can play between 45 and 50 so long as we do not go beyond 70. 
So, I would like to support what the minister has said; put it at 50 percent.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. The rate is adjusted to 50 percent? Is that so?

BRIG. GEN. KATIRIMA: The minister has not indicated to us how he is going to use the extra money.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, how will you use the extra money? Just satisfy us. 

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, if we have – because we do not collect all that we propose in the tax measures. This particular year, the tax measures are extremely tight and if we get that additional money, definitely, that will be used in the various supplies that we are going to make under the appropriation.

In the most unlikely event that the issue of Kerosene is carried, already we will be losing Shs 15 billion. And unfortunately thus money will not go to the benefit of the poor. It will go to the fuel dealers – (Interjections) – yes, it will go to the fuel dealers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Members, we have agreed to adjust by 50 percent under items 1 (a), (b) and (c) –

MR OKELLO: Madam Chair, I beg your indulgence. Government has not had a policy shift as far as attracting and protecting investors is concerned. So, I want to request that this august House considers increasing 50 percent on other soft caps and syringe leads and at least, leave 45 percent for the local investors.

Madam Chair, this is very important because already we have increased taxes for all these categories. So, it is my humble request that a special consideration be given to the local investor.

MR ARINAITWE: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would like to support the proposal moved by the chairperson –(Interjections)– I am not a member, my friend. Get informed.

Madam Chair, I am the Vice-Chairperson of the Gender, Labour and Social Development Committee. I am not a member of the finance committee. Please, put the record clear. But I also represent workers in this Parliament. So, I would like to support the proposal moved by the chairperson of the committee to protect local investors. These local investors pay bills for umeme, water and so many other things, but mostly, they also pay their workers. Therefore, I would like to support the proposal that the imported cigarette should be charged at 50 and the locally produced products be charged 45 percent. Thank you so much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I am wondering whether we have actually carefully thought out the impact and implications of what we are saying. I do not think we have. Why don’t we retain the minister’s proposal and take time to study what is going to happen to the farmers and industries so that next financial year we can take – I think we are being rushed. You know that is how we did the gazetting and blew the budget for display of the voters’ register; it was because of this.

MR CADET: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Whereas the minister is proposing to increase the tax – the way we are moving - we are assuming that all cancers in Uganda are caused by tobacco. But some cancers like the cervical cancer is actually just transmitted – (Interjections) – that is a fact. You can challenge it – the fact is we have other cancers that are being caused by travelling in second hand cars. We have to move from travelling in second hand cars - there is smoke coming from second hand cars which causes cancer – (Interruption) 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I am surprised to hear the honourable member, who is not even a doctor telling his House that most of the cancers are caused by those causes, knowing that actually tobacco smoking has over 4000 components that cause different cancers including hypertension, diabetes – the minister can even verify that.

In addition to that, he is just focusing on smokers; what about the non-smokers. Is he in order to mislead the House that cancers in Mulago Cancer Institution are actually sexually transmitted?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, let us move carefully. I propose that we retain the rates the minister has proposed for this financial year and we task our committee and the Committee on Gender to evaluate the impact of the proposals that Members want to bring so that next financial year, we can talk from a point of knowledge. On the issue of tobacco, we retain the figures; let us go to the spirits. 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, replace item 3(b) as follows –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, we have not yet dealt with tobacco leaves. I propose that export of tobacco leaves – since we are still in the initial stages, it will help to promote the workers industry if they are taxed at 10 percent. 

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, in light of your guidance, I think we need also to study that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How will it impact the farmers – the tax on exports? 

MS NAGGAYI: I rise on a point of information because the Committee of Trade, which I sit on, interacted with both companies. I want to state that we know the underlying issues and that right now, the companies that are involved have issues of investment. The workers they are talking about are actually going to lose jobs because the other company that was not listened to has listened in the farmers in terms of outreach; seeds, fertilisers and so on. This company that is manufacturing simply buys from the farmers – (Interjections) – yes; we have the information. That is why we cannot make any informed decision right now without an exhaustive investigation by the ministry and the committee. 

We need information relating to the losses and know what we could do as a country and what gain we can make as far as workers are concerned; because even farmers are workers. We need holistic information. We do not need to rash it because the report of the committee has shown that there is an issue that was not researched and so there is information that they do not have. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I appeal to the House to leave that matter of the 10 percent for now. Let us study the situation; let us do the research. Then next financial year; which is coming soon, we can talk from an informed position – we might injure people we do not even know about. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to give information and also seek clarification from hon. Mafabi. The tobacco companies were making cigarettes from here. Then they shifted to Kenya. When they shifted, they denied us employment. 

So, the clarification I seek from hon. Mafabi is; the 10 percent is it on the export – (Interjections) – then I think the minister should consider this. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I want to appeal to you that we study the situation; examine the impact on the industries, on the workers and the farmers before we take a decision. I do not think we are being fair to those involved; it is only one financial year. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Chair, I agree with you. It appears we are very much in a hurry with hidden agendas – everybody seems to have a hidden agenda. So, this decision of giving us time to study the matter is fair. We should not rush when we are not sure of where we are going. 

I also appeal to the Leader of the Opposition to help this House by causing less confusion in this House. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, to begin with, I am a Ugandan and whatever I say, I say it in the interest of Ugandans. The issues I am bringing up are not for confusion. For your information, I went to school, I have never repeated a class; I have studied at a very high level and worked in international organisations. And my point is that I have a reputation to protect. When I talk of 10 percent on exports, I am trying to protect jobs for Ugandans. 

Madam Chair, you are aware that I have been here since House began; I have not moved away. This gentleman called, “The Leader of Government Business”, is busy trotting in and out of the House because he cannot manage sitting. So, is he in order to come and say that I am causing confusion in the House when in fact, I am adding value on issues where the House is missing the mark and to matters where he is not professionally competent? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, please, let us treat each other with courtesy; this place is for speaking on issues from different directions until we come to a consensus. So, let us treat each other with respect. 

Hon. Members, I appeal to you to retain the proposals of the minister. This House directs the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to take interest in the subjects we have been discussing – even Trade and Industry so that next year, you can come and tell us the impact on taxes and so on. Now let us go to beer. 

MR OKELLO: Madam Chair, two; replace item 3(b) as follows: (b)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Is it in order for the Leader of Government Business to come in once and run away, yet he is supposed to control that side? Is he in order to go away?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are on beer now. Any issues on beer? If there is nothing on beer, let us go to spirits.

MR OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. “(2) replace item 3(b) as follows: (b) undenatured spirits. Shs 2500 per litre or 100 percent, whichever is higher.” The justification is, the ministry agrees that charging 140 percent on undenatured spirits, which is a raw material will complicate tax administration. Most genuine manufacturers of spirits will always be in a refund position on the final product. Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, you have heard the proposal.

MR YAGUMA: Madam Chairperson, on beer, some of us who are drunkards - (Laughter) – I am making that statement and I am serious because the other day, one of our leaders told us that people from western Uganda are drunkards.

On beer, in 2(b) it states, “...whose local raw material content excluding water is at least 75 percent by weight of its constituent”. I want to report that I think these beer manufacturing companies are telling lies to Government and if these are not lies, the ministers will clarify. They say that they are growing local sorghum in Kaberamaido, Kabale and therefore they are using 75 per cent of local materials.

The fact on the ground is that, this is not true. This beer like Eagle or Senator is low priced beer consumed by our poor people. So, instead of taxing paraffin, they should tax this beer because I do not know any part of Uganda where they are growing sorghum massively to produce millions of bottles that are consumed every year in Uganda. 

So, I would propose that the tax here be doubled to 40 per cent instead of 20 per cent. This is part (b), where they say “where the local raw material content excluding water is at least 75 per cent.” I am saying this is not true. Can any Member stand up and state where a lot of sorghum is grown and sold to Nile Breweries to make Eagle, which is the beer most taken by our locals? So, instead of taxing kerosene, we should double this tax.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the Committee on Trade, hon. Okot Ogong.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, as Members of Parliament, we must talk from a very informed position. I come from Lango where we grow a lot of epuripur sorghum, which is used for making beer. We grow tonnes of epuripur and our people are getting a lot of money. 

I want to inform the hon. Member that tomorrow, we can go to all these factories and see the tonnage that our people are bringing to these factories. So, for you to say that people are not producing sorghum, is to talk from a point that is not researched. I want to appeal to you that let us go to Lango today and let us go to these companies. You will be embarrassed and bamboozled. (Laughter)

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I am still on point 2 (b) on beer whose local raw material content is about 75 per cent. I support the argument of 40 per cent because if you look at (c); beer produced from barley, I look at it that these are all raw materials and besides, we have planned to reduce taxation on areas like kerosene. 

If you go further, we are also looking at water. This is not bottled water but piped water that has been taxed. So, in a way, we have to tax alcohol, especially beer more so, I support the argument of 40 per cent.

It is true our farmers are planting epuripur sorghum. I do not dispute that but still, this sorghum is local raw material. At the same time, even barley is raw material being cultivated from here and they are all used to brew beer, which is alcohol.

Therefore, the 40 per cent can be across the board. Instead of 20 percent, we can put it at 40 per cent while also maintaining the one in (c) at 40 per cent. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, what was the rationale for your 20 per cent before we take a decision?

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, this was after consultations and looking at the production. When we increase the rate beyond 20 per cent, that means the demand for Eagle beer and all that will go down. Therefore, the market for epuripur will definitely come down. We can look at it in the coming financial year as to whether there is need for us to increase this.

Also when people fail to stick to Eagle beer, the resultant effect is that they will go for the local waragi, which is more harmful to the population.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I do not want to believe what the minister is saying because I know that recently, Uganda was voted the most drunk nation and what is the reason behind this? Beer is very affordable. I do not believe that farmers are going to lose money when the price is raised the reason being that there are not many alternatives for raw materials. I do not want to think that this is going to affect the farmers.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, we all read and we all have information. Uganda has been rated the happiest country in the whole world. I am wondering why my sister is saying Ugandans are drunkards and yet, that is not true. Ugandans are just happy and it would be very bad for Ugandans not to be happy. Therefore, Madam Chair, is it in order for a Member of Parliament who is voted by people who are happy to refer to them as drunkards? Is she in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think even teetotallers can be happy, so not everybody drinks. Let us get serious, hon. Members.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I come with institutional memory. I have been here for some time –(Interjections)– I am going to help you. You recall one time, there was a high tax on locally manufactured beer and we moved that it should be reduced. In that year, the sales went down. Why? It discouraged people to produce sorghum because the cost was high and the demand of the beer was low. Now, the reason why this rate- in fact, I would propose for anything - for local content- what do you want to create? You want to create employment for your people in the agriculture sector. The best place to create are those who are growing sorghum, which will produce the beer, which is on demand.  And the beer, which is on demand is the one at the lower end. 

So, Madam Chair - that is why Senator - in fact, we should reduce the tax on Eagle- on this locally grown so that more people will drink and more sorghum will be produced and more money will be made –(Interjections)– I do not drink beer but I am happy. Yes, I am a happy man. (Laughter) Nandala is a happy man. You know. I have been a happy man since 2001. So, I would propose the one of 20 percent- even the one in (c) should be 20 percent if it is the one which is locally grown here. If it is the one we grow in Sebei mostly -because we grow barley in Sebei. We do not grow barley; we grow it there. It should also be 20 percent- why should you give the ones of sorghum more money- that is why we are saying let it be 20, 20 and 60.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I have been advised by the Treasury that the rates we are addressing now were just for information; they were not for us to take a decision on. The ones they want us to take a decision on were tobacco and undenatured spirits, fuel and telecom services - for information. That is what the Finance people have told me. Minister, please, help us we need to get to-

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, I was also standing to give the same guidance that these rates were put here but that were not commented on by Finance and were not interrogated by the committee were for information. They have not been varied in this financial year, so, we do not have any information on whichever industry. So, where they have varied the rates, like alcohol, previously, from 70 percent to 140 percent and then they advised that, “no, we take it back to 100. Those are the rates we interrogated and those are the stakeholders we met in those industries.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then we have no business on 2(a), 2(b), (2(c) - Yes. Let us go to 3(b). Address 3(b).

MR YAGUMA: Madam Chair, the guidance I am requesting from you is why are they in the schedule? I am wondering whether this schedule is not part of the Bill. Because they are in the schedule; they say Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill schedule. The guidance I want from you is whether the schedule does not form part of the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we take a look at the rates for last year and if they have not changed, then they have not changed.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, I do not want whoever passed the information to you to mislead this House because it is not the first time we are dealing with the Bills. In the Bills they bring, those issues, which we are going to vary or where they have made proposals to vary - But now for them to send information and say, “Those are just for information,” that is not how the Bills we have received in this House - I have been in the Budget Committee; I have been in the finance committee. 

So, this reasoning that they want to enforce now to this House is wrong and we must discourage that. They should have cleaned this Bill before; unless they are telling us now that there are issues with the Bill. Otherwise, we are not going to take it as gospel truth what they are trying to pass to the House.  

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chair, in the history of this Parliament - I have been here for more than two years now - I have never seen us on any single day a technocrat writing a chit telling us to omit some things that are in the Bills. This one for me is a paradox. In fact, this is a rare occurrence. What I wanted us to have- Is there a possibility for the minister honestly - because now, this is a Government Bill. Minister, tell us, if these things were not meant to be discussed, why have they appeared in the Bill? I want to take the submissions of hon. Justice Ogoola. He said if you tell a lie for the first time he is not going to take you very seriously when you tell him other things in the next submission. Now, hon. Minister, why are these things in here? You have just given us the information? What sort of information are you giving us?   

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Madam Chair, the information I would like to give is that we have been crying and looking for the sources of money: going to paraffin, going to what when these people were hiding money here. It looks like they had the intentions of taxing beer but somewhere somehow something went wrong. Now, this is a blessing in disguise. 

Why don’t we take it as part of the Bill and help them to look for more money? (Laughter) This is the information I want to give. Thank you my colleague. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, every year, these five Bills are published. Every year, we enact them. So, if the old information is there, I think it is not a problem because they are part of the old law, which is being left there and other areas are being amended - yes. So, it is not that we have to amend everything. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But procedure, Madam Chair. Members, before I give a point of procedure, the Finance Act is a big book - very big like this. If you are saying they should bring, they should have brought a huge book like this. What happens now they bring what needs to be looked at. That is why you see this small one. The book is always brown in colour - (Interjections) - exactly like that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Member, let us see the memorandum. Let us see the -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, the procedure - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the object of this Bill is to amend the Excise Tariff Act; to provide for excise duty, value added services, incoming international call services, money transfer services, and to replace the schedule prescribing rates of excise duty payable under the Act and for related matters. This is the object.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said is true but you see, the schedule we are amending - the chapter where barley is - the HS code which is used to classify the item - those are the ones, which are included here in (c) (d). But the rest are still the same. They have not changed. 

So, the indication there - as you have said that they are not varying the rate but the rate they are varying is the 3(b), which we are dealing with and which we dealt with in the committee. Otherwise, if it had a difference from the other original law, we could have dealt with it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, please, help us. We need to move.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, your guidance is right and where we are proposing some amendments, these are contained in the memorandum and also they were contained in the Budget Speech. For instance, on the issue of kerosene, in the Budget Speech it was proposed that there would be adjustments. So, these are the ones that when we go through this schedule, will be indicated and when you take a look at Clause 3, it says “replacement of the schedule.” So, you are right, Madam Chair. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Members, we were on clause – 

MR OMACH: Yes, on Clause 3 (b), we did agree that we should bring it down to 100 maximum because it was at 70 percent and then we jumped to 140 doubling it and the industry did complain and they were right, that we would lose industries to our neighbouring countries where they are charging only 70 per cent. So, we said that we should move gradually. That is why we appealed to the committee and we are agreeable with what they have submitted today. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, Clause 3 (b) will be amended as proposed by the committee –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I want to see the justification. There is the Uganda Manufacturers Association who are investors and they meet. You had come with 140 percent but are saying it is 100 percent; you came with Shs 4,000 and you are now saying Shs 2,500. What was the justification of putting it earlier on at 140 and then coming to Parliament to say you have accepted 100? We want to know the justification. Is it a bargaining chip for something? Why did you take the 140 and 4,000 in the first place?

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, we have a letter from the Uganda Manufacturers Association to the committee and also from the Alcohol Manufacturers Association, which letters I am going to lay on Table and they said it was very abnormal. We do not know what justification had mutually informed the ministry but they appealed and said, if a finished product is at 70 percent, how come the raw material is at 140? So, we agreed with the Ministry of Finance to provide the rates back to 100 but I do not know whether the Leader of the Opposition is asking for the original assumption.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I support the committee but I want the minister to give us reason why it was 140 before, and that is what you read and you are telling us that it is already committed. Explain that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, please, respond on kerosene. We need to finish this.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I have already explained and the Ministry of Finance are not angels; where there is justification, you have to act accordingly. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go to kerosene. 

MS AOL: Madam Chairperson, on spirits –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have finished the spirits.

MS AOL: Madam Chairperson, thank you. I was once in Sudan in Khartoum and I saw that the level of consumption of spirits there is so low and I really see the consumption here in Uganda - even if hon. Okot Ogong feigns happiness but sometimes if we go deep into the villages where even education is actually compromised by the rate of drinking, I would really go by the original thinking of 140 percent. What is wrong if the consumption goes down and we get other alternatives? Alternatives will always come. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 3(b) be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go to kerosene. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I propose that Clause 8(e) be deleted. I beg to move.

MR KAJARA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to call for your indulgence, first of all, to understand why Government has sought for this amendment. The objective of this proposal is to raise revenue of Shs 15 billion. This Shs 15 billion has already been captured in our proposals for expenditure. Secondly, this proposal is already working from 1st July. We are already collecting this revenue. If we went against it, then this means we would have to refund and who are we refunding to? We have made it clear that first of all, we stand to lose the Shs 15 billion and the beneficiary will not be the people of Uganda; it will be the oil companies and dealers because this money will not go directly to reducing prices. The prices of paraffin will still remain and the oil companies will benefit. Government will not be able to execute its programmes because we shall have lost this revenue and, Madam Chairperson, there will be reduced fuel volumes of diesel and petrol because of this adulteration. That means we have less consumption of petrol, less consumption of diesel and then we do not collect more revenue from diesel and petrol. That is why I implore –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Madam Chairperson, we feel very bad sitting here to debate something that is already working. Why do you bring us something that is already working? Are we here to rubber stamp or are we just doing things retrospectively? Why are we here? You should not have brought it here. I need that clarification. Why should the minister waste our time? 

MR LUBEGA: Madam Chairperson, the issue of paraffin is really crucial. We are representing people who are very poor and we do not want to squeeze water from a stone. When evening sets in, the people use paraffin. When our children are revising, they use kerosene and it looks very queer. When you talk of these kids born of rich people and you do not consider the people from the grass root, then you are not fair; you are doing a disservice to the nation. Let us find anywhere else to get money but not from kerosene; we do not want -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Make a proposal; can you make a proposal where we can get that Shs 15 billion? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, we have reduced spirits from Shs 140 to Shs 100. No.2, even on international telephone calls, the minister is reducing from 0.09 to 0.07. It is clear that it is possible to reduce tax. We have also got him money from cigarettes at 50 percent.

MR GEORGE EKUMA: Thank you, Madam Chair. On kerosene, I heard the minister say that the tax is levied on the dealers. It is not true because whenever a product is brought to the market, the seller will charge a price on top of the tax he has paid. Therefore, when selling a product, the taxes are transferred to the consumer. So it is not true for the minister to state that this tax of Shs 200 is borne by the dealers; it is ultimately the consumer to bear it. 

So, Madam Chair, I would insist that the minister collects this tax from alcohol other than from kerosene, which will affect a poor person in Bukedea who cannot even light their house. I cannot allow this. Thank you.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chair, I studied some chemistry in senior six; there is a rule called Markownikoff’s rule. (Laughter) This rule states that during the formation of double bonds which are very weak – I want to bring an analogy which is scientific – that it is the carbon atoms with the least number of hydrogen atoms that will lose the few they have to form a double bond.

Let me now build my case. Madam Chair, you know where we were born; the problem we have is forgetting where we have come from. I cannot imagine myself coming to represent people of Mbarara Municipality where some people cannot even afford electricity – they just use paraffin. I want you to know that the UPE pupils in the villages use paraffin for reading. You saw people in Zombo on the TV when they were sitting on the floor in school. Those fellows use paraffin at night to be able to revise for exams. 

Madam Chair, let us get money from somewhere else so that we can give hope to the poor people so that they can know that this Parliament is thinking about them by rejecting the taxation of paraffin. I propose that this tax is deleted for the sake of caring for the common man in Adjumani, where the Second Deputy Prime Minister comes from. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think no one is objecting to the idea of supporting the poor people; the question is if we remove this tax, where do we get this money from? Please, propose the source.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, we did ask here why there is no tax on gas but that question has not been answered. And we know the people who use gas; that is one area where we can be able to raise money. Let the minister propose the rate on gas to raise money. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to support the proposal for an amendment that has been made by hon. Betty Amongi. The minister does not convince me and I think he does not convince many Ugandans by the reason he is advancing for proposing this tax. The two reasons are: One that it is being misused for adulterating fuel. So is it the view of the minister that by adding Shs 200, the one who has been adulterating fuel cannot do it anymore because they cannot afford an additional Shs 200. Certainly my answer and I think that of the minister will be “No.” So this particular reason that you are advancing falls by the wayside; it is not sustainable. Two, it will raise additional resources, which is okay. But then he justifies – because I think the minister is carrying the pain or the feeling of guilt that he is targeting the poorest of the poor.

Madam Chair, it used to be said, during the Budget process in this country, that the Budget should be pro-poor. That was the argument then and we were made to believe so. Now the minister, in trying to shield himself from such a conscience, is simply saying that the dealers will pay. And yet everybody knows that it is the old women to pay, as the final consumers. And I want to remind this Parliament – If only my colleagues would listen to me.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, please. 

MS ALASO: I want to remind this Parliament; some of you are talking, saying electricity is unaffordable. But there are areas in Uganda where there is nothing called “electricity” – it is just not there. So if you are talking about affordability there are areas in Uganda where people are wondering what electricity is. And so for those areas, the UPE pupils depend entirely on kerosene; children who cannot buy an exercise book – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, can you propose where we can raise the Shs 15 billion because we know the problem; just propose where we can get that money. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, you had said that I was very quiet – you know these are bottled sentiments – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but the issues you are raising have been raised already. So propose.

MS ALASO: So, Madam Chair, instead of us targeting those poor fellows, who use kerosene, there is already a proposal here; let the minister be given a day and he comes back on Tuesday, if time allows, to come back with a proposal on taxing gas, which you and I use. Let him come back with a proposal on taxing alcohol or even airtime, which is a luxury, but not kerosene, which is an essential.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us here find what the way forward is from the committee chairperson.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, we have been working very well with the Members of Parliament so far as far as taxes are concerned. And in all these, we have been using consensus to move forward. So we are saying that if the Ministry of Finance could concede on the kerosene – because they had brought another proposal, where taxes on the telecom industry would revert to the UCC. If we could insist that that money goes to the Consolidated Fund, we would have – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Would you have raised the Shs 15 billion? Let us have hon. Mutende.

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Madam Chair. I just want to bring out a few things which I hope should help us in our discussion. First of all, if you look at cooking gas and you want to tax it, true the numbers of people consuming it are not many but if we are looking at saving our environment, cooking gas is the way to go; pretty much the same way if you look at computers, they are not used by many people but we need to spread out the use of computers and indeed that is why Government removed taxes from computers, the same thing with solar panels. The way to go is to find a mechanism of getting as many people as possible to use solar panels and also to save the environment and still achieve lighting.

Other commodities like medication; Government has made so many concessions on medical equipment, medicines, livestock equipment and medication -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you suggesting that it is okay for the 90 percent to smoke?

DR MUTENDE: I am coming to that, we are conscious of the fact that sugar is an essential mass consumption commodity but still we go ahead and tax it. Our people are not necessarily going without sugar. 

When we come to Kerosene, it is not anything different from sugar as a matter of fact. We still can afford to have this taxed as a mass consumption commodity but as we improve on alternatives of providing energy and saving our environment.

MR KAKOOZA: Yes, you have asked a pertinent question. You see, when they are putting these taxes - we are in East African community, look at the pump rate in other countries. In Rwanda the pump rate is Shs 475 per litter. In Kenya they increased VAT from 16 to 22 percent. In Tanzania they put VAT from 16 to 22 percent and it raised a lot of hullabaloo but they wanted to raise revenue.

In Uganda here when you go for the pump rate the lowest in the region is Shs 200 because we had exempted diesel in the first years. So, when you are putting this tax you compare yourself within the region, because it will encourage the other countries not put their goods in our market. The Shs 15 billion, you have already appropriate 30 percent of that money; it has been utilised already and there is no way you can turn and say that you do not have the money.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: The price of fuel in Kenya is lower than the price of fuel in Uganda. I deal in fuel, you do not know fuel. The price of fuel in Kenya is lower than that in Uganda and the reasons are simple.  The tax on fuel in Kenya is lower than ours and of course they are near the port. You cannot come here and say that price in Kenya is higher. In fact, Ugandans smuggle fuel from Kenya but Kenyans cannot smuggle fuel from Uganda that is a total lie. So what we are trying to put across for you is that if you are talking about raising revenue, the best place to raise revenue is not paraffin. You can talk about cigarettes, it is a luxury; you can talk about beer it is a luxury but paraffin, which is being used by a poor person to light a candle at home where his income is very low, is not right.

Is hon. Kakooza in order to mislead the House that he knows the pump rates of fuel when he does not deal in fuel, and we who deal in fuel are giving him good information?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, gives us a way forward, please.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, hon. Alice Alaso has refused to come to my constituency because we are using a lot of paraffin. I would like to concede if you also accept that the amendment that I was expecting to move under 13(g) incoming international call services, we are intending to reduce it from 0.09 to 0.07. We will not remove it and we will use that to cover the Shs 15 billion. We concede that the proposal that was raised by Betty Amongi is taken. We remove the Shs 200.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chair, I have a problem with the proposal by the minister to go back. (Interjections) I thought we are honourable and we are supposed to listen to each other.

Madam Chair, this intelligence system is supposed to make sure that we are capturing all the international calls received so that those telecom companies do not cheat and under declare what calls were received. Now by removing this system you leave those people free to declare whatever they want.

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is not removing it; he is saying that he abandoned his proposal which had been to reduce the tax.

MR KABAJO: But, Madam Chair, according to the document that we received here, 0.02 percent would be used to purchase this intelligence monitoring unit, if he abandons that position where will the money for purchasing it come from? That is the answer I want to get.

MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to inform my colleague that this issue of Intelligence Network (IN) systems started way back in 2006. We made a report on the Floor of Parliament to UCC to purchase this system. UCC advertised and made arrangements to procure this system way back in 2008. I find it strange that the ministry wants to give them money to purchase something that was already budgeted for by UCC to be bought; they need no money to purchase this IN. 

I recommend that that money should go to the Consolidated Fund to help us raise the revenue we need, not to UCC.


THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chair, further amendment. We need to move an amendment that the money to be collected from these international calls should not be given to UCC but be taken to the Consolidated Fund. He has not moved an amendment, it was a proposal. We want to move that amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to put the question on the levy which was proposed to be sent to the Consolidated Fund.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 3 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

The Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and greed to.)

(The House resumed, and the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.00 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2013” and has passed it with some amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)


BILLS
THIRD READING

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

8.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2013”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed.


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

8.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013 be read for the second time.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to move a motion to do with heavy taxes on business, and you know the laws we are handling are tough. I want to move a motion that the House be adjourned.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, for several weeks, I have been saying that we are late. I think the country has run out of money – tomorrow we are going to deal with the Committee of Supply. There is Committee of Supply; there is VAT Bill; there is Supplementary Appropriation and we need to send the information to the Government printery – you will not be here. Yes, hon. Bahati.

MR BAHATI: Would it be possible that we can begin at 10.00 a.m. – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for me I will be here but I do not know whether you will be here at 9.00 a.m. 

MR BAHATI: We will be here.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, we are ready. Some areas have exhausted the Vote-On-Account and it is getting very tight and we needed tomorrow morning to pass the supplies for the –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Order, Madam Speaker. It is a serious order by the way. Madam Speaker, we gave Government a third of the budget and a third of a year is four months and four months end on 2nd October. Today is 19 September and that means that we are in a dangerous state. One month and a half we have no more money to run. Is the minister in order to tell us that what we gave him is over and now he wants to finish this within the shortest time – (Laughter) - and yet the one we want to supply is for three quarters? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, when did we give you the Vote-On–Account?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, when we are paying the Capitation Grant, it will go beyond the one third that has been given and so we cannot pay it until the budget is passed and so we will have to wait and what is remaining cannot cover the whole of the Capitation Grant for the education sector. So, that is what I am talking about.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, as you all know, the bulk of the money in this budget is for infrastructure development. I want to inform this House that the people responsible and that is the Ministry of Works and Transport have moved extremely fast. The information that I have – (Interjections) - yes, they have moved very fast so that they even beat the time frames. The  information available is that actually much of the money that you have allocated for projects has already been absorbed, and we do not want these people to run short of money because then we shall fall behind schedule.

MS KABASHARIRA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg the indulgence of Members. We have already spent enough time here. I was suggesting that if they so agree, we will receive the report of the committee and we stay with it and then tomorrow when we come, we just go through it but at least we get the report just to balance. We get the report of the committee because it will not take 15 minutes to receive it and then tomorrow we just go through it.

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Members who are here are promising you that they will come tomorrow and I buy the idea of hon. Naome Kabasharira that we receive the report, we go with it, peruse through it since we have agreed that we are coming back tomorrow so that we ease the work and make it quicker. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us receive and then we debate it quickly in the morning.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The people who come late are the ones who are telling –

MR FRED OMACH: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2003 be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, seconded.

MR OMACH: The object of this Bill is to amend the Value Added Tax Act Cap.349 to remove from the exempt supplies, the supplies of accommodation in tourist lodges and hotels outside Kampala Capital City; the supply of goods and services to the contractors of Bujagali and other hydroelectric power projects and water for domestic use; to repeal the zero rating for wheat flour and for related matters. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chair?

8.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Ssebunya): Madam Speaker, this the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and I am not going to repeat the introduction and the objects of the Bill – (Interjections)- I read the objects of the Bill?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR SSEBUNYA: Okay. The objects of the Bill is to amend the Value Added Tax Act Cap.349 to-
    (i) amend the First Schedule of the VAT Act to align the terminologies in the VAT Act with those of the EAC Treaty; (clause 3);
    (ii)  amend the Second Schedule of the VAT Act; (Clause 4)
	1 (a) amalgamating supplies that are similar in nature to give them one general name, Dental, Medical and Veterinary Goods.
(iii)	removing from the exempt schedule, the following supplies: hotel accommodation out of Kampala, supply of goods and services to the contractor of Bujagali Hydro Power, supply to contractors of other hydro power projects and the supply of water for domestic use.

Observations

 Reinstating VAT on the supply of water

Clause 4 (1) (c) seeks to remove paragraphs 1, (k), which is about the supply of domestic water from the exempt supplies. It is important to note that last financial year Parliament exempted the supply of water from VAT. The justification then was the need to reduce the cost of water for the ordinary Ugandans. 

The committee, however, observes that despite the fact that the supply of water has been exempted from VAT for the last one year, the cost of water has not been reduced; it has just increased.

The committee examined the effect of VAT on domestic water in great detail with the Ministry of Finance. Each litre costs Shs 1.912. A 20-litre jerrican therefore costs Shs 38.24. The VAT on this jerrican of what would be the earlier figure times 18 percent, which would equal to Shs 6.88. Total price for a jerrican of water after the introduction of VAT therefore is Shs 45.21 per jerrican. But how much is water sold on the open market? That is the question. The answer lies with the middlemen. They buy the water cheaply as illustrated above but sell it to the consumer at a much higher price. It is also important to note that in this liberalised economy, middlemen control the prices.

The committee recognizes that there is need to deter such strategic behaviour and to be in line with the Millennium Development goal No. 7, which aims at having, by 2015, the proportion of the population without sustainable access to safe drinking water and best sanitation reduced by providing every person with access to clean water.

Although the committee was informed that only 28 towns in the country have received piped water, only 272,000 homesteads, of the six million homesteads are connected to domestic metred water. The committee recommends that Government expands coverage of piped water to those areas where there are piped water schemes.

Direct access to clean water will eliminate the middlemen from the chain and make water cheap for all the consumers. What they mean here is, where there are schemes for piped water in those towns, Government should increase the access to this water through stand pipes. Stand pipes eliminate the middlemen. That is what they are trying to say that instead of reducing the VAT on domestic water that goes to people’s homes, they should expand on the stand pipes.

VAT on Wheat

The supply of wheat grains like any other supply of unprocessed agricultural products and livestock has been exempt from VAT. The proposal in clause 4 (1)(a) now seeks to remove the supply of wheat grain from this category. It has been exempted and it is removing it so that it can start to pay VAT.

While examining this proposal, the committee received submissions from the Uganda Manufacturers Association and M/s Harris International, the following matter were highlighted:
    1. Two taxes have been introduced concurrently on wheat grains. The 18 percent VAT was introduced by Government and the 10 percent import duty was imposed by the East African Community.

    2. With the introduction of 18 percent VAT and 10 percent import duty, additional funds have to be raised to cover those two taxes. This has led to a 30 percent increase in working capital.

    3. The price of a carton has increased from Shs 46,000 to Shs 60,000. This is in the market now to cover VAT. While in Kenya the comparative price is between Shs 46,000 and Shs 48,000. It therefore becomes cheaper to import wheat flour to Uganda than to process it.

    4. Imported wheat four is 25 percent implying that it is  better to import than manufacture locally.

    5. Unemployment is likely to increase given the fact that 6,000 jobs are now at stake plus some spillover effects. Uganda has got 15 millers of wheat flour and employs 6,000 people of which 20 are casual and the sector consumes electricity to the tune of over Shs 6 billion. The experience in the region is that VAT is not applicable to the supply of wheat grains. 

On the basis of the above observations, the committee makes the following recommendations:
    1. Stay VAT on wheat grains
    2. Maintain the import duty on wheat flour at 60 percent
    3. Maintain the 10 percent duty on imported wheat grains
    4. Control smuggling along the borders.

 VAT on hotel accommodation

Clause 4 (1) (c) removes paragraph (1)(u) on supply of accommodation in tourist lodges and hotels outside Kampala City from the exempt list of supplies. The committee received a petition from the Association of the Uganda Tour Operators Ltd to the effect that due to the sensitivity of the industry, introduction of VAT has posed a challenge to tour operators who already have contracts with brokers in Europe to bring tourists to Uganda and the process had been agreed upon for a period of two to three years depending on the broker.

These contracts were entered into before the reinstatement of VAT and the operators claimed that they could not change the prices since they operate on small margins. The industry has been threatened with cancellation of bookings resulting from the extra charge due to VAT.

The minister also informed the committee that Government reconsidered its decision on this proposal and proposes to stay the re-introduction of VAT for at least one year.

On the basis of the above, the committee recommends that in order to allow smooth transition and proper planning in the sector, paragraph (1) (u) appearing in clause 4(1)(c ) should be deleted.

The committee also recommends that Government should study the possibility of introducing a tourist levy. It is expected that Government will generate more revenue from such levy.

 VAT on the supply of goods and services to the contractors of hydro power project:

Clause 1 (4) (c) proposes to delete paragraph (1) (dd) (a), which exempts the supply of goods and services to the contractors of hydro power project from VAT from other hydro power projects from BAT. 

The committee received submissions from Ministry of Finance to the effect that the proposed re-introduction of VAT poses a serious financial challenge to Government. The minister contends that Government does not have the resources to finance the tax component and even if resources were available, they may delay projects due to delays in the raise of funds. 

The committees therefore recommend that in order to avoid delays in critical infrastructure like Karuma, the exemption on the supply of goods and services to the contractors of hydro power projects should be reinstated. 

However, to avoid possible abuse, the exemption should not be extended to sub-contractors. Members should understand this proposal because once they say you have won a contract, and if you are not exempt you are supposed to pay VAT. The ministry did not budget for those claims by contractors. So the committee reports that in an appropriate time, it will move amendments in accordance with the observations highlighted. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we agreed, we have received – you can go and sleep over the VAT – you changed your minds? Okay, if you changed your minds, let us hear from hon. Amongi.

8.21
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. However, I want the committee to deal with the issue of water. First, the water for domestic use – in urban, the municipality, taped water from National Water and Sewerage Cooperation is stored in jerricans and that is the case for the majority of the urban poor. So, I still support exemption on water as it was last financial year. 

In that respect, last financial year the prices of water did not go down because National Water and Sewerage Cooperation went ahead to collect those taxes on water yet URA did not tax it. Therefore, when Parliament makes a decision, it is important that that decision is followed up in all Government institutions; be it parastatal or not. 

So, I want to appeal to the House, the Chair of the committee and the minister that on the issue of the urban poor, we must delete that particular section relating to water. And I am certain it falls under 4(c) – I do not know whether it is 1(z) or 1(e); but I ask you to guide me on which particular one is to do with water so that we can move an amendment for deletion. 

But, Madam Speaker, let me also thank the minister for bringing Mama kits as one of those which are now listed for exemption on VAT. We had talked about this matter for long; Mama kits were taxed and could not be brought into the country. So, I thank the minister for exempting Mama kits. 

8.24
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am in support of the submission made by hon. Betty Amongi. In line with the Millennium Development Goal, which is stated clearly by the committee that every person must have access to clean water by the year 2015 – that is not very far from now? And the committee noted that only 28 towns in the country are receiving piped water coverage out of the six million. If the millennium deployment goal states that every person should have water, why are we going ahead to levy tax on the 272,000 homesteads in Uganda, which have this water?

So the committee recommends that Government expands coverage of piped water to eliminate middlemen. But we have ever made similar recommendations in this House and Government did not take them up seriously. How sure are we that these recommendations that the committee is asking us to make now will be taken up by Government and our issues dealt with as proposed here? 

For that matter, I challenge the committee to tell us how sure they are that this plan is in the activities of the Government for this financial year and if that is not the case, I strongly support the proposal by hon. Betty Amongi that at the appropriate  time we make amendment to remove tax on water. 

8.26
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to object to re-instating of VAT on supply of water especially piped water – hon. Minister, you do not have control over rain water –(Laughter)

In our culture where I come from, even the poorest homesteads, once you get a visitor, the only thing they should get for free is water – let alone the smile. So when you tax water – someone said that the budget is supposed to be pro-people. Two items in this budget, Kerosene and water – this is the only contentious matter in this law. If we could resolve the issue of water, I would be comfortable. But water is needed by all the people –(Interjections)– you can raise tax on mineral water if you want. 

So, Madam Speaker, I move that in paragraph 1(kk) which was exempting water should be retained. Let us find other areas to tax, but water – please hon. Jonam – actually your name means water in English. 

2.28
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise to thank the committee for the very good report and to support VAT on water. I support this though I come from a water-stressed area. I have been fighting the problem of middlemen and whenever I go to ministry of water, they tell me they do not have money to get for us pre-paid meters. When you consider this, with VAT, the highest a jerrican can go is Shs 45. The problem has been the middlemen. 

So, I support retaining this VAT and use that money to buy prepaid meters, because the law says you can either have middlemen –(Interjections)– the problem with middlemen, they will just increase and the water law is clear; you can either have the middleman, who is an operator to give you the water or you have user committees. In the public we can have public taps and purchase prepaid meters. The public would then pay money directly so that we can pass on the VAT on water otherwise we shall pass by the pre-paid meters.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I want to support the removal of VAT on the hotel industry. I come from Bunyaruguru and that is our main source of money. It was causing problems because we went there when it was introduced and people had cancelled their bookings. So, I thank the committee for this wonderful report and I beg the hon. Members in the House to support VAT on water so that we can purchase the pre-paid meters on water. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: May I ask, is it going to the Consolidated Fund or to the Ministry of Water?

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, this money is essentially with National Water because one, they pay input VAT when they import chemicals like chlorine, on electricity and other things. So once they do that, it means this VAT that is paid by the domestic consumers will enable them to claim the other one and it enhances the industry itself to expand. If I can give information, all of us use National Water because –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, you asked a direct question, “Is this money going to National Water or the Consolidated Fund? Madam Speaker, this money is going to the Consolidated Fund. The chairperson here should not tell us that this money is meant for extension of piped water. No, when you look at the policy statement, there is a loan from World Bank that is meant for extension of piped water in the country but not this.

8.32
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of VAT on water, I just want to concur with hon. Cadet that we want water to be extended to all of us. At the same time, we are the same people saying we should reduce VAT on water. We are reducing taxes left and right. How is this water going to be extended to those people that want it?

National Water and Sewerage Corporation should come up with pre-paid meters so that people can access them, pay their Shs 45 and we avoid the middlemen. I think we can afford Shs 45 as people of Uganda. Let us agree that all of us need clean water. If we limit it and say that we do not collect taxes –(Interruption)

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, hon. Nyakikongoro for giving way. I just want to inform Members that we cannot eat our cake and at the same time have it. We are crying that we want water to be taken to the rural areas. Where shall we get the money to take that water there? I think this money is going to be charged to people who are well-to-do that is the piped water in your house, so let us pay this little money so that we can get services. Thank you.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, honourable. By the way, Madam Speaker, when you look at the region, VAT is in existence in these other countries and it is high. If we continue saying that we do not pay, how are we going to get these services to the bigger population that actually needs it? Thank you.

8.35
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to raise issues on VAT. My concern is on VAT on wheat. We do not produce wheat in Uganda, it is imported - 

THE SPEAKER: We produce wheat in Kapchorwa.

MR EKUMA: Fine, Madam Speaker. If there is wheat that is produced in Uganda, it is very little. Much of the wheat that we have in this country is imported all the way from America. The wheat that we have is so minimal. Therefore, VAT on wheat must be implemented and indeed import duty should be implemented. We must collect tax. 

We are talking of infrastructure development in this country and we want to exempt most sectors in this country. How shall we raise the tax that we are yearning for? Here in No.4, the committee says that imported wheat flour is 25 percent implying that it is better to import than to manufacture locally. Where do we manufacture wheat from?

If you move to most of these factories we have in Kampala, we are processing imported wheat grain therefore there is no wheat that is locally produced from Kapchorwa that fills these factories that we have. The Ministry of Finance must explore this area and collect tax.

Madam Speaker, I support tax on piped and bottled water. My people in Bukedea need boreholes. How can Government extend these boreholes so that our people enjoy safe water? Let us introduce tax on piped water. Ugandans, we must be true to ourselves. We must expand revenue collection –(Member timed out_)

8.37
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. When they read for us this Budget, we perceived the tax on water differently. During the period between the Budget reading and now, we have undergone different sensitisation interactions with URA. The areas, which we thought were affecting our women directly in the villages were cleared and the water, which these people are intending to tax - 

Anyway, 18 percent was being collected by National Water because when you go to the water bills we get every month, you find this tax there but the tax was not going to URA, it was going to National Water and it was not assisting in the extension of water anywhere – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I will beg the Speaker to add you one more minute. Madam Speaker, I have already begged you in advance. I want Members to be clear. There is what we call agents who collect tax on behalf of URA. The moment you make a phone call and MTN collects that tax, it has to remit it to URA. Even this VAT, which National Water charges on your account; the 18 percent, is remitted to URA. So it does not keep it. Nobody should lie to you that this money is kept by National Water. The money is remitted to URA and URA remits it to the Consolidated Fund. Please, let us not confuse the two.

8.40
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two comments: one is on the water and another one is on accommodation. I have been looking at two scenarios of supplying water in the urban area and then the rural areas and it is practical that those who are paying the VAT or those who are affected are those who live in urban areas. Urbanisation in Uganda is real. It is moving on and including the poor within town. The essence of exempting the villagers is that they are poor. But I represent an urban area where we have very poor people with no food while people living in the villages have the food at least. Madam Speaker, look at a poor person in town who has to go to a health facility - and most health facilities in town are paid for - buy water and then this man in the village who has at least where to cultivate food is exempted. When I look at water they say water is life. Government is giving us free medicine; why not water? (Interjections) Yes. Because water itself is medicine. 

Madam Speaker, I want to go to No.2, accommodation on hotels in the villages. When it comes to accommodation in Kampala and then in the rural areas, and in reference to the tour operators, we got one million tourists in Uganda. Half of these people who came to Uganda are the Sudanese who come here, the children who go to the parks – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay half a minute on tourism.

MR MBAHIMBA: Now, Madam Speaker, when tour operators come here and say, “Please exempt us,” I do not see a Sudanese who comes to Uganda to be here, who is considered a tourist, having booked two years ago. This is a hoax. They are just dodging tax in Uganda.

I am proposing that we immediately impose tax on hotels –(Interjections)– yes. How many people book in advance? 

8.42
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maybe to finish his sentence, I support that those hotels should pay for – one, we need money and they get it. They should pay.

Madam Speaker, thank you. When Ministry of Finance is imposing taxes on different areas there are certain things you should put in consideration. When you look at what the committee has discovered on VAT on wheat, each and every food that we eat involves wheat. We have our local manufacturers and we should protect them so that the bread can be cheap. All our children in school eat bread; even at home we eat bread. 

But I want the minister to accept what the committee has put down. They are asking that you stay the introduction of VAT on wheat grain, maintain the import duty on wheat flour at 60 percent so that we can discourage these people who import. Maintain the 10 percent duty on imported wheat grain, control smuggling- this smuggling of wheat from Kenya on the borders when our people who grow wheat cannot benefit. 

Madam Speaker, I support what the committee has proposed because it is even generating money and at the same time protecting and giving jobs to our people. This employment issue we should always consider it when you are spreading your tax. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

8.44
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kagulu County North, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for recommending the staying or deferring of VAT on hotel accommodation up country. I remember a month ago I moved here on the Floor, under matters of national importance, a concern that was coming from the tour operators when Government abruptly introduced the VAT on accommodation. Although the VAT introduction was good, it was abrupt and yet we are dealing with a very sensitive industry. You should also realise that tourism is right now the highest income earner for this country. 

Last financial year we got $830 million. It topped everything and this was based - that most of the tourism marketing in this country is done by tour operators. Uganda Government spends only Shs240 million, that is, $90,000 on marketing Uganda. Marketing Uganda is done by tour operators, private investors. Unilaterally abruptly introducing VAT will automatically affect the industry; we shall lose more money. In fact from the minister’s submission she hoped to raise only Shs6 billion out of the introduction of VAT. When we calculated the amount of money that we would lose out of this, it would be Shs 23 billion! So, I agree with the committee that this VAT should be stayed, at least deferred until the market –(Member timed out_)

8.46
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Madam Speaker, two years ago you visited Kabale District and you saw the mountains and the hills of Kabale and how difficult it is to access water. And even when you look at my forehead this scar is a result of water- (Interjections) - yes. The committee and the Minister of Finance have explained to us and I think we need to understand it that the price of water is not because of the tax. A jerrican is Shs 25 by National Water. If you put VAT it will be Shs 30. But in the market because of the middlemen, it is Shs 200 and Shs 300. That can be sorted out administratively and we encourage National Water to sort out that as soon as possible.

Madam Speaker, I am very happy this evening that we have rejected the tax on paraffin because there are taxes that make sense and there are those that do not make sense. A tax on piped water which is going to affect majorly people in urban centres, people who can at least afford it, but aimed at expanding water to the people of Ndorwa West is a tax that I support and I ask this House to support it because we need the money to expand the water system in this country. So, it is very important that we understand that and also it is important that we know that this VAT is not going to affect boreholes. Gravity flow water will not be affected –(Member timed out_)

8.48
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to implore the House to remember that we are a national assembly legislating for both rural and urban people. We have National Water and Sewerage Corporation but we also have rural water systems for small towns and urban centres like Obongi. 

The cost of water in the rural areas is much higher, more than double the cost of the water from National Water here –(Interjections)– not middlemen. What Government does is to procure a project. After construction no provision is made for running the project. The people have to generate money locally to pay the staff. For example, in Obongi we have a water supply at the urban centre and there is no supply of fuel and the cost of one jerrican - Madam Speaker, you have been to Obongi and you know the situation of Obongi. The cost of one jerrican of water in Obongi is three times this which has been given here. The price of water there is Shs 200 per jerrican and if the people heard that the National Water and Sewerage Corporation has added a tax here, definitely this will affect the price of water in the rural areas. Also, the money collected from taxes raised from water does not translate directly to any increment in the number of water systems in the country. 

I therefore support the proposal by hon. Amongi that water should never be taxed. We should look for taxes from other areas. There are many options.

Secondly, if we increase the price of water by increasing tax on it, we divert people to the use of unsafe water sources and, therefore, we increase the disease burden –(Member timed out_)

8.51
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I have seen the fear of some of the Members of Parliament who think that it is through this VAT that they will have extension of water services to their areas. I think they are wrong. We can actually get something elsewhere, for example, from contractors and we can even get more money than this Shs 20 billion. Let us not tax water. I want to give an example; in Gulu, some of our homes have stand pipes. If you tax water, then it means that we are also going to increase prices for the poor who come to collect water from the stand pipes in other people’s homes. Let us not tax water, for goodness sake! 

I really appeal to Members of Parliament not to tax water because there are other areas.  Let us tax the spirits. The spirit can bring in up to 140 percent but you have refused to tax something that really is destroying our youth and you want to tax water. This is very unfortunate. You can give your order but the truth is –(Member timed out_)

MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and the committee for a very good report. I must say I am very impressed by the patriotism of members in terms of the need to grow the tax base and the need to raise more money and I wonder if the minister doesn’t propose the next budget framework, that we will start by discussing where to get the money because we have spent little money without explaining where it comes from. If we don’t do that, I think when discussing the Public Finance Bill, I would like to propose that we look at that –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Mukitale has just stated that he is impressed by those Members who are supportive of the proposal to deduct VAT from water. Madam Speaker, the Members who are here, whether or not in support of VAT are supportive and that is why we have been here up to this time. Is he in order to say that those who are not supporting the VAT on water are not supportive? 

THE SPEAKER: No, I don’t think he said that.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Tourism is one area which is generating us money only competing with remittances from the Diaspora. So, that is an area where we should find money and do everything that will make us get more. I am particularly interested in the security of the tourist centers. In Egypt, before it caused itself problems, all the security was provided by the government because the government knew that that was a money maker. So, these are the areas in which you should be investing money.

 VAT on water and on the debate I think earlier on kerosene; it is the middle men who are taking the money. It is not the Consolidated Fund. Look at how much a jerrican of paraffin is at the petrol station and you will find that any shopkeeper gets five times more than – (Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, we all want to get our people water as cheaply as possible. If we want –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Point of order, Madam Speaker. On this Finance Bill, I have seen the name Matia Kasaija, the minister of state holding the portfolio for Minister of Finance. Is he in order to come and debate his own Bill before we Members have finished? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, I think he is the mover of the Bill and I think he wants to explain to you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, then if that is the case, let us give our views and when we finish, the minister will clarify – (Interruptions) - I am the one holding the Floor; you will come later. You will have an hour to yourself. 

Madam Speaker, I have seen here that we are exempting Karuma Hydro Project, which is a US$3 billion project. Madam Speaker, 18 percent of US$3 billion is US$540 million which is almost US$1.5 trillion. We are exempting it and saying Government will not be able to collect. We are looking at Shs20 billion to a poor person in town. We can afford but go to Kisenyi; who can afford? Go to Kifumbira here, who can afford?  You are going to tell people to go and drink that dirty water and they will have problems. I think let us be realistic. The money going to make the pipe line is not VAT –(Interruption)

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Nandala, for giving way. I just want to inform my dear brother here about something that he obviously knows but for the sake of the House, in Mbale Municipality, where the water is piped, the cost is as has been put here which is about Shs45 a 20-litre jerrican. Just move out a bit where there is no piped water and even if you came to Sironko in my village which is in his constituency, it is Shs200 a jerrican and that is in the village. 

So, really the truth is that as long as the middlemen are addressed and people can access the water at Shs50 a jerrican, they will be more comfortable than being denied access to piped water and indeed, it is the main objective of this 18 percent. The National Water and Sewerage Corporation only operates in the urban centers and this money should go to the Consolidated Fund and try to extend water to the rural areas and make it cheaper and more affordable.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You are right. Madam Speaker, I want to inform you that I have worked on water with the locals and we have supplied water up to his home. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2, as amended – stock and transit – that should also be included. Yes -

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Madam Chair. I just want to be clear on that word “stock”. I hope the member meant “either in transit or in storage” because what we are talking about is stock. It is either stock on transit or stock in storage. I hope hon. Nandala-Mafabi that is what we all meant, in storage or in transit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Anyway, you are a doctor of animals but I will help. All accountants know that – (Laughter) - when you say something is in stock, it is in store. It is common knowledge. But when you want say that one in transit, it is called stock in transit. That is why I am saying stock in transit and in stock.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supplies in stock or in transit. So, I now put the question that the clause be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But on your French spellings, you may have to amend a bit because they are not quite - you may have to improve the French.

Clause 4

MR SSEBUNYA: On Clause 4, the committee is proposing to amend the Second Schedule to provide for supplies which are exempted from VAT. Delete paragraph (a) and the justification is that it is unfair to introduce two taxes at the same time. Members, that is the wheat grain and it is a constraint on Uganda’s especially so when the other countries in the region do not charge VAT on wheat grain. The ministry has failed to justify why wheat grain was singled out of the other exempt unprocessed food stuffs. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The minister.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, hon. Opolot was spot on when he was talking about the growing of wheat in Uganda, and the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament has said that he has to grow a lot of wheat and we have capacity to grow and actually export and this has been proven with rice already where we are now a net exporter.

So No.1, this zero rating is actually in favour of those who are producing wheat outside Uganda and they are exporting to Uganda and because of this, we, last year, lost Shs 14.7 billion.

Now this here as a tax measure, we are putting this 18 percent and we expect to raise over Shs 50 billion and some of the roads that we are proposing to build will come out of this money.

Then also with the production of wheat in Uganda if encouraged, more employment will be generated. So, it is my prayer, Madam Chair, that we allow this VAT to be charged starting this financial year.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I agree with the committee. First of all, wheat is food and if you are going to start taxing wheat, then also tax maize and rice. So, in that regard, already the imported wheat flour is being charged. Isn’t it? Mr Chairman, isn’t it being charged at 60 percent?

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So why do you want to charge this thing? I think on this one I agree with the committee. It is good and there is no tax loss by the way –(Interjections)- no, nothing. I do jot concur on that. So on this one, the committee is spot on.

MR EKUMA: VAT is a consumption tax and therefore, when VAT is collected on wheat, even these people will be able to claim this VAT. Therefore, it is better that we collect 18 percent VAT on wheat.

MR OKOT OGONG: I would like to agree with the committee because the reasoning of the minister is also very narrow and weak. He is saying that we increase tax so that people produce wheat in Uganda –(Laughter)- and yet the Government is not doing anything to promote the growing of wheat in the country. So you just want to impose tax so that people produce wheat here when Government is actually giving nothing in the production of wheat within the country!

Therefore, we would like to agree with the committee and the Leader of the Opposition that this is food. Some of these people do not know that chapatti is made out of wheat – (Interjections) - some of them do not know that this bread that we eat every day is made from wheat. They think it is some other thing else. But I want to inform Members that what you are debating now is what our people are depending on. When you talk about ‘kikomando’, ‘rolex’, ‘sambusa’ and whatever – (Laughter)- and therefore for us to now start taxing food that our people are eating, I think that you are going too far. 

I would like to appeal to you to concede. These are our people and we need to plan for them. And if you want people to produce more wheat, I want to give the Ministry of Agriculture more money so that they produce wheat and when we know that there is wheat already in the country then we can now impose tax. I think that is better planning.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, we would like the wheat that is being produced by the Uganda farmers to be exempted but the wheat that is being imported are the ones that we propose to tax so that the Ugandan people can produce more. (Applause). Government gave to Kapchorwa combine harvesters, planters and we have very big potential to grow wheat even in Zombo in West Nile. It is also part of tax measures. Over Shs 50 billion will be collected and I appeal to Members that we put this section.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Members, we need to move a bit carefully. We have passed wheat, which one is water? 

MR SSEBUNYA: The second one is 1 (u)(3) – 1 (u) –

THE CHAIRPERSON: 1 is for what?

MR SSEBUNYA; Now that one is for the hotels.

THE CHAIRPERSON: 1 (u) for hotels.

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then where is the water? – 1 (kk) is water?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: And where is the hydro? 1 (dd)(a) is the hydro.

MR SSEBUNYA: 1 (dd)(a) is the one on hydro. It is the supply of any goods and services to the contractors or sub-contractors of hydroelectric power. (dd)(a) is the supply of any goods and services to the contractors and supporters. So maybe we now go to (ii) which is still under clause 4. 

We had proposed to delete 1 (u) – 1 (u) is the supply of accommodation in tourist lodges and hotels outside Kampala appearing in clause 4(1)(c) and the justification is that due to the sensitivity of the industry, introduction of VAT has caused a challenge for the tour operators who had contracts with brokers in Europe to bring tourists at agreed prices for a period covering two to three years, and to allow for a smooth transition for proper planning in that sector.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that 1 (u) be deleted – on hotel accommodation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In which one?

THE CHAIRPERSON: 1 (u) - hotel accommodation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: 1 (u) is what?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hotel – 

MR SSEBUNYA: Hotel accommodation-

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put a question on hotel accommodation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: 1 (u) is on what?

THE CHAIRPERSON: 1 (u) is on hotel accommodation.

NANDALA-MAFABI: What about the one on wheat?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us do one by one. So, I put the question that 1 (u) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is in 1 (z)? Or there is nothing on it. What is the content of 1 (z)?

MR SSEBUNYA: I don’t have 1 (z).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us go to hydro. Let us go to 1 (dd) (a). Honourable members, this is the VAT on hydro power.

MR SSEBUNYA: Okay, we propose that we delete 1 (dd) (a) appearing in Clause 4 (1) (c). The justification is to avoid delays of infrastructure projects like Karuma and the exemption of supply of goods and services to the contractors of other hydro power projects should be reinstated. And two – no, I think let us first deal with that one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This one is proposing to –

MR SSEBUNYA: I can go to (d), which is deletion by substituting the paragraphs 1 (dd) (a) – this is the supply of any goods and services to contractors and subcontractors of hydro power projects. The justification is to avoid delays in critical infrastructure projects like Karuma. The exemption of goods and services to the contractors of other hydro power projects should be reinstated. However, to avoid possible abuse the exemption should not be extended to subcontractors. So, as we amended, we deleted the word “subcontractors” and remained with only the “contractors”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, the sub-contractor contributes to the overall development of the project. So, the moment you don’t allow the sub constrictor to get their VAT, it means the cost of production goes high. If you have exempted the main one, you must also exempt the subcontractor too – (Interjections) – yes, because let me do simple mathematics for hon. Dr Mutende to understand – (Interruptions)

DR MUTENDE: Order, Madam Chair. This is the second time the Member is referring me, first, to VAT and now to simple mathematics. Really, is the Member in order to keep demeaning my capacity to that extent repeatedly? I request that – really simple mathematics – is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think he just likes you. That is why he is always talking about you. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, thank you for that wise ruling. He is a veterinary doctor and you know what veterinary deals in. But I wanted to contribute like this: assuming the subcontractor has a contract of Shs 1 milion, the VAT on that makes it Shs 1,118,000. If you don’t exempt, it means the cost of that project will raise to Shs 1, 118,000. But if he is allowed to get their VAT, then it will be only Shs 1 million. It also means that the cost will be transferred to us who are going to consume the power. That is the reason.

MR SSEBUNYA: We concede on the statement and agree that it be applied to both contractors and subcontractors.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what do we do now? Can you restate what should be in the final text?

MR SSEBUNYA: (dd) (a) should read thus: “The supply of any goods or services to the contractors and subcontractors of hydro power projects…”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. So, I put the question that 1 (dd) (a) be amended as proposed by the chairperson of the committee.

(Question out and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: 1 (kk) is about water. But I wanted to know something about 1 (ee). These are diapers. What are they doing here? Are you proposing to tax children? Look at 1 (ee). We battled for both the sanitary towels and the diapers in Eighth or Seventh parliaments to remove those taxes.

MR SSEBUNYA: We are putting diapers in the same class as medical examination gloves to make them exempt. I think it is okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: They are repealing the paragraph?

MR SSEBUNYA: The contraceptives of all forms, ambulances, dental, medical examination gloves, maternity kits and diapers. So, those are to be exempted. So, Members can produce as many as they can.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you satisfied with that? It is okay. Right, let us now move on to 1 (kk) on water.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is water, but we haven’t dealt with the one on wheat.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The one on wheat is next.

MS AMONGI: Madam Chair, I want to move an amendment under 4 (c) for the deletion of (c) (1) (kk). I beg to move.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, I support the amendment. When we were dealing with accommodation, we talked about hotels. We know that the people who use hotels are those who have some money. I would be the first one to support the removal of VAT on hotels outside Kampala because I am an investor in that area. People who use hotels are those who are rich, but we have decided to levy VAT on water which is used by the rural and urban poor. How could we apply taxation in that area? I want to propose that if we have to bring in VAT, then we must have VAT on hotel accommodation across the board as it is on water. This will ensure uniformity because the people who use hotels are rich or tourists. These are people who come here because they have money to spend. Madam Chair – (Interruptions)

MR KAFUDA: Madam Chair, for the time I have been in this Parliament, I have not seen legislation being done retrospectively. We have finished the item on accommodation. The honourable member would just argue his case for water and justify it other than threatening that we should go back for the others. Is he in order to derail us in revenge?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we finished with the hotel issue.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, I know that but I also think that if Members get convinced, we can do a recommital. So, I am just building my case. So, the Member cannot say I am out of order. It is based on that – I say for equity, can we exempt water from taxation? Thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chair, in the previous Parliament, we faced pressure as Members of the Committee on Natural Resources to waive VAT on metered water. At the same time, hon. Executive Director brought us a request to improve the accounts of National Water. We looked at the actual burden of the VAT on domestic water and found it is not as prohibitive as we initially were informed. 

Presentations have been made and there is close to Shs 20 billion which we expect out of this tax. And in the same spirit, we removed subsidies on electricity last financial year which was targeting less than 10 percent and wondered how we could target the 90 percent without power. 

So, I make a plea to Members that whereas it sounds sensational and popular, the VAT on domestic water is not as bad –(Interruption)

MR AMONGI: Madam Chair, I have been in this House since 2001; you can have your principle and I also hold my principle. I have urged on the issue of the urban poor – I went to Katanga on foot and saw water being sold at Shs 700. I went to Kisseka Market and a jerrican of water is Shs 1,000. Those are people who buy water from domestic meters. Therefore, I am urging my point from the principle of the urban poor; not because I am sensational or a populist. If I wanted to be a populist, I would be on your side because you are the majority Members. 

So is it in order for the Member to stand up and say that Members who are against this VAT, like me, are urging based on populist ideas and are being sensational? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not think anybody is being sensational, everybody has got a position. Let us just listen to one another without pressing each other. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I was referring to the time when we waived tax, because I was part of that effort right from the committee on Natural Resources in the previous Parliament. The point I want to make – (Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, my neighbour. I seek clarification from you. In the Eighth Parliament, VAT on water was urged and waived. What has changed that we should now bring it back? Is there something which has changed that the poor people can now afford it?

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much my neighbour. That is a valid question and I was moving to that point. The fact that we had not understood – we moved because we had been informed that water was being charged Shs 200. We later verified that the figure moved only from Shs 40 to Shs 45. It is the speculator who eats the Shs 155. The speculators in your urban authorities; the ones who own the taps are the exploiters. 

So, I propose that instead of punishing the Consolidated Fund and National Water, we should talk of regulating the middleman, who pays Shs 45 to National Water but takes home supernormal profits of Shs 155. That is where the problem is. We followed up this matter and I make a plea that we talk of regulating and managing those service providers who pay peanut to National Water while milking our citizens. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that 1(KK) be repealed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, in Clause 5, amendment of schedule 5 – third schedule to the Principal Act. We are proposing to delete paragraph (a) on the supply of cereals; “Where the cereals are grown, milled or produced in Uganda”. The cereals produced in Uganda should be zero rated. And (b) minister conceded that the proposal was not well thought out. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you reintroducing the word, “Produce”, “Grown, produced and milled in Uganda? That is your amendment. 

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, when you remove the word, “Produced”, it makes it possible for imported wheat grain or cereals to be brought here, milled and then they will be zero rated and therefore we will not be able to collect the taxes. So, we would like to have this limited only to those cereals that are actually grown in Uganda not imported raw materials. So we should remove the word “produced”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So should we leave it as it is?

MR OMACH: Yes, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That means there is no amendment on Clause 5. I put the question that Clause 5 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the chairman forgot to move for the deletion of clause 4 (1) (a) on wheat.

MR SSEBUNYA: I conceded.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, the title. We go back to clause 1? Is there anything you want to change on the proposed clause 1 on the commencement? We had stood over the commencement.

MR SSEBUNYA: Somebody had contended that we were still within the provisional period. So, I was giving in on that matter.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That you will not make any changes? You have abandoned your proposal?

MR SSEBUNYA: We will not go ahead with our committee proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

9.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The House resumed, and the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

9.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013” and passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

9.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

BILLS

THIRD READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

9.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2013

THE SPEAKER: Titled settled and Bill passed.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2013

9.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2013 be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to provide for supplementary appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund under Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 of a sum of Shs 552,033,911,000 to meet additional expenditure for the financial year 2012/13. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have a report? I think it is only one page.

9.57
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Madam Speaker, a report of the Committee on Budget on the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2013. Copies were brought and I think they are somewhere there. It is a brief report, if we can have the copies.

Introduction

The findings of the report confirmed that the Appropriation Bill, 2013 is a reflection of the total supplementary expenditure of Shs 602,727,352,000 that was approved by Parliament during the course of financial year 2012/13 of which Shs 50,693,441,000 was approved as statutory expenditure and Shs 552,033,911,000 was approved for recurrent and development expenditure. 

The breakdown is in table one, which shows those figures; recurrent expenditure in Schedule 1 and 2 and development expenditure, which gives a total of Shs 602,727,352,000. 

In conclusion, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2013 amounting to Shs 552,033,911,000. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if there is no issue, I put the question that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2013 be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2013

Clause 1, agreed to.

The schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

10.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

10.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2013” and passed it without any amendment.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

10.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2013

10.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2013” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION ACT, 2013”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. 

Now, hon. Members, I really must thank you all and singular for the marathon work that has been done today. I want to thank the ministers, the Leader of the Opposition and all the Members of Parliament, the Sergeant, the technical assistants who are here and our clerks -  Yes, and myself. (Laughter) 

So what we are going to do tomorrow is to do the Committee of Supply so that our people can go to the government printers in the afternoon. I will adjourn the House to 10.00 O’clock in the morning. I do hope the Budget Committee is ready so that we can supply and then we have a weekend. The House is adjourned to 10.00 O’clock in the morning. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 10.03 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 20 September 2013 at 10.00 a.m.) 
