Tuesday, 2 September 2014

Parliament met at 02.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting, which is a very important sitting as we begin the process of finalising the budgeting process. Notwithstanding sub rule (2) and (3) of Rule 18 of our Rules of Procedure, starting Wednesday, 3 September 2014, up to the time when we conclude the budget process, the House will be sitting in the morning and afternoon, from 10.00 a.m. to 2.00 p.m. and from 3.00 p.m. to 6.00 p.m. On Mondays, the House will sit from 2.00 p.m. to 6.00 p.m. and from 10.00 a.m. to 2.00 p.m. on Fridays. 

I wish to thank the chairpersons of all the sectoral committees whose reports are now ready, and I call upon all of them to look at the schedule to know when they are appearing so that we do not have any delays. 

In the same spirit, I call upon the chairperson and members of the sectoral Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to expedite the consideration of the Bills operationalising the collection of taxes. These are the financial Bills that have to go with this same process. 

I also wish to give notice that the House will dedicate one hour on Wednesday, that is tomorrow afternoon, to pay tribute to the late Angelo Andrew Obonya, a former member of the LEGCO, former ambassador and a senior political leader in this country who passed away on the 12th and was buried subsequently, in Gulu.  

Honourable members, you know, the Budget Act makes a specific demand on when we should finish with handling the reports from the sectoral committees; we should have completed this by the 31st of August. When we adjourned plenary to send the committees to do the work, the time when we should have reported coincided with the time when census and several other activities were taking place. So, we could not call plenary. The same law gives the Speaker powers to extend the period provided in that law to accommodate whatever business spills over the period provided for in the law. 
The Speaker issued a notice extending the period from 31st August to 30th September to enable us finalise the process of budgeting. So, please, take notice that we are acting within the framework of the law, operating on the extension issued by the Speaker. 

Honourable members, you are aware of the events that took place on 1st of August, relating to a law that was passed by this House. Yesterday, I received notice from hon. David Bahati and hon. Benson Obua Ogwal giving notice to re-table the Anti-Homosexuality Bill –(Applause)– and the letter reads: “As you are aware, the Constitutional Court of Uganda nullified the Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2014 on the 1st of August, 2014 on technical grounds...” 

I am sure honourable members understand what the technical grounds were; we all do. (Laughter) So, we need to deal with those technical grounds seriously.

“The substance of this petition was not handled by court. Parliament has already granted leave for us to present this Bill. In the meantime, we are also looking into other grounds, which were raised in the petition. 

The purpose of this letter is to ask you to allot the time for us to re-table the Bill. 

Attached is a copy of names of over 240 members of Parliament who have so far expressed their support and do second re-tabling of this Bill.” (Applause) Actually, the list, which is attached, does not have only 240 members; it has 254 Members of Parliament! (Applause)

I am also advised that although hon. David Bahati was championing the Bill, the process of reintroducing it and working through for these signatures was initiated by the honourable member for Kawempe North, hon. Latif Sebaggala. (Applause)

So, honourable members, the notice is given here, but as you are aware, right now, we are focusing on the budget. The Bill was already here and we passed it into law. If it had still been within Parliament, it would still be property of Parliament and we would have done whatever was necessary for us to correct the anomalies that could have happened. But as it is now, it has left Parliament and had been signed into an Act of Parliament. So, this Parliament has no authority over it now. The authority that Parliament has is to wait for its reintroduction. When it is reintroduced, then we will handle it appropriately and please, deal with those issues you are aware of, which created the situation that led to the nullification of this Bill. 

When we finish with the budget and as soon as the movers of this Bill are ready, we will proceed. You are also aware that this House had already granted leave for the Members to do the same and the necessary documents from the Ministry of Finance had also been finalised. So, we will just do the rest of the things administratively once they are ready. (Applause)

Honourable members, I should have said at the beginning; I had a request from the Minister of Finance that there are documents that he needed to lay today to facilitate whatever is going on in the committees. There are three documents. I need you to restate them for the record so that we know what they are.

2.18
MR MUHAMMAD KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. In your communication, you have indicated new days on which Parliament will sit. I am particularly concerned about your pronouncement on Fridays, where you have indicated that Parliament will sit from 10.00 a.m. to 2.00 p.m. Friday is a special day for Muslims for Jumma prayers, and they start at 12.30 p.m. and if you are late, 1.00 p.m. And we always conclude the prayers at 1.45 p.m.

Therefore, we beg you, kindly, to readjust that time to accommodate us to have special prayers, which are held on Fridays. Maybe, Parliament could end its business at midday or 12.30 p.m. I beg for your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The prayers of the honourable member for Butambala are accordingly granted. On Fridays we will be sitting from 10.00 a.m. to midday, to accommodate the Jumma Prayers. (Applause)

Honourable members, I was saying that there are documents to be laid by the Minister of Finance. I think there is a corrigendum – have you supplied this to the Clerk, honourable minister? I mean the Corrigendum to the Draft Budget Estimates for the financial 2014/2015 and Corrigenda Schedule II to the Draft Budget Estimates for financial year 2014/2015 and three, there is  a statement to withdrawal some of the supplementary expenditures for the financial year 2013/2014. I think the clerk at Table will be reading these at the appropriate time and if that appropriate time would be now, then you would call the matter now.

2.19
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For avoidance of doubt, there has been a change in the method of work. Wherever the government present their policy statements, the Opposition likewise presents alternative policy statements. But I would like to say that we have been meeting resistance from the leaderships of some of the committees. It is important that we agree that after the committees have presented their reports, time should be given not only to the respective sector ministers but also to the shadow minister of a particular sector. 

Just for avoidance of doubt – I know we have already agreed on this method of work but I want us to adopt it as what is going to happen. The shadow ministers should be able to respond to the reports of the respective committees and sectors. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member for Dokolo, who is also the Opposition Chief Whip, is just restating the Speaker’s ruling in the past. That has been the practice of this House. That is why we always say that alternative policy statements should be sent to the committees as well so that they are handled together.

So, if matters arise from your alternative policy statements, then you should be able to respond to them. If no matters arise, then you might have to keep your peace.

2.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker, allow me comment on what the Opposition Chief Whip has raised. There has been an issue in the committees where the shadow ministers would want the sector ministers to be present when they are presenting their alternative policy statements, which created a lot of disagreements in those committees.

I would like to pray that in the future this should come out clearly as far as what is supposed to happen in the committees. It will help much in adopting a uniform style; there should be a procedural way of doing it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, I think the procedure is very clear. Once a matter is already before a particular committee, it is that committee to determine its order of business. If the committee determines that it wants to talk to so and so, that should be so. It is the committee to generate a list of the people they want to interact with. This is because, for the example, the minister might be needed to answer specific questions. If the shadow minister is required to answer some questions, they will be invited to answer those specific questions. 

Otherwise, the order is determined by the committee. It means that nobody can come from somewhere and say they want it to be done in a certain format. That will not be right. Whatever is supposed to be done will be agreed upon by members of that committee in their first meeting for everybody to know how to go about it. 

So, it is clear. And that means that if there are some problems that have occurred, we will have to repeat the procedure so that it is understood by Members from both Government and Opposition. This will help to weed the process of unnecessary interferences.

LAYING OF PAPERS
    I) CORRIGENDA TO THE DRAFT BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015
    II) CORRIGENDA SCHEDULE II TO THE DRAFT BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015
    III) STATEMENT TO WITHDRAW SOME OF THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

2.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I would like to lay the Corrigenda for the Draft Budget Estimates for the financial year 2014/15 – Corrigendum I.

I also beg to lay Corrigendum Schedule II to the Draft Budget Estimates for financial year 2014/15 and finally, a statement to amend Schedule II and Addendum I and II to Schedule II of the Supplementary Schedule for last financial year totalling to Shs 98.42 billion, which was not expended last financial year. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the documents that have been laid by the minister. They stand committed to the Budget Committee for expeditious handling to fit within the timeframe that has been granted for handling these matters in the House.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the model used by the hon. Omach in presenting these documents is very strange and new in the history of Parliament of Uganda. I do not know under what rule and procedure the corrigenda have been laid on the budget that was presented with all the tax proposals presented. We already borrow money drawing from Consolidated Fund and borrowing from commercials banks.

All sectoral committees have almost concluded their reports. So, with your guidance, I would like to seek to know under what rule the hon. Omach has laid this corrigendum.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Budget Committee will advise the House on how to proceed with this matter when they look at it. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

    I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2013/2014; AND
    II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this particular motion was already moved on 12th June and so it is already before the House, to consider those two items. So, we can now proceed to handle the specifics from the respective sectoral committees.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015 FOR THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chair, I see you have made some executive summary. I would advise that you proceed with that one so that we save time.

2.25
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON ICT (Mr James Kabajo): Mr Speaker, in accordance with section 11 of the Budget Act, Article 155(4) of the Constitution, Rule 138(1) and  177(a) of the Rules of Procedure, the Committee on Information and Communication Technology considered the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology, the National Information Technology Authority Uganda (NITA-U) and affiliated agencies for financial year 2014/2015.

This report is available on the iPads if the honourable members can check under today’s business, the report is there.

The report covers the following institutions: vote 20 Ministry of Information and Communications Technology and its affiliated institutions listed below: UCC, Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Uganda Posts Limited; and Vote 126 of NITA-U. 

The report highlights the following sector performance, key planned activities for the financial year 2013/14 and key planned activities for financial year 2014/2015, budget proposals for financial year 2014/15 and it has observations and recommendations.

Methodology

The committee examined the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2014/15 and made reference to the following documents as written below.

We also held meetings with the Ministry of Information and Communications Technology, NITA-U, UCC, Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology and Uganda Posts Limited.

Mr Speaker, since the report is with the members, for purposes of moving quickly, I will now proceed to the observations and recommendations. I will skip the details.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is fine, but you could also lay the hard copy of the full report on the Table.

MR KABAJO: I am going to do that, Mr Speaker. I will also take the opportunity to lay on Table the minutes of the meetings that we held.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes of the committee meetings.

MR KABAJO: When I finish presenting, I will also lay on Table the hard copy of the report. For the Ministry of ICT the committee made the following observations:
    1. National ICT policy; since the establishment of the Ministry of ICT in 2006, the sector has been operating without an approved national ICT policy. The committee observes that lack of a national ICT policy denies the ministry the ability to implement projects in a coordinated manner in the sector.  The committee recommends that the minister pursues approval of the national ICT policy expeditiously.

    2. UCC Act, 2013 regulations; since the UCC Act, 2013 commenced in January 2013, the accompanying regulations have not been laid before Parliament as stipulated in section 93(3) of the Act. The committee observes that the delay in presenting the regulations hampers the operationalisation of the Act. The committee, therefore, recommends that the regulations should be laid before Parliament in accordance with the Act in order for them to have the full force of the law.


    3. National Post Code and addressing system; A pilot project was started in Entebbe Municipality in 2010. I request members to read of the issues. The committee observes that the project has been piloted for a very long time of three years. The committee recommends that the Ministry of ICT should expedite the drafting and tabling of the national post codes and addressing system law. The pilot projects should be wound up and the lessons learnt compiled to inform the proposed law. The National Post Code and the national addressing system should be implemented by UPL with UCC as a coordinator and the Ministry of ICT as the overall Supervisor. Any agency implementing the national addressing system should adhere to the standards that will be stipulated by the Ministry of ICT under the said law, which has been referred to above. 

    4. Communications tribunal; section 60(1) of the UCC Act, 2013 establishes a tribunal to arbitrate matters in the ICT sector. However, this tribunal is not yet in place. The need for the tribunal is based on the specialised nature of the sector that calls for a dedicated arbitrator supported by technical staff. The committee has been demanding that this tribunal be set up for a long time and the ministry has not acted. The committee recommends that the tribunal be expeditiously established to handle disputes in the sector.

    5. Human resources in the ministry; the ministry has failed to attract the desired competent human resources due to the low remuneration compared to the private sector. Even when the jobs are advertised, they do not get sufficient responses. The wage bill of the ministry has been fixed at Shs 944 million for the last two years, hence incapacitating any planned recruitments by the ministry. The committee recommends that the finance ministry increases the wage bill for the Ministry of ICT to cater for its recruitment plan. In the meantime, the ministry should get technical support from the agencies it supervises.

    6. Computer emergency response team, there is no doubt that IT within the country is associated with many benefits and certain risks such as malware etcetera. Therefore, the country needs to set up protection mechanisms to protect computer systems against cyber attacks. The committee recommends that the country sets up a national computer emergency response team to safeguard the operations of Government agencies and other computer users in the country. Government should avail funding for this activity.

    7. Internet governance; Uganda, like the rest of the world, is increasingly becoming dependent on the internet. To that end, there is need to pay adequate attention to resources such as the Uganda Internet Exchange Point (UIXP) and the country code top level domain name. The UIXP, which assists in maintaining internet traffic within the country, is managed through an ISP association with minimal involvement of Government. The country top level domain that is “.ug” on the other hand is currently operated by a private entity. Despite the private manager maintaining the internet infrastructure in the country, Government should play the required role in order to secure all internet users in the country, especially those who use the .ug domain. The committee has raised this same issue on many occasions but no action has been taken by the ministry. The committee observes that Uganda is one of the few countries in the world where Government is not involved in the management of its top level domain name leaving the country at a risk. Neglecting these resources the committee observes in the information security context is like liberalising the military services of the country. The committee recommends that the Ministry of ICT and NITA-U should take over management of the UIXP and at the same time, pursue a public-private partnership with the current private sector manager of the top-level domain.

	The NBI should be linked to the UIXP – I remind members that the abbreviations are defined at the beginning.

8. 	Data Protection and Privacy Bill

Permeation of internet in the country and the collection of data that is analysed and stored electronically requires or necessitates a law that protects the source of the data. Many countries have this law – Kenya, our neighbours, enacted theirs in 2008. Uganda has procrastinated in processing this law. 

The committee recommends that the ministry expeditiously handles the Bill, given that the various government agencies are collecting data from the citizens and many citizens are using their financial cards to purchase various products and services, leaving data trails at various points of sale. You should note here that it is not only Government agencies collecting data but even private agencies and companies.

9. 	E-waste Management

The committee was informed that an e-waste management policy was developed and approved by Cabinet two years ago and that the strategy was launched a month ago. However, Uganda lacks an e-waste processing plant to handle the burden that comes with e-waste. A memorandum was recently signed under which used computers would be exported to Kenya, which has a plant. This plant is an outcome of an alliance between the ministry, Dell, a private international computer company and the Kenyan Government.

The committee recommends that Government develops incentives to attract an investor to set up an e-waste processing plant in Uganda.

10. 	Namanve ICT Hub

The committee was informed that the ministry working with NITA-U plans to set up an ICT hub in Namanve that will accommodate the ministry, NITA-U, ICT park and a business processing outsourcing centre. The contract for a feasibility study for the project is going to be signed soon by NITA-U.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of ICT and NITA-U should acquire their own premises as the committee has recommended previously.

Vote 126 - NITA-U

Mr Speaker, as before, I will skip the details since Members can read on their own. But I will go straight to the observations and recommendations for NITA-U.

    1. National Backbone Infrastructure

The committee was informed that phase I and phase II of the National Backbone Infrastructure were completed and commercialised and the addendum to the contract of phase III was signed. The proceeds from commercialisation of this investment will be shared in the ration of 1:1 between NITA-U and the manager of the National Backbone Infrastructure. 

The five-year renewable contract was signed with the manager of the NBI on 31 May 2013. Phase III of this project is due to be implemented this financial year and will cover Kampala-Masaka, Masaka-Mutukula, Masaka-Mbarara, Mbarara-Katuna, Masindi-Kyenjojo. It will also have a network operating centre. Phase IV will be funded under the World Bank RTIT Project and will cater for all the districts in the country, which are not yet connected to the NBI. It is envisaged that a majority of MDAs will be connected to the NBI by the end of the current financial year.

The committee observed that commercialisation in the ratio of 1:1 seems to favour the commercial manager more. The committee recommends that when the current contract expires, the ratio of sharing the proceeds should benefit NITA-U and Government more and that NITA-U should ensure faster roll-out of the last mile connectivity to the underserved areas of the country.

    2. E-government Services

The committee observed that to achieve the benefits of e-government, MDAs should have qualified IT personnel. In many of them, the function of IT is delegated to individuals whose professional background is not IT-related. This has compromised the uptake of e-government services, which is well reflected in the failure to utilise the equipment that was utilised in the MDAs under phase I of the NBI Project, such as video conference facility.

The other observation is the reality that where the qualified IT officers exist, they do not report to NITA-U and therefore may not be under any obligation to implement the rationalisation plans that NITA-U has set up.

The committee recommends that IT personnel within MDAs that are not originally IT professionals should be re-tooled and equipped with adequate and necessary skills to perform those roles. In order to achieve the e-government strategy, IT officers should be deployed and remain accountable to NITA-U in the same way accountants are deployed and remain accountable to the Accountant-General’s Office.

    3. BPO and IT parks

Business Process Outsourcing centres have potential to create employment. The countries where BPOs have been successful, such as India, have a well-developed IT enabled services strategy and the industry derives its success in conglomeration benefits. In Uganda today, the BPO industry is anchored on the concept of call-centres and the bit of accounting services and data entry. It is envisaged that the IT park to be set up in Namanve will be a centre of excellence for IT software development and maintenance.

The committee recommends that Government should take advantage of the many IT graduates in the country, especially software developers to enhance their ability to produce software products that are relevant for the operation of MDAs and the country at large. More specifically, the ICT sector should have an innovation fund. Government should implement the incentive scheme so as to encourage the private sector to set up more BPO centres. NITA-U should advertise the BPO services offered in the country in order to attract more investors to the sector.

    4. National Database

There are many Government agencies that are collecting data from the same sources but for different purposes. It is important that all these national databases are integrated to provide a single source of data. NITA-U has prioritised this activity in the framework of RTIT. The committee emphasises the need for the data protection and privacy law in order that this data, which is being collected in properly secured.

    5. Information Security

The issue of information security should be regarded as a matter of national security. NITA-U has developed a comprehensive national information security framework that details the end-to-end of information security. However, the department within NITA-U, which has only two staff, is inadequately equipped to implement the framework and its roadmap.

The committee recommends that this being a very important aspect, the staffing needs of the department should be addressed as a matter of agency.

Uganda Communications Commission

I will again go straight to the observations and recommendations:

    1. Analogue-to-digital Migration

Under RCDF, UCC is facilitating the process of analogu -to-digital migration. Having agreed at the World Radio Communication Summit that the entire world migrates from analogue to digital terrestrial transmission, all countries are required to have migrated by June 2015. In Uganda, UBC was accorded single signal distributor status unlike other countries which have more than one signal distributor.

It was envisaged that UBC would as a result be unbundled to provide for two companies; one for infrastructure and the other for content. The overall benefits of the migration process will be the spectrum dividends that the country requires to utilise the 4G/LTE technology.

The committee observes that given the deadline of June 2015 referred to above, it is evident that Uganda is behind schedule with a dysfunctional national steering committee. This committee does not have a detailed analogue to digital migration roadmap.

The committee has, in the past, strongly objected to having one signal distributor for the entire country. The committee recommends that in addition to UBC, Government should procure at least one more signal distributor to avoid a monopoly situation.

Given that UBC will be providing service to other broadcasters, it is only prudent that the infrastructure part of it, that is the signal distribution, is separated from content and, therefore, the committee recommends the express unbundling of UBC by making the necessary provision amendment in the UBC Act.

Government should create a functional project management unit that should put together a detailed workplan for the analogue-to-digital migration plan and implement it.

2. 	Intelligent Network System (INS)

The INS is known for revenue assurance and quality of service. Over the years, UCC has attempted to procure and install the INS but has met resistance from the operators because the INS was not provided for by law. Parliament mitigated this by including a provision in the Communications Act, 2013. Countries like Rwanda and Ghana have already installed this system.

Whereas the prime purpose of the INS was to monitor incoming international traffic, revenue assurance would be the most relevant in the Ugandan context given that within the region under the Northern corridor framework, roaming charges might be abandoned.

The committee observed that UCC is reluctant to implement the INS. The committee recommends that UCC should install the INS as a matter of urgency considering that several calls for bids have been cancelled in the past.

3. 	Rural Communications Development Fund (RCDF)

The RCDF, which constitutes the universal access fund for Uganda was established in 2003 for the primary purpose of ensuring that all underserved areas in the country have communication services. The background to this was that whereas telecom operators have license obligations that require them to take communication to all parts of the country, they did not invest in areas, which they regarded as economically unviable and were always happy to pay a fine associated with failure to meet this obligation.

Within the scope of the International Telecommunications Union, countries represented by their regulators and to an extent operators agreed that a levy be imposed on the gross annual revenue of operators so that governments take the responsibility of ensuring that economically unviable areas were served through the universal access and the universal service fund.

Historically, Uganda levied a one per cent charge but when the UCC Act was amended, the levy was increased to two per cent on account of the many unfunded priorities in the telecommunications sector and the ICT sector in general but also significantly to address the ratio of computers to students in schools where RCDF has established computer laboratories.

Contrary to the belief that this fund has not served its purpose, the following are some of the achievements of the fund. I think, in this case, I was going into the details. So, I will skip to the recommendations. 

There is table five, which shows the achievements of RCDF and members are encouraged to read for themselves. Table six is about the number of schools, which conducted UNEB ordinary level computer examinations, I think with support from the computers from RCDF. You can look at that table also. Table seven is about the number of students who sat for UNEB Computer Studies Ordinary Level examinations from 2005 to 2013.

I now go to the recommendations. There is also another long passage concerning the increment of the levy from one per cent to two per cent, which I encourage members to read for themselves. 

Recommendations

    1. The committee recommends that UCC urgently standardises all computer laboratories in schools.
    2. That RCDF is managed independently of UCC in the same way that the Uganda Road Fund operates independently of UNRA for it to be more efficient.
    3. Rather than the finance ministry pursuing the one per cent and requesting for it to go to the Consolidated Fund as proposed in the Finance Bill, 2014, the Ministry of ICT should consider a board member for the fund from the Ministry of Finance to allay the misconception that UCC has a lot of money, which is unutilised, yet in actual sense, the sector has many unfunded priorities for which the Consolidated Fund has not been able to provide for in the past. Even in the budget for this year, those priorities are not provided for.

Under telemedicine, RCDF has supported a number of regional hospitals and health centres with ICT facilities to improve their efficiency and also to provide learning opportunities for the medical personnel.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, on the previous paragraph, is the Finance Bill, 2014 or is it 2013?

MR KABAJO: The one for this year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, for the budget?

MR KABAJO: Yes, under the Finance Bill for this financial year-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That would be the Finance (Amendment) Bill.

MR KABAJO: Yes, Mr Speaker. Under telemedicine, the learning opportunities are delivered online for the medical personnel to continue in the acquisition of knowledge related to their profession. The long term benefits of the e-health initiative under RCDF is for Government to mitigate the ratio of doctor to patient by using telemedicine to access specialised consultants without the patients having to travel to the referral hospital. This project has, however, been delayed due to what the committee views as delays in procurement in addition to some health centres not being well aligned to the programme.

The committee observed that a pilot project has taken a long time. That there is inadequate coordination between the Ministry of Health and Uganda Communications Commission/Rural Communications Development Fund, which has resulted into lack of ownership by the health personnel who are implementing this telemedicine project in the different health centres and hospitals where it is.

The committee recommends that:
1. 	That the pilot project should be completed and the project rolled out to the rest of the country.

2. 	There should be increased coordination between the Ministry of Health and UCC/RCDF in the implementation of this telemedicine project at all levels.

Quality of service

As communication operators acquire more users, the quality of service becomes worse. Whereas UCC issued a moratorium to telecom companies over unsolicited messages, which continue to be a problem, there is also the issue of dropped calls. The committee observed that UCC has not efficiently carried out its regulatory and enforcement role in accordance with its mandate.

The committee recommends that UCC should emulate regulators in Nigeria and Rwanda who have, in the past, taken punitive action by way of fines on offending operators.

Interception of communications

The Regulations of interception of communications Act were enacted in 2010. To operationalise this, it was required that mobile phone users register their Subscriber Identity Module (SIM) cards. To date, unregistered users continue to feature on the networks of telecom companies implying that the purpose of registering the SIM-cards might never be achieved. 

The committee recommends that the Minister of Security, who is responsible for the law, should work with UCC and ensure that the objective of the law is met by blocking the unregistered SIM-cards from accessing telecom services. 

Counterfeit phones

For the past two years, UCC has alluded to a campaign against counterfeit phones. The telecommunications operators partly blame the poor quality of service on these counterfeit products, some of which do not have the international mobile equipment identifier, which is retrieved by dialling that number as you see it there. 

In neighbouring Kenya, counterfeits were abolished and these are likely to find their way into Uganda through the porous border points. The committee learnt that UCC has procured the central equipment identification register to disable fake phones. However, the equipment has never been installed because telecom companies claim that they can only use it when regulations for the new Communications Act are put in place. 

The committee observed that UNBS is not vigilant in detecting fake products, which enter our markets including counterfeit phones. The committee recommends that the Ministry of ICT and UCC should as a matter of urgency, get the regulations that operationalise the Communications Act 2013 tabled on the Floor of Parliament within two months of presenting this report. 

Uganda Institution of Information and Communications Technology

I will go straight to the recommendations. Let me read a little bit on it before the recommendations. Uganda Institute of Information Technology (UIICT) is mandated to provide training intervention in ICT so as to support the national strategic objective of increasing the use of ICT throughout the country to enhance development. 

Section 5(1)(w) of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013 provides that Uganda Communications Commission will operate and manage UICT. This has been done to enable the institute get policy guidance and funding to upgrade it into a centre of excellence to the level of internationally renowned ICT institutions. 

The committee observed that the institute has capacity and can serve the purpose of an ICT park. It is, therefore, necessary for the institute to develop a master plan that will enable it to achieve that objective. It is envisaged that if planned well, the institute can be a hub for ICT innovation in terms of software that is relevant to the Ugandan context, which if adopted by Ugandan MDAs will reduce the resources spent on proprietary software. In addition, the institute has the potential to be a centre of the tools and retools of Government employees in ICT skills as is the case with a similar institute in Ghana. The committee recommends that Government should develop the pre-requisite infrastructure at the institute for it to accommodate the observations above. 

Uganda Posts Ltd

Let me go straight to the observations and recommendations. On page 33, the committee would like to see Posta Uganda transformed into an e-government service delivery entity similar to what is happening in Kenya. Kenya has transformed the post offices into a one-stop service delivery centre popularly known as “Huduma”, where booths are set up in the post office building for various Government agencies that deliver direct services to the public. Such services range from renewal of passports, national IDs, drivers licences to registration of land titles and customer services in general. 

Uganda Posts Ltd represents Uganda at gatherings of the Universal Postal Union. It is at one of these gatherings that it was decided that all countries must adhere to certain standards such as the national post code and addressing system and as earlier mentioned, Uganda lags behind in the implementation of this critical resource, unlike our neighbours Tanzania who are in advance stages of implementation. 

Whereas Uganda Posts Ltd is one of the stakeholders, which the ministry has worked with during the pilot project of the national post code, they did not play a very significant role despite they being a major beneficiary of the outcome. The committee believed that Posta Uganda is in full position to manage the post code project. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Post Office should restructure and adopt the Huduma project model in Kenya. The post office should be a lead implementer of the National Post Code and Addressing System, with UCC as the coordinator. 

ICT funding in Uganda: a comparative analysis

In the past, Uganda enjoyed attention as a key ICT aggregator in its operations. This state of affairs has since diminished and can be attributed to the inadequate attention that Government pays to the sector, despite its being one of the four strategic economic interventions in the country – and despite this sector being one of the growth sectors which has been identified by Government. 

The table below shows the budgets for the ICT sectors in Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda. I will not read the one for 2013/2014, but I will read the projections for 2014/2015. Kenya expects to spend $110.3 million; Rwanda expects to spend $34.9 million, for Uganda, we expect to spend $6.4 million. 

Members can also look at table 10 of the e-government readiness indices of different countries, including Uganda. Look at them to acquaint yourselves with Uganda’s position in e-governance readiness. 

Based on the above, it is inconceivable that Government is proposing to take away 50 percent of the levy of operators to the Consolidated Fund. In fact, it is a contradiction for Government to recognise ICT as one of the four strategic pillars of the economy whereas only 0.1 per cent is provided to the sector from the Consolidated Fund. Overall, the sector contributes six per cent to the economy. The Ministry of Finance is proposing to take away even the non-tariff revenue that the sector has. 

Overall, the sector contributes six per cent to the economy of Uganda. It seems to the committee that the sector is given lip service and may not be as strategic as Government is saying. 

Conclusion 

The committee on Information and Communication Technology recommends that Parliament approves a total of Shs 45,235,878,000 out of which Shs 10,039,050,000 is for vote 20 of the Ministry of ICT, and Shs 35,196,828,000 is for vote 126, NITA-U. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the committee. I thank the committee for –

MR KABAJO: And I beg to lay on Table, the report of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that copy of the report. 

Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Sectoral Committee on Information and Communication Technology on the Ministerial Policy Statement of the Ministry of Information Technology and Communication for the budget for the financial year 2014/2015.

The committee has made several policy recommendations but in relation to the specific matter before us is that the committee recommends that Parliament approves a total of Shs45.210 billion out of which Shs 10.14 billion is for Vote 020 – Ministry of ICT and Shs 35.197billion is for vote 126 – the National Information Technology Authority. That is the recommendation of the committee. I now propose the question for your debate.

But before we get to debate this matter, allow me recognise in the public gallery, the participants from the International Law Institute, African Centre for Legal Excellence who are studying legislative drafting at the institute in Kampala and they include: Momodou from Gambia, Robert Kandulu, from the Malawi Law Commission, TshepoMokgothu from Botswana, Keita Rose Atkinson from the International Law Institute, Brenda Trespalacios, an administrator at the International Law Institute and hon. Paul Mwiru, who is one of the participants in this course. Please, join me in welcoming guests who are here to observe our proceedings. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Abalokweri Primary School in Apac District. They are represented by hon. Lucy Ajok, the Woman Member for Apac District and the hon. Maxwell Akora, the Member for Maruzi County. They are here to observe the proceedings. So, please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, the issues in this sector are fairly straightforward. So, I expect, if any, very limited debate. But I certainly request the shadow minister for ICT to give some short interventions though not now and then the sector minister will conclude and we take a vote on the issue.

If there is any debate, it has to be limited. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to beg your indulgence regarding the process we are undertaking. I feel that it would be procedurally right for the Shadow Minister of ICT to first present so that the debate can just go on without breaking.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, at this stage, there is no presentation. There are only responses to issue they submitted to the committee. Even the minister will not make a presentation.

If there are any issues raised, the shadow minister will make responses before the ICT minister closes. After that, we will conclude. There will be no submissions at this stage, please. And going by the numbers that are standing, we have to limit the time for each Member to debate. So, how many minutes for each?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Three minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, agreed, three minutes for each member to debate.

3.10
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee members for a good report. But I would like to inform Government that we need to look at Uganda as one unit. Uganda is a landlocked country and so, it is the ICT system that can now link us to the rest of the world. This means that Government needs to know that ICT is one of the priority sectors but it ends there without putting resources. 

I am, therefore ,surprised and that is why I want to ask this House – even the ICT hub is being proposed to be put in at Namanve, why not in Omoro or Kasese? That is why I am saying we should look at Uganda as one country. This will help us to decongest Kampala. It will also help us to spread certain services. Otherwise, we cannot continue having everything in Kampala, causing congestion and traffic jam. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, therefore, I would like to make a proposal that the ICT hub be constructed in Omoro County to thank our Deputy Speaker or in Kasese to thank our Minister of Defence. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That motion is already adopted. (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. But on a serious point, honourable members, I am not just talking for the sake. When you look at the trade component of this country, you realise that South Sudan has been the biggest trading partner in this region. So, with the ICT hub there and the standard Gauge Railway, we will link ourselves to DRC and South Sudan and the entire Northern Uganda and those people have been suffering with war. 

Another important point is about removing the two per cent levy from ICT equipment. Honourable members, this money is for rural communication – this is money where we can call the hon. Nasasira is here and direct him but when you put into the Consolidate Fund Account – you know how hard it is to deal with Ministry of Finance. I know it as a Shadow Minister of Finance. That is money to connect our rural schools in the country and people’s farms. For example, if you have a pineapple farm like the one of the Minister of Defence, you can connect yourself to the world market using this network, to showcase what is produced in Uganda. That money can also be used to connect hospitals, hotels and some of you travel –(Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the House that the two per cent that we have been giving to the UCC is, in most cases, underutilised. Most of the monies keep lying idle on the fixed accounts. So, it is better to remove taxes on computers to take our one per cent to finance our sectors and leave the other one per cent that they can effectively handle and utilise.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is the honourable member in order to make a very serious statement that money is usually kept somewhere idle without giving us any figures and where that idle money is kept? We are not aware of that idle money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you give the House information on where you saw this money? If not, you withdraw your statement.

MR SASAAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the Finance Committee and quite often, we interacted with the UCC. They have always accepted that much as they do not have tax challenges with URA, monies have been there on the accounts idle. But the fact of the matter is that even if you went to the accounts of the UCC, Mr Minister, you will realise that this commission has got money on its accounts that has stayed there for a long time not being utilised. I can table it when we come in here to present the finance committee report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not able to rule on this point of order because the information is not very clear. Please, wind up.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I beg that you give me some one more minute. Colleagues, this money under the universal communications access – Kenya has the same money, Rwanda has the same money, Tanzania has the same money and it is a levy, not a tax.

Under the law of Uganda, it is a tax you take to the Consolidated Fund. This is the money even MTN and all these telecom companies use when they were starting, for taking booths in many places –(Member timed out.)

3.16
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My issue with this report is when they point out that most telecommunication companies deceived us that they were having a subscribers’ registration and up to today, many unregistered numbers are still on the network.

It is not only the unregistered numbers being on the network, the telecommunication companies did hurry in an attempt to beat the deadline that UCC gave and at the end of the day, they captured raw data to deceive this country that that data is computerised.

Recently, somebody was soliciting for money on the internet and would give a number to which mobile money must be sent and the issue was taken up by a few friends in the police force. What we later discovered was that the person who was receiving money was using a name of a lady, but on the receiving side, when you call a man would answer.

So, I would really implore that this report should have gone as deep as discovering what benefits these telecommunications are receiving from simply hoodwinking us that all mobile subscribers are registered. That is where the issue is.

The issue of money being controlled by the Minister of Finance; I think they are complaining about some Shs 8 billion, which is lying on the account and the accusation that this money is there to gain interest but my understanding is that if we allow this money to go under Ministry of Finance, the money will be gone in just a day. 

My only problem with their recommendation is that they have not considered, in detail, how to increase and expand the programme of taking internet connections to the villages? In Nebbi I would assure you that they do it in a haphazard way; they come today do the training and then come back shortly after to pass the people who have done the training and gained the knowledge. Even in secondary schools, connectivity is poor and they have not done any follow up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister for ICT, you will recall that this matter of SIM card registration came before this House and a decision was taken. The Prime Minister made a commitment to this House that those will be taken care of. I do not know how far you have gone with this matter but you need to get some response on what you did especially on the latest decision of the House.

3.20
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Time and again, we advocate for increased funding for most of these MDAs but it is important for this House to find out how effective and efficient are these entities run and governed.

I say this because the chair of the committee is advocating for UCC to retain the two per cent levy it charges as per section 68 of the UCC Act. Since inception of UCC, it has not had a board and it is a requirement as per the Act that the board approves the budget estimates for UCC.

I want the minister of ICT to explain to this House why it has taken long. Up to now, he has failed to appoint a board and imagine the amount of monies that goes to this institution and the decision-making and oversight only lies between the minister and the executive director.

Chances are that this money can be lost if we do not put governance structures in place. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.22
MR KIWALABYE MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 28, about interception of communication, the committee is urging the Minister of Security to work with UCC but I do not think we are supposed to work like that. You cannot urge a ministry which you do not have any control over. What the committee would do is to urge the Minister of ICT to work with the Minister of Security and UCC to ensure that this problem is solved. But you cannot urge the ministry, which you do not have control over.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.23
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you look at the expenses, 2012/13 the wage bill was Shs 2.3 billion but when you compare to other years, the wages have gone down. For example 2013/14 it was Shs 0.9 billion, 2014/15 still Shs 0.9 billion, which means that this wage bill, either people retired, died or they worked and disappeared after one year.

In addition to that, removing money from UCC to the Consolidated Fund when you are well aware that UCC has been giving computers to our schools, hospitals and other institutions, I want the Minister of Finance to repent, that money does not belong to you. Look for money from somewhere else but leave UCC to function very well. (Applause)

We have phones that are not registered and they are still working. There is a phone SIM card number 0772748828; this person is masquerading as Engineer Denis from Hoima. He says he works in Tullow Oil; he has robbed everybody. He calls people to get jobs in Tullow. They deposit money and he deceives that there are even houses for rent. I am urging you and I am seeing Engineer Mutabazi in this hall go and get this man because you know where this man is because this phone is still on. It is on and off; get this man for us, 0772748828. This is a thief with this SIMcard.  I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

3.25
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support other Members who contributed that we should not give more money to UCC on top of two percent. In fact, we wanted to remove everything because they have no board as it was alluded to. They also have money on fixed deposit. We were also tasking them to produce how much interest has been accrued on those fixed deposits and what they have been using it for.

They told us that they have already put computers in 90 percent of the schools in Uganda. Now, Mr Speaker, why do they want more money? And it is also very insecure for us if UCC has failed – the domain name “.ug” is still under private hands. I do not know how secure this country is. Thank you.

3.26
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened carefully on the challenges surrounding the operations of UCC. But despite those challenges, we need to focus on how to manage them without stopping these people from having money. The demand for ICT services is now nationally driven because computer literacy is becoming mandatory. And where rural communication stand has reached is where they are targeting secondary schools but not even primary.

I propose that more funds be put to support this programme because many of those districts where we do not have these centres, many of the students get a lot of problems when they reach higher levels of education and cannot be able to compete with the rest who have got this advantage.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, there were two issues that were raised – the issue of low staffing and low salaries. We need to differentiate the two and set our priorities. The recommendation put here is that: “Ministry of Finance should put more money to enhance the payment.” But I think the primary challenge here is the issue of low staffing. We need to examine why, even in other sectors where salary was increased, like in Health where we have increased money for doctors, why is it that the performance is still low? And since we need this service, we need to ensure that more people are recruited before we look at the issue of increased pay. This is because the number of staff indicated here is extremely worrying.

Lastly, on the issue of ICT funding in Uganda, without even comparing it to other countries, Mr Speaker, we need to be able to budget for more funding. There is also the issue of them having their own premises. As members of Parliament, we face a lot of challenges on the issue of paying rent; there are a lot of audit queries on rent arrears. So, all these ministries should ensure that they have their own offices so that these problems are averted. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.29
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of rural communication, I think it is very important that Uganda Communication Commission continues to get some money because even the little they have tried to do, for example, in my district, there are schools which have not yet got computers; there are others where installation is not complete and they are not yet even functional. However, they have run the courses twice and this has raised a lot of interest from the local community. After that one or two weeks’ course, the community does not have anywhere else where they can go and study computer. Once the schools start, the community is cut off and yet, we are a very rural district, where even the roads are bad. Computer literacy would have given us an easier link to the outside world.

My appeal is that this money is streamlined and with the rural areas – my colleagues, I want to support the point that primary school is the level where computer must be studied from. And yet, we do not have this. Our children are equally disadvantaged in education because of lack of computers.

My other request is that there should be a transparent and equitable way of distributing these computers. When I visit some of the schools in my district, there are some schools, which have not yet received them – and they are Government schools – without even an explanation. There are schools that have got a very large number while there are those that have got almost nothing compared to their number of their students. So, we want transparency and equity. I also appeal that something be thought of in form of a community centre for this communication because the rest of the community is not going to struggle with schools during school time. So, there should be a centre where the community can go and do some work, especially in the most rural community. So far, I cannot communicate with my secondary school because the lines are not functional –(Member timed out.)

3.32
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have three issues that require clarification from the minister. When I listened to the report, I did not hear about the issue of the national ICT policy – I do not know whether the ministry has a policy. And if it is not there, how does this ministry run?

Secondly, we have had a problem with the unsolicited SMSs on our phones; every time you find messages flocking your phone and you do not know where they come from. Can these messages be regulated?

Honourable minister, we have areas in this country where people have never watched TV; they have never listened to UBC Radio and yet, I think it is your ministry to connect these people. Cases in point are Bukwo, Kween, Bundibugyo, Ntoroko and others. We do not know for how long these people will be in the black-out.

The other issue is the weak network that we have in Bukwo; we have MTN and Airtel but they operate on 2G, which is not sufficient – you reach there but you will not find network. We want to thank you for the work you recently did; you supplied internet to schools but with this poor reception, we may not achieve much. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.34
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for presiding over this difficult ministry. (Laughter) Taking into account the 0.1 percent of the whole amount given to this ministry is saddening, sickening and shows lack of political will! 

Mr Speaker, I wish to comment on the issue of computers for schools. These computers supplied to most of the rural schools – we say it was a God-given opportunity but it is sickening to know that many of them are not functioning like my colleague from Bukwo has stated. Weak network in many places, especially the islands and those ones that border Kenya where the network across has hampered the network in our country. I do not know what the ministry will do to beef us this network such that we can also access these opportunities. 

Mr Speaker, the question of Post Office; I think if it is not a condition that when you are registering a company you need to have a box number, many of us would give up because Post Office services in Uganda are almost non-existent. I also want to look at the Post Bus. When you look at the figures that the Post Bus brought in and then you look at amounts got from the rent of boxes, you find that actually, renting boxes earned us more than the Post Bus. So, I am really wondering what is supposed to earn more.

Finally, on the question of counterfeit phones from China and other countries, as my colleague has stated, this has hampered communication in this country and the ministry has to do something about it. You buy a phone and after two or three days, it ceases to function. There is need for something to be done.

I would also support the issue of not withdrawing money from UCC. I would simply say that we need more money in the Ministry of ICT because the world is becoming a global village through the internet. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.37
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report that they have tabled. I want to address myself to two or three things. 

One, in the conclusion, the committee recommends that this amount of money be voted to the Ministry of ICT and also to AIPA. I would have loved, having been given a long list of challenges faced by the ministry as a result of low funding, a little bit of detailed break down under these two votes. What do we intend to cure because we have had a number of challenges. So, in which area are we focusing? Is it human resource or digital migration? What are we addressing with this money that you have proposed?

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek further clarification. In the digital migration process which is also alluded to here as not being completed, we now have a number of private television operators. Don’t we have particular television channels that are supposed to be free for the consumption of the public without pay? It now looks like it is mandatory that once a subscriber has subscribed to a particular television channel and once the subscription is done, all the television channels are cut off. I want clarification on that.

I also want to re-emphasise that the issue of transferring the two percent levy collected by UCC to Ministry of Finance under the development fund does not pay dividends. We also have to be mindful that all the gadgets, which are utilised under the Ministry of ICT are run by electricity. Therefore, we need an integrated approach in this area. If you are going to take computers to schools, which do not have power, then what are those computers going to do there?

Recently, one of the schools in my constituency was given 40 computers by Ministry of ICT. After one month, I was told that they had gone to pick them to take them to another school because this school did not have power to run these computers. Therefore, I would think that it would pay a lot of dividends if we devoted some of this money to rural electrification so that we have a package of ICT integrating with REA to have power in those places where we are going –(Member timed out.)

3.14
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much for this opportunity and I also take the opportunity to congratulate the committee for a very good detailed report.

In his State of the Nation Address, His Excellency, the President did enumerate very clearly our priorities in as far as development is concerned and he did enumerate them as follows: one was infrastructure, two was energy, three was agriculture and then ICT. For goodness sake, is 0.1 percent a priority? It is a huge question mark; 0.1 per cent to ICT. Is that really a priority? Who is letting down the other? Is it the Ministry of Finance? Who is doing what and who is not doing the right thing to ensure that the President - I would really like to get that clarification.

Whereas Rwanda with just 11 million people can afford to pump in $34 million, Uganda can only afford a miserable $6 million and the programme is to ensure that by 2018, everybody in this country has a computer and is computer literate. Really, what are we talking about?

The little money available should not be taken anywhere. Let us remain with this money in ICT and not Ministry of Finance. Let this money not go to Ministry of Finance. If it is to go directly, then it goes to ICT and part of it remains with UCC.

Two, is on rural communication. Thank you very much for that initiative but the schools were very poorly served. I have a school; Kyezi Missionary Secondary School with about 660 students, with 11 computers. That is about 66 students per computer. I do not know when the son of my friend in Isingiro will ever touch the keyboard.

If only you could come out with this big policy like that of Mr Mutabazi, that “Yes, my programme is to ensure that every student in this country gets a computer by 2015/2016,” I can assure you that there would not be this debate about having this money going here or there. Let it not go to Finance.

Finally, on rural communication again and areas that are underserved, the reason some of these companies were licensed was to ensure that every part of this country is properly served. As I talk now, three quarters of my constituency does not receive any phone calls; Ruyanga, half of Kikagati, Kabuyanda, Mwizi, Rwampara –(Interjections)- what are you talking about? We have cried out so I think –(Member timed out.)

3.44
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I thank the committee for the recommendation on e-waste management but we have a very big problem. It is reported that a memorandum of understanding was signed with the Government of Kenya, which has a plant for e-waste management. My view would be that we need to fast-track the establishment of e-waste management plants in our country and sensitise the community generally on the dangers of e-waste.

We now incur a lot of costs on health because many Ugandans are actually consuming junk from contaminated environments; telephones, TVs, computers which have become junk are deposited anywhere. There is need for us to have an affirmative fast-tracking mechanism to have e-waste management plants locally here in Uganda rather than relying on something that may be very difficult to access.

My second issue is the issue of registration of SIM cards. Some of the subscribers presented fake identification in order to register those SIM cards. Even for those who registered, the data that may have been captured by the telecom companies may not be the right data of the individual subscribers. My colleague from Mbarara Municipality did talk about specifics. The fact of the matter is that many Ugandans are currently losing a lot of money due to e-fraud in mobile money. Unfortunately, the police e-fraud squad unit is badly manned; it is understaffed and underfunded. I am actually a victim of that kind of fraud from sharks of mobile money, where one person claimed he was called Dr Kenneth Baguma of World Health Organisation. I even had his telephone number, let me state it for the record: 0758960766. 

I reported the matter to the CID headquarters. When they tried to track him, they found he was called David Ouma. (Laughter) That is the registered number. Those mobile money fraudsters are so elusive that the e-fraud squad has not been able to clump on them. Many people are crying due to e-fraud –(Member timed out.)

3.47
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I want to take on the issue of the computer levy. I had an impression that we are strictly observing the vision 2040 of this country, from which we developed the National Development Plan. MDAs have work plans and budgets, meaning that whatever we do should emanate from some critical planning and thinking. 

By the time a levy is introduced for a purpose, like in this case, there must have been research backing up the importance of the ICT and computerisation of these schools. The argument that these funds have not been utilised, to me, point at governance issues in that place. Otherwise, when you get a headache, you would be cutting off the head to avoid the pain. The same way, we are arguing is that because the monies were not utilised – we are not looking at the absorption capacity of UCC. Many Government institutions return money to the Consolidated Fund due to low absorption capacity. But this also is under budget performance which may relate to poor planning by that entity. 

So, Mr Speaker, it is very important for Members to realise that most of the rural areas, including my own place have been beneficiaries of these computers. As if that is not enough, I normally read my e-mails very frequently, I see Members of this House responding to an e-mail after three months and you wonder whether these situations were overtaken by events. Then the solution would be to withdraw the iPads because one would assume that Members are not using these iPads. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member shall observe the integrity of the House. 

MR MWIRU: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I am at pains to hear Members saying that we correct the governance issues at UCC but we continue appropriating funds for that purpose because when you withdraw the funds, the objective will not be met and this will affect the national development plan and the vision 2014 –(Interruption) 

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a specialist in communication, I would like to inform you that in communication systems, people do not respond to everything. You respond to what matters to you. So, I would like to defend the Members of Parliament that sometimes, they do not respond because the message was not in their priorities. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I accept the information from the communications specialist. But without losing focus on what I was saying, by the time a levy is introduced, let us take an example of the Road Fund –(Member timed out.)

3.51
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the two percent, which the Minister of Finance wants to take, there is an issue on that money. Hon. Nasasira should discuss with the Minister of Finance. I beg you to sort it out at ministerial level because Members of Parliament are not in any way intending to block the supply of monies that can help this country. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at the report of the committee, they point out a good number of issues that would require regulations. The biggest problem we have with the Ministry of ICT – hon. Nasasira, look at me –(Laughter)– is regulation. You have heard Members of Parliament raising questions on how the telecommunication companies, which deal with, especially mobile money - whenever Government proposes tax – like last financial year, a tax of 10 percent was levied. They decided to shift 100 percent of that levy on the consumer. That is typical of any business person. 

So, if you do not regulate them as the Ministry of ICT – UCC has a mandate to regulate the telecommunications sector in this country. So, we ask them to step up that role. We hear of much fraud which should be regulated by UCC. We should have no problem at all and Parliament should have no problem in giving you money especially when it is hon. Nasasira speaking for it. Even if you have done wrong, you have a soft tongue. (Laughter) Why would we refuse to give him money? Even when he is in the wrong, the way he defends himself, would persuade you to give him money. But let us see the money doing the work it is supposed to do. 

Members of Parliament have spoken about the computers you gave to schools. I want to confirm to you that most of the schools in my district have received except a few –(Member timed out.)

3.54
MS FLAVIA NABUGERE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaliro): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the good report and I have a point of information on e-waste management. I have learnt in the process of managing waste that e-waste management involves a component of mining. The investors are seeking to recover the minerals that they have used so that they can use them again. 

So, when we talk about benefit sharing, we need to take that into account. That, therefore, means that we should ensure that the processing plant is in this place. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.55
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntejeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think it is quite obvious that there is a lot of good will for this sector because among the categorisation of the various sectors, this is one of the primary sectors for the growth of our economy, both in terms of contributing to job creation and facilitating other sectors.

As it sounds from the presentation, Mr Speaker, it is like we have a long list of initiatives that have been coming in, year in, year out, but without any actions being taken and all on account of the lack of adequate funding to this sector. Of course, there are problems relating to governance, but which we can address because they are just administrative. The biggest problem in this sector is the issue of funding. So, we need to seriously address this. This is because if we are to rank the sectors in this economy that are important, I think ICT would be ranked among the most important sectors.

Therefore, we need to seriously look at how to provide for more funding from the Consolidated Fund to support the initiatives, some of which have been enumerated.

From the various reports from this committee for the over years I have been in this House, there are initiatives such as the National Post Code and Address systems that have been recommended and each year we come here, it is reported that no actions have been taken simply because there is no funding. But I think we need to highlight the importance of having a strategic plan and policy for this sector, for it is said that failure to plan, hon. Minister, is like planning to fail.

We have all these resources, but without you having a policy and a strategic plan for this sector, we are doomed. That is why it is important for us to highlight the importance – in fact, we should make is a precondition that as early as possible, the minister should produce a plan for this sector, considering how important this sector is.

When you go to other countries like India, you see ICT sparks squared all over the country. This is done to boost the rural areas because it makes integration of these rural areas into national development plans easy –(Member timed out.)

3.59
MS SOFIA NALULE (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We cannot overstretch the importance of ICT not only in Uganda, but also in the world. In that regard, I would like to support the motion.

However, my concern is that the technology that comes with the ICT at times is not disability compliant. So, I would like to request that NITA-U this time ensures they procure software that can be used by persons with different disabilities. I thank you.

4.00
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the committee. I would like to start with a clarification. On page 8, the committee having got information from the Minister of ICT, indicated that the wage bill in 2011/2012 was 0.638. In 2013/2014, it was 4.378 and in 2014/2015, it is 0.94. I notice that there is something lacking here upon which you need to make some clarification. Why is it that in 2012/2013 it was 4.3 yet for the rest of the other years, it was zero point something. What is the problem?

Two, I think for the ministry to work well – many people have talked about the board – but also the committee stated it very clearly that since 2006, there has been no approved policy. That means that even the budget that has been presented was not approved.

So, where are we going to operate from? Which laws will govern and support us if the ministry cannot set up a board? No wonder, Mr Speaker, when you look at the call rate per unit in this country, you realise that there is a lot of discrepancy; the cost per unit is not uniform. This is because there is nobody to control this.

But when you go to other countries, you realise that call rates are uniform for the various operators. In Uganda, this is completely different. So, we need to do something on this matter because Ugandans are spending a lot of money on calls.

Indeed we sympathise because we all look at ICT as a priority sector. However, you realise that the money being given to it is so little. I think if everything is streamlined, why shouldn’t we give money to this sector?

Let me talk about phone tracking. One time I lost a phone and went to the police. But it was very tedious to track it. While I am happy that I got that phone back, I realised that whenever the police moved to the different operators to do their investigations, not all of them accepted to freely give out data. Now I think –(Member timed out.)

4.03
MS MARGRET BABADIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for presenting a detailed report.

I have two points to raise: one concerns mobile money transfers. This method has become an easy way of transferring money immediately. However, many people are losing their monies because once you make a mistake and post your money onto a wrong number, you can never recover it. But also there are thieves that have manipulated that method and are now withdrawing people’s money in huge sums. 

I would like to know from the minister why we don’t have a law regulating this kind of money transferring. The banks have their laws but this kind of transaction is done at our own risk. I would be happy to see you, Mr Minister, bring here a law to regulate the transfer of money through the mobile money networks so that people don’t keep losing out.

My second point is on the technology regarding blind people. I would like to state that technology has gone very far. It is very simple to record a voice using any computer. But the UCC has not taken any steps in ensuring blind people access this kind of technology.

I would like to inform you that even in these iPads, there is an inbuilt voice recording device. The challenge now is how many people know how to use it. That is why I urge UCC to ensure many people are trained to use this kind of technology. That way, we will be able to extend services to the blind people and students who can use computers elsewhere.

When I go to an internet café, I cannot access it because it is not installed there. Let us have it as a rule that all the computers must have a voice so that blind people can access them. For the deaf, we need a method so that they can also access the phone. That is what I have and I would like more people to know about the voice and train teachers to train people. 

That is important and if you want, I can train you on how to access the voice. It is there in the IPads that you have. (Laughter) Thank you very much.

4.06
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On page 28, we all agree that the ICT is one of the integral sectors that we have in this country but if I read it clearly, the Communications Act, 2013 increased the levy from 1 to 2 per cent and the reasons there in were that it would help in the national project in the ICT sector like analogue to digital, national postal code addressing system turning UICT into a centre of excellency.

The question is what then is the motivation of the Ministry of Finance that they should now remove the levy from RCDF to the Consolidate Fund? What motivates them? 

Mr Speaker, more often than not, we have had a problem as a Parliament that there is either inter-ministerial fights that end up here or sometimes intra-ministerial fights that are sometimes not necessary. (Member timed out.)

4.08
MR ABDI CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the efforts of the committee and equally important, the effort of the Minister in charge of ICT. I believe he has developed the road network and he will also develop the ICT network.

With the current population of 15 per cent, which accesses internet, it is important that we boost this percentage above 15 per cent so that majority of Ugandans can access internet. We should also bring the roaming charges down so that at least, we can monitor robbers, thieves and other criminals who come into this country because by them accessing internet within the country, we will be able to monitor them.

I would also want to accept that ICT has taken us ahead by informing us. We as human beings and we have remained as people who are not knowledgeable enough but the internet is knowledgeable and we read in order to get the information. The minister should help us more so that we get this knowledge. It is through this internet that NRM has kept itself in power, strategically. We have been able to strategise using the internet and we have been able to beat the Opposition using the internet and that is very true. (Laughter)

If you do not read it at all, then it means that you will never get the knowledge to win an election.  A winner has to remain strategic enough and of course, you need power to read every other time in order to get the knowledge to win an election. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we now conclude. I will give the Shadow Minister for ICT, then Minister of Finance. Honourable minister of Finance, there is a specific issue I would like you to help me with; the proposal from the committee is approval of figures by this House. You have just presented corrigenda again, which are going to the Committee on Budget. How do we deal with it? Does it affect the figures presented by the committee now, in which case we should not pronounce ourselves? I need to be guided on that.

4.10
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR ICT (Mr Benson Obua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to start on this point that hon. Chemaswet has confirmed what we always suspected that the NRM wins with the help of computer at the point where tallying is being done. 

I would like to thank you for the opportunity to respond to some of the salient issues, which have been raised by Members but not without thanking the committee for a job well done. I have to say that I am not the Shadow Minister for ICT; hon. Andrew Allen is indisposed and he asked me to stand in for him. I belong to the same committee and if you check the report, you will find that both of us have signed, which means that we largely agree with what the committee has reported here.

I would like to say that any country and therefore, any government that does not take ICT seriously in this era is digging its own a grave.

From the report of the committee, that is partly true for this Government because when you compare the figures our neighbouring governments are putting into ICT, ours is really dismal; it is too small.

I do not know what that speaks about our concerns as regards ICT. No wonder Rwanda has been described as a small country in a hurry to succeed. I do not know how we can describe our country. 

Having said that, let me point to some of the issues; a lot has been said about the national ICT policy and I do not know how we can emphasise this enough and if it were in my power, I would recommend that the passing of this budget should be withheld until the minister presents us with this policy because it has been a very long song. I do not know where the problem is; at committee level, it has been a fight year in year out. Mr Minister, you have an explanation to make. 

Another issue I would like to point out is that we have MDAs under this ministry who are very big; their budgets are big but they do not have vote status. For instance, we have the UICT, we have the UCC, the Uganda Posts Ltd. They do not have vote status and we think they deserve to have their own vote status because of the role that they have played in this sector.

Another issue that Opposition would like to observe is the issue of over-centralisation of UCC. We know they are doing a very good job; they are playing their role quite well, if you put UCC only in Kampala and you do not put other avenues – I am saying that you need to decentralise UCC just like Bank of Uganda has decentralised. They have currency centres in the regions. This is a very important point as far we are concerned.

And then on the issue of digital-divide, which affects Ugandans very much – the rural areas versus urban centres, RCDF is trying its best. But I think more should be done.

Members have ably raised these issues and I do not want to overemphasise them. But the issue of the two percent is very critical. as the Opposition, we want to categorically state that we resist and oppose the issue of giving 50 percent of the two percent to the Ministry of Finance. (Applause)

I do not want to over emphasise the issue of quality but I will briefly talk about the issue of analogue to digital migration. This is an issue on which we advised very strongly from day one when it was – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to wind up?

MR OBUA-OGWAL: Okay, I am going to wind up shortly, Mr Speaker. The issue of digital migration is very critical because time is running out and if we do not wake up, it will be too late. I believe we have resources and UCC is willing to do everything possible. But the idea of having only one signal distributor – and that being UBC, which is a government entity – to distribute signals to everybody, is not good. This creates a monopoly and yet, we recommended over and over again that another signal distributor, for example, one of the private television companies should be given that opportunity to participate in the same just as it is happening in other countries where up to four signal distributors exist. What is wrong with Uganda? And if we are switched off, who is it going to benefit?

Mr Speaker, there are other issues that I would have loved to raise but because of the way you are looking at me – (Laughter) – I will end here and say, thank you for the opportunity. But please, ICT is the future and tomorrow SEACOM is launching; SEACOM is a service provider that is bringing a super-highway closer to us here to help us have even faster internet. But are we going to be able to use this? Cables have been laid for optic fibres and yet, we have slow internet access everywhere. Mr Speaker, this is food for thought. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not look at the Member in any particular way. (Laughter) That is the same way I always look at honourable members. 

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will first clarify on the corrigenda that we have tabled before Parliament. First of all, the corrigenda is in accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability Regulations, Section 32(1), which is supposed to make corrections of errors and omissions on the draft budget estimates for revenue and expenditure for this financial year. And this will be based on the following principles:
    (i) To make the corrections that have been made on account of errors and omissions, which were unforeseen at the time of finalising the Budget;
    (ii) The changes will not result into supplementary pressure or arrears on the items where the re-allocations have been made;
    (iii) The corrigenda has taken into account the provisions of the Vote-on-Account which was already provided and;
    (iv) The proposed changes are backed by supporting documents from the relevant ministries, departments and agencies.

Mr Speaker, you have alluded to whether the figures that have been supplied for this sector will be affected. I would like to inform you and the entire House that the total corrigenda estimates which require additional resources amounts to Shs 95.79 billion and these are in the following sectors:
    (a) The wage shortfalls: These are the wages that were not paid in the last financial year because the supplementary expenditure was not approved at the time. So, we carried it forward to this financial year.
    (b) The ex-gratia for local government political leaders, which had also not been paid but have now been included in this corrigendum.
    (c) The schools’ capitation grant. You will recall, Mr Speaker and members that the schools’ capitation grant was not paid in time in the last financial year, amounting to Shs 63.12 billion. So we did carry it forward and it has already been paid this financial year.
    (d) Global Partnership on Education Project. The NARO and additional NTR collections totalling Shs 95.799 billion.

So, the rest of the corrigenda such as NAADS will be on NAADS; the re-arrangement of the funding; salaries for the DPP’s office because they recruited extra support; Mulago Hospital and Uganda Cancer Institute. Those are reallocations across votes and will, therefore, not translate into a change in the overall Budget. 

Mr Speaker, as far as this is concerned, the figures for the Ministry of ICT and NITA-U are not affected by this corrigenda. However, it would be better to supply the figures after harmonising with the Budget Committee. That is our recommendation.

Regarding the committee report, we want to appreciate it and thank the honourable members for producing a good report. Two issues concerning the Ministry were raised. One of them was about provision of additional salaries. In the current Budget, we have provided Shs 450 billion for both salary increment and to take care of any recruitment gaps. But unfortunately, the Ministry of ICT did not discuss with the Ministry of Public Service. So, it is our intention that discussions will be held with the Ministry of Public Service in the context of the coming financial year and not the current one. In the meantime, we agree with the committee’s proposed report that we do use the existing agencies.

The second issue that concerns us is about the one percent levy. Government has prioritised investing in a number of sectors, including the ICT sector. All the investments we are talking about – the ICT infrastructure has been occasioned by funding from Government. We get revenue from different sources in order to execute the Budget, including non-tax revenue generated by ministries, departments and agencies of Government. Now, the sources of these funds are consolidated into the Consolidated Fund. In fact, Mr Speaker and Members, in the proposed new Public Finance Bill, we are proposing that most of, if not all, the revenue be collected, consolidated and managed under the Consolidated Fund.

Now, the advantage is that from the Consolidated Fund, as Government, we prioritise and as Parliament, we appropriate to different sectors – in order to address the priorities as identified in the national development plans in each sector like roads, railways, education, ICT, agriculture and the rest. You will want to learn that even where there is no electricity, access to ICT cannot be achieved. So we need rural electrification and we need power extension including solar. But we are discussing with the Committee on Finance and the ICT sector and making consultations so our final position on this will be informed after those discussions are concluded. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.26
THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members of the committee for their report and for the issues they raised. I would also like to thank the shadow minister for the issues he raised. He said he was the acting shadow minister and I take it that you are not the shadow of the shadow minister.

Let me also thank the honourable members overall. In their contributions, all the Members were supporting the development of the ICT sector for the future of Uganda. If Uganda is going to be part of this globe, we agreed on all sides of the House that we must be ICT compliant so that we can be players in the world. The question therefore is, what do we need to do in order to achieve that? I think that should be the gist.

Mr Speaker, there are many indices that the world uses to measure the extent of development of countries. In ICT, one of the indices is called the ICT development index and it touches on infrastructure and access to ICT and skills development and usage of ICT. There are other measures like how we are performing on e-government and other e-services and so forth. In the ICT development index of the 2012 report of the International Telecommunications Union, of the 157 countries that were measured, Uganda was 130th out of 157. So I leave it for Members to judge. 

We, at the ICT sector are working hard to see that we come from that level slowly. Of course, much as we are quoting other countries, our neighbours and so forth, they are not very far from us. They are around 130 also so, even our region needs to come up. In fact, the best country in Africa is number 64 and that is Mauritius. South Africa, which is a power house in Africa’s economy, is actually 84th so you can see that in Africa, we still have a long way to go.

Let me now touch on the responses by Members whom I thank very much as I said for their support and understanding of the need. Of course, we have many challenges that we are trying to address in all those areas whether it is infrastructure or skills development or even usage. I heard hon. Mwiru saying that we do not answer our emails. You are just talking about usage.

Hon. Ekanya was talking about where the hub should be developed. I did not hear him very well as to whether he was talking about Omoro or Tororo but I did hear -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He was very clear, he said Omoro.

MR NASASIRA: I didn’t hear the Rt hon. Speaker’s ruling on the unanimous vote. The first ICT hub or an ICT path – Of course eventually we can roll them out but the first ICT path has to be developed and we are carrying out a study now. One of the things you require for it to be developed is closeness to an international airport because you are trying to attract big companies to come and invest in that path. When you have done that like India did, then you can roll out to Omoro, Kasese, Kazo and the rest of the places and even Tororo.

So I think realistically that if that ICT path is going to attract these big ICT companies to invest there, you need to get it close to access say, the international airport. So it is not that we want to put everything at the centre; rather, it is that sometimes the facilities are at centre but eventually, you can roll out many ICT paths like India did. I am happy you are supporting the usage of this one percent levy. 

There has been an issue of SIM cards, which I will comment on generally because most people have raised it and I know it is an issue. Through UCC and many telecom companies, we did register the SIM cards. We even gave multiple extensions for this registration, then gave a final deadline but we realised that there are still some SIM cards, which are not registered and that is very difficult. 

We are discussing this with the telecom companies because, first of all, they have the data concerning which number is being used because they get the revenue. They also have the data of which number is registered. So we are working on them to see that if they do not have enough software, they should develop it so that revenue collected - because they collect and every phone that rings is recorded. 

If a phone rings and there is no registered name, a red flag should come up. So we are trying to see whether this is an inside arrangement that some people are getting SIM cards without registering them. But I want to promise this House that we shall get to  the bottom of this and we are getting the cooperation of the telecom companies because it should be easy; any card that is not registered should be detected and put out of action.

As I said, it is not directly under our control. We have to work with the telecom companies and see that we solve this. I will mention something about it when we come to regulations. Again I think that is what hon. Anywarach was referring to. 

On the issue of the board, hon. Musasizi, it is my hope that the board of UCC will be approved tomorrow in Cabinet because it has been on the business of Cabinet. Anybody can check with the Cabinet secretariat, it is on our agenda, I think item No.4 after the prayer, minutes and two papers. So it is not that we are hanging on. I do not want to waste my time on earlier delays but we have resolved those delays and we have them all in place this month.

Hon. Majagere raised an issue about whether it is the Minister of Security or the Minister of ICT. We work and cooperate together and as you know regarding that law for interception, which is under the Ministry of Security, if you are going to intercept any message or communication, which is under Ministry of ICT, we have to work together. Yes, technically maybe they should not have recommended it that way and I agree with hon. Majegere but we shall work together and try to resolve that.

On the wage bill which was raised, my understanding is that initially, when we established NITA-U, it did not have a vote. It was operating under Vote 020 so the whole wage bill of NITA-U and the wage bill of the ministry was under vote 020 but now NITA-U has its own vote 126 so part of that wage was shifted. What you need to do is adding a wage bill on vote 126 and vote 020 and you will see – it is not that staff have gone. Now, NITA-U has got its own vote. That should explain the change in the wage bill. 

Now, again on registration, the honourable member said: “If 90 percent of the schools in Uganda have got computers, what do you need the money for?” Surely, my sister, these are government schools. We need to develop ICT in all schools in Uganda and that is why in this financial year, we moved a policy that 30 percent goes to the private schools. When we finish the government schools, we will go to the private schools. When we finish secondary schools, we will go to primary schools –(Applause)– we should start developing ICT right from there. So how can we be satisfied by just that? I hope I have convinced my sister on that matter. 

Hon. Lucy Ajok, you talked on some issues on which we agree. True, there are some schools where the computers are not connected. There are others which have not yet got computers and I do agree to that. The whole concept of e-government is in about four areas. It is not only in providing computers. First of all, you need to install the infrastructure. Then you need the financial capacity to stay on the internet because the schools need to be connected to the internet all the time. Then you need content on those computers for whatever you are going to teach; whether it is science and so forth. And finally, you need to retool the teachers for them to be able to teach the students. 

We now teach teachers every holiday under this fund. For example, this holiday, 6,000 teachers were taught and we still have a long way to go. So it is a combination of all and the points you were raising hon. Ojok were pertinent. 

Now, hon. Sabila, I want to apologise for the delay in the ICT policy. It is not that there was complete absence of a policy. An ICT policy framework was developed in 2002. The ICT policy might have taken long, but again, as we agreed with our committee, we completed it in April. It is now before Cabinet and I hope to push it through Cabinet and then we will bring it to this House as the ICT policy. 

The issue of unsolicited messages is being resolved, but again it will be handled with the regulations that I will talk about later. I know the problems of TV and radio for Bukwo. We now have a radio frequency for Bukwo and UCC has requested UBC to apply for a licence. As soon as they have that licence, they will be on air. 

Now, the networks from Kenya had hampered our networks; along all borders, the moment you get there, you receive the other networks rather than ours. But we are trying to resolve this problem in an easier way. We want to have one network area in our region so that we remove all roaming charges. Our target was 1st of September, but there might still be hitches and our earlier plan was for 31st December. 

As I talk now, there is a meeting going on in Arusha involving all the member states to resolve this issue. The telecom operators have agreed but we must harmonise our taxes and our interconnection charges. We are determined on that and our heads of state have directed the ministers of finance and ministers of ICT to see that this happens and then there will be no more border networks in Kigulu Island and the others. 

Now, on counterfeit phones, again it will depend on the regulations. The UCC has done their work, but the telecom companies – until the regulations are in place, it is difficult for them. But we also have to work with the Uganda National Bureau of Standards which checks them. 

It is time now for me to talk about these regulations. The regulations have been finalised with UCC. But as you know, the way government works, they are now in the Attorney-General’s Office for final endorsement. As soon as they are over, I will bring them to the House. I have already discussed with our committee and I have discussed with the committee on legal. 

When we made that law, I think there was too much enthusiasm. Normally, regulations are a matter of a statutory instrument. Normally, Parliament makes the principle law and empowers the minister to make regulations through a statutory instrument which he eventually lays on the Table. But on this one, the law says that the regulations should come for approval of Parliament. 

Okay, we abide with the law as it stands, but I hope in future we shall look at it. But since the practice was the same for PPDA, we will bring them and I hope we will have them passed omnibus since there is already a precedent. So I hope that as soon as we get the clearance from the Attorney-General’s Office, we will bring them here and pass them to help us deal with issues of counterfeit phones and others –(Interjections)– I hope in about a month’s time they will be here. It is in our interest to bring them anyway because it helps us to manage our sector better. 

Now, on the breakdown of the RCDF fund, asked by hon. Mulimba, there is a breakdown on that fund. But if you want me to mention a few areas – you see, initially, there was one percent. That one percent was purely for improving communication in the known service areas by the private sector. But the law also says that the second percentage supposed to be used for ICT for development will be covered under the minister, under NITA and under UCC. 

Generally, as we had said, under this one percent levy, we are going to expand the RCDF programme and finish transiting from analogue to digital. And as you heard from the report, it is Uganda which is behind in this region. We are way behind yet the global deadline is 17 Jun 2015. It is not our deadline, so we cannot change it. We have to move from analogue to digital. 

I am happy to report that Nakasongola, Mityana, Jinja, Mpigi, Entebbe and Kampala have been completed through these funds. And that covers about 70 percent of the viewership. We can see how much penetration we have of television. The other remaining area is being handled. We have strengthened our committees at policy and steering and technical level. We are working together with the Ministry of Information where this analogue to digital migration falls. For us, we are providers; so we are working together on that. I am sure that we will beat the deadline. But we need these funds to finish the work. 

We are also using it to start on the process of turning UICT at Nakawa into a centre of excellence. There is a master plan that UCC has developed. But it is also supposed to strengthen the capacity of the minister. This ministry is currently staffed at 30 percent. It has been seven years now and it is still staffed at 70 percent. So how do you expect policies and regulations and guidelines and strategies to come from a ministry that is established at 30 percent? 

So we need to redevelop the ministry and strengthen it so that it can then deal with the agenda of ICT in the country. Similarly, NITA which was also established in 2010 is established at 30 percent - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are –

MR NASASIRA: I am about to conclude, Mr Speaker. So, there is need for that money. I was surprised to hear from hon. Alex Byaruganba that three-quarters of Isingiro does not have networks. I will try to find out on that. Otherwise, I would like to thank you so much for that support.

Hon. Epetait talked about e-waste management. You heard my colleagues also proposing that the plant should be here but we will discuss that later. I would like to agree with what the honourable member said that we have to build capacity. 

There are two issues to comment on before I conclude. One, ICT to be compatible with people with disabilities and this was said by the hon. Sofia Nalule. There is an effort and as I talk, you will realise that the hon. Margret Baba Diri has a handset that speaks. Otherwise, I agree with them that we need to focus more on that so that it caters for people with disabilities more. 

So, I don’t know how much – I know you are an active member in trying to look for solutions for issues that affect people with disabilities – we will engage with you on how Government can support although as you may know, much of the ICT products are brought here through the private sector. 

I have already talked about the ICT policy but on what the hon. Margaret Babadiri said about the law to regulate mobile money transactions, I would like to say that we will discuss with our colleagues at the Ministry of Finance so that we can find a solution.

On what the shadow said – you together with other colleagues supported the idea of us retaining the one percent to continue with our development and I would like to agree with you on that.

On the vote status for UCC and UPF, as the law is now, UCC is a self-accounting body. And when you check Article 153 of the Constitution, those levies are actually not part of the Consolidated Fund. That is per the law as it stands now. They have separate accounting systems. They are audited by the Auditor-General and reports come here. So, because they don’t have votes on the Consolidated Fund, their money does not come directly from the Consolidated Fund.

On decentralising - yes UCC has decentralised – they now have offices in Mbale, Mbarara and Kasese. And on the issue of the signal distributor, I would like to say that our policy on digital migration is that first, as Uganda Broadcasting Corporation is, we must first separate the content from signal distribution so that UBC can operate like any other television company and compete with others. We will form a separate entity for signal distribution that will distribute for all. Somebody should not worry that the free-to-air channels like UBC will be charged. There will be no charges at all. Those free-to-air services will still remain free.

Our policy is that in the first five years, we will remain with one signal distributor, establish ourselves so that as time goes, we will bring in a second one. As you may recall, even for telecom companies, we started with the duopoly and now we have a number of companies. So, for now our policy is for us to have one signal distributor for the five years and will restructure UBC, which I think the new board has already started on.

Hon. Lugolobi talked about strategic planning. Yes, part of this problem maybe is because the ministry was still young and so it could not have a strategic plan. However, I would like to assure the House that we will soon be calling Members for workshops by November. We are now in the final stages of doing a draft strategic plan for the ICT sector 2015-2020. So, the ministry will soon have a strategic plan to deal with all areas of ICT right from usage to infrastructure, skills and innovations. I thank you for the support shown and pray that you pass this report. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister of ICT. I also would like to thank the shadow minister, the chairperson of the committee and members and the entire House for the elaborate debate and interest on this matter. 

The motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on ICT on the ministerial policy statement for the budget for the financial year 2014/2015. The committee has made some policy recommendations. Also there are figures that the committee has worked out that came about as a result of what was presented in the ministerial policy statement. We have got the clearance and guidance from the Minister of Finance that the corrigenda have no implications on this particular report. Even if they had, the Budget Committee would still sit to look at the details for us to supply during appropriation. I now put the question for the adoption of the report of the committee in its entirety.

(Question out and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ON THE BUDGET FOR THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015 

4.54
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Tony Ayoo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. In accordance with the provisions of Article 155 (4) of the Constitution of Uganda and Rule 177 (a) and (b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament (2012), the Committee on East African Community Affairs is mandated to, among other things:

    1. Examine and comment on the policy matters affecting the Ministry of East African Community Affairs;

    2. Monitor other East African Community designated departments under its jurisdiction and examine critically, recurrent and capital budget estimates of the Ministry of East African Community Affairs and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House.

Mr Speaker, this report is an output of the Committee on East African Community Affairs oversight on the sector ministry. The committee considered the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2014/2015 for votes 021 – Ministry of East African Community Affairs (MEACA).
This report covers the following aspects:
1. 	Sector mandate
2. 	The ministry’s strategic objectives 
3. 	Key function/roles of the ministry of MEACA
4. 	MEACA’s budget performance for financial year 2013/2014
5. 	Key sector achievements in the financial year 2013/2014
6. 	MEACA’s budget projections for financial year 2014/2015.
7. 	Key priority areas for implementation in the financial year 2014/2015
8. 	Key planned outputs for financial year 2014/2015
9. 	MEACA’s underfunded priorities 
10. 	Observations and recommendations
11. 	General recommendations and conclusion.

Methodology

The committee critically examined previous and current ministerial policy statements from the ministry of East Africa Community Affairs, analysed previous committee reports and raised issues for response from the minister.

The committee held a meeting with the ministry of East Africa Community Affairs and discussed the ministerial policy statement and other matters incidental thereto. The committee drafted and held meetings in which this report was reviewed in detail before being adopted as a committee report.

I beg to lay on Table the report of the committee of EACA on MEACA’s ministerial policy statement for financial year 2014/2015 and the minutes of the committee on EACA on the ministerial policy statement for MEACA for financial year 2014/2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report and the minutes of the committee meetings.

MR AYOO: Mr Speaker, all the details of the report are provided for Members in their IPads and I think they are following. 

Observation 

    1. MEACA Policies and Strategies

The committee observed that MEACA has initiated the following policies for the financial year 2014/2015 to further uphold the EAC integration process for the benefit of all Ugandans: The national policy of EAC integration and the national EAC communication strategy, which are both before cabinet pending approval.

Recommendation 

The committee recommends that Government fast-tracks development of these policies to serve as a reference in negotiation and implementation of the EAC protocol for the benefit of Ugandans.

The committee further recommends that EACA carries out effective public sensitisation and awareness countrywide and this should include the civil society organisations, private sector and Parliament of Uganda among others.

Position of Minister of EACA 

The committee observes that the position of the minister of EACA is still vacant and the current minister of state is overstretched in handling both regional and domestic responsibilities.

Recommendation 

The committee recommends that the position of the minister of EACA be filled expeditiously. The minister for EACA is not here as you have been informed. They are in for a meeting in Arusha and that is why the committee is calling for urgent response in filling this position.

MEACA’s Operational Budget 

The committee is concerned about the lean operational budget of MEACA. Besides trademark East Africa technical support, MEACA’s budget is largely sponsored by Government of Uganda. The committee recommends that MEACA in conjunction with Ministry of Finance mobilise more funds to support MEACA’s budget so that it can deepen the integration effort in Uganda.

The committee also recommends that the Ministry of East African Community Affairs should also be vigilant in its proposals and engage development partners.

Staffing 

The committee is concerned about the inadequate staff at the ministry. For instance, the committee was informed that the whole department of political and legal affairs currently has one technical staff although the structure provides for seven. The positions fell vacant as a result of transfers, promotions and resignations. Requests for recruitment were submitted to the Minister of Public Service and Public Service Commission. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service and Public Service Commission expedite the process of recruitment to fill all the vacant posts for the ministry to effectively deliver on EAC output.

Arrears to EAC organs and institutions 

The committee received a list of verified arrears to EAC organs and institutions as at 30 June 2014 as follows:
Inter University Council of East Africa accumulated arrears of Shs 8,823,430,874. Inter University Council for East Africa, the outstanding balance for financial year 2013/14 is Shs 1,961,738,395. Inter University Council for East Africa, construction of the headquarters at Shs 1,343,500,000. Lake Victoria fisheries organisation, outstanding balance as at the end of the financial year 2013/14 was Shs 1,472,664,359. Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation for operation “Save the Nile Perch project”, outstanding balance as at July 2013 was Shs 429,490,080 giving a total of Shs 14,030,823,710; this was at the exchange rate provided below.

Out of the verified arrears amounting to Shs 14.03 billion, the ministry has provided for a total of Shs 3.07 billion to partly cater for the arrears as follows: Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation Shs 0.90 billion and Inter University council of East Africa, Shs 2.17 billion.

The committee learnt that ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Ministry of Education have been making these contributions with resource challenges hence the accumulation of arrears. This responsibility has been transferred to Ministry of EACA with the commitment that the issue of arrears should be finally sorted out in the medium term.

The committee recommends that these accumulated arrears form part of the key propriety areas for funding in financial year 2014/15 because Uganda is duty bound to make these contributions.
The committee further recommends that the Ministry of EACA sets out an annual schedule for payments to clear the arrears in a phased manner with in the next three financial years.

Observation  

MEACA’s involvement and empowerment of other stakeholders 

The committee is concerned about the ministry’s involvement and empowerment of other stakeholders like the business community, the women and youth groups, people with disability and civil society organisations in creating further awareness of EAC integration to other Ugandans. The committee recommends that the ministry spearheads the main streaming of EAC integration with MDAs and private sector to ensure that the EAC components in their sectors are prioritised and budgeted for and also integrate technical expertise from MDA’s in the sensitisation and awareness workshop.

The committee also recommends that the funding in respect to public awareness and public participation in EAC integration should be revised upwards to fast-track sensitisation programmes.

The committee further recommends that MEACA carries out an audit of the policy statements of all ministries every financial year to ascertain that their MDAs are complying with the directives from PS/ST regarding mainstreaming of EAC activities.

Observation No.7: Leadership and Guidance in the EAC Integration 

The committee was informed that MEACA has undertaken research and carried out extensive consultation to provide leadership and guidance in EAC legislation processes for informed decision-making. The committee recommends that MEACA continues undertaking research and carrying out wide consultation with various stakeholders, including the East African Legislative Assembly, civil society organisations, private sector, Parliament, among others.

General Recommendations

The committee has highlighted the following recommendations that will greatly enhance the cooperation between Uganda and other regional and international blocs:

1. 	Fast-track the harmonisation of national policies and laws to conform to EAC protocols and other regional economic communities.
2. 	Provide funds for sensitisation and awareness creation on EAC integration.
3. 	Funding research for evidence to support country positions during the negotiation processes.
4. 	Prioritise Uganda’s contribution to the regional blocs to stop the accumulation of arrears.
5. 	Prioritise resources within the budget to facilitate MDAs to actively participate in the negotiation processes.
6. 	Ensure that sectors are mainstreaming EAC sector-related issues in their plans and budget.

Conclusions

Subject to the observations and recommendations made herein, the committee recommends the approval of the budget of the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for the financial year 2014/2015 as follows:
    • Wage – Shs 655,092,290
    • Non-wage – Shs 22,298,997,490
    • Development – Shs 567,519,540
   	Total – 	Shs 23,521,609,320
Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, committee chair, for a very clear report and very well-presented. Honourable members, the motion before the House is for the adoption of the report of the sectoral committee on East African Community Affairs on the ministerial policy statement on the budget for the financial year 2014/2015 for this sector. I propose the question for your debate.

Honourable members, I take priority of those who did not speak previously and this will also apply to the next debate on other issues. So if you want to speak on every subject, you might have a problem. You need to strategize and decide which one you really want to speak on. So those who have spoken, please, keep your peace for now.

5.11
MRS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the important issues they have raised. 

I would like to raise an observation on the East African Community involvement and the empowerment of stakeholders. I remember last year when we were debating the budget of this ministry, we requested the Minister for East African Affairs to continue informing Parliament about what is happening in the region. However, I do not think that at any single moment the Minister for East African Affairs has ever brought any report on this Floor and in particular with regard to the East Africa Legislative Assembly. 

We need to empower ourselves before the other stakeholders can be empowered. Questions keep coming to us and we even do not have valid answers for our people with regard to the integration issues in East Africa, with regard to trade and with regard to different programmes that the Ministry for East African Community Affairs is handling. So I wish to know from the minister what plans his ministry has in terms of equipping Members of Parliament with information regarding his ministry since we have been demanding for that information.

In the ministerial policy statement of this ministry last year, we also raised the issue of filling up the gap for the Minister for East African Affairs, and it is coming up again. I do not know what the minister has to tell us; did he inform his appointing authority about this issue, rather than the committee chair coming here to tell us that the minister is overstretched with the kind of work he is doing? Is the minister satisfied with the work he is doing and therefore he feels comfortable? Thank you.

5.12
DR MICHAEL LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am interested in this subject and therefore I want to give my contribution. 

I have read the report and among the achievement listed, which the ministry has to report home about, is the increase in export trade. It is reported that we fetched US$ 643.5 million up from US$ 590.6 million in 2012/2013. This is Shs 1,737,450,000 in exports but when it comes to imports, other countries within the region have benefited from Uganda’s expenditure through imports to a tune of US$ 667.1 million, which is Shs 1,801,170,000,000. If you subtract the net in exports from the net in imports, you will get Shs 63,720,000,000, and that is the trade deficit we have made. 

We are making this deficit perennially after spending Shs 19 billion on the ministry and now we want to spend another Shs 23 billion on it to get another deficit. The immediate question that the committee should have asked, therefore, and which I want to ask, is: How much are we benefiting from the integration process. We want to know how many businesses Ugandans have opened in other countries. We can see Kenyans are establishing businesses here and elsewhere in South Sudan but how many of such businesses have been established by Ugandans? This is the essence of the integration process and why we should get involved. 

I also want to know the extent to which doing business has been made easy. It is very easy for the rest of the world to establish businesses here but it is unlikely, unless the ministry can outline this to Ugandans, that it is becoming easier for Ugandans to establish businesses abroad. If we do not do this, it becomes very difficult for us to make a decision on whether to give this ministry money or not.

I want to know the monetary outcome of the publicity that is being hyped – we went to this and that university, school or region; so what! What are the benefits? If you incurred that expenditure, I want to know how this expenditure is going to be made good in terms of what comes out of these activities.

I also want to know the outcome of the capacity building. We have been having a debate on whether we have got personnel worth being mentioned as having the capability to handle negotiations between Uganda and other countries in the region or with other trading blocs. Can we be in a position as Parliament to take a decision on this based on the information generated by the committee? (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just wind up.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Can we say that because of this expenditure incurred on raising the capacity of our negotiators, this is what we have achieved and this is how we are going to benefit out of it? If we do not answer these questions, it will be very difficult to think positively about integration and the net benefit for Uganda. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.17
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a job well done.

My concern, however, is about the campaigns or sensitisations that have taken place to market this idea of the East African Community and the East African integration in our country. This ministry has been in existence since 2006 but I am worried because they have only managed to cover 32 districts out of the 112. This worries me, just like other colleagues, because I have always been wondering why. 

The East African integration, which we have always talked about, seems to be more presidential, ministerial and maybe parliamentary. When it gets down to the local person at the community level, it is more like an idea which has not really come to reality. You can just see from the report where you only have 32 campaigns carried out, out of the 112 districts. It also goes back to the same with the schools. 

Since my district, Hoima, was not part of the 32, I want to know from the chair or perhaps the minister what the mode of these campaigns was. Whom were you meeting in those districts where you went to campaign? Was it the district councils, opinion leaders in the district or did you go to the radio stations? What is the mode of these campaigns because we need these people to go down to our people?

Quite often, I have addressed this issue of the East African integration in my constituency and I have tried to tell the people about the advantages of integrating but we need to see the Ministry of East African Affairs moving fast to sensitize Ugandans. We need to know where the opportunities are or what it is that we are moving towards; otherwise, it defeats the understanding of the majority of Ugandans when we see ourselves as already integrating and yet we are really not consulting them.

At one time, I thought we could have required a referendum to ask Ugandans whether we are ready or willing to integrate, and that would be after the campaigns of course. That is why you see Tanzania all the time raising this issue because of the pressure from its population. So I would like the Ministry of East African Community Affairs to intensify their campaigns and move to all the districts of Uganda and include all NGOs –(Interruption)

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. I really want to support you on the sensitisation of the EAC. However, I also wonder how the committee came up with these districts because Busia and Tororo are not among them and yet they are the gateway to cross-border trade. Thank you.

5.21
MRS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the submission of their report. 

I would like to support the recommendation of the committee on sensitisation of the public. I know that the ministry has made attempts - they came to Soroti - but I would like to comment on their mode of sensitisation. It has still remained at a certain level. We are continually empowering the same Ugandans. The Ugandans that we are talking about who need opportunities do not get the chance to get empowered or to get this kind of information. So I would like the ministry to adjust or improve on this mode of sensitisation. When you go and conduct a public meeting in English and yet you intend for the local man to find a business opportunity across the border, then you are not passing on the information. We are beginning at a point as if they are already aware about what East Africa is. 

Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that it is much easier to sensitise an educated person than somebody who is semi-literate. So, you need to begin at a certain level because they can do business much as they are at that level of education. I think the way the ministry passes on this information needs to change. They need to attract those people so that they understand. I was there and people were not interested because the way the message was coming in was not understood by the local people.

Regarding the understanding of opportunities available like trade, education and employment, it looks like the other countries are already ahead of us. Like it has been said before, these countries have identified the available opportunities. If you walk around the streets of Kampala, you will see many Kenyans with businesses and you will see many South Sudanese owning property in Uganda. How many Ugandans can you say own businesses in Kenya or in any other East African country and are working in an environment as calm as the Ugandan business environment?

Recently, we heard that Ugandans were expelled from Kenya but we do not hear any comment from the ministry as far as that is concerned. Citizens of other countries are working in Uganda and operating calmly and comfortably but when ours are in other countries, they are not comfortable. Can the ministry make a comment on that?

Mr Speaker, it was also mentioned that we are lagging behind as far as our statutory obligations are concerned. My question is: Have we not been budgeting for this? I ask this because I look at this as part of what is expected and the normal thing to do. I want to observe that this might cause mistrust among us and other neighbouring countries. 

It does not, therefore, surprise me that in a lot of things we are not at par with our sister countries. One, you do not have a minister in charge of the ministry and this could be one of the reasons. Somebody could push for some of these positions. However, two, if we are not going to appear to be responsible and committed, we are not going to earn the trust of other countries. So I would really like to urge the ministry to pull up their socks as far as this is concerned. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.24
MR MATHAIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the good report. I also want to thank the ministry for the achievements so far attained. 

I would like to appeal to the ministry to put in a more concerted effort to increase investment in the cooperation arrangement. Having said that, I would like to inquire from the minister, based on the conviction that what you negotiate for is what you get, how many companies we have prepared to trade in Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi. How have we prepared our ministries, the ministry of education in particular, to prepare manpower and to flag them off to go and work in Rwanda? How is the ministry coordinating with other ministries responsible for the East African integration? 

This is the direction our country should be taking. We should be negotiating for a holistic integration, where our ministries negotiate through the ministries of East African Affairs to ensure that our people are not fleeced in Tanzania, Rwanda, and they do not have to negotiate on their own; they should be flagged off as they go. 

Rwanda needs teachers, for example, and teachers are going to Rwanda, but how are they paid and what conditions are they working in? How has the Ministry of Education worked with the Ministry for East African Affairs to ensure that we flag off our boys and girls so that they can go with pride to Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania and Kenya to work?

Recently, I interfaced with her Excellency Mrs Wapakabulo in Kenya; it is a shame that we do not have more than 15 registered companies in Kenya. As my sister asked, how many Kenyan companies are working here? What are we doing to make sure that we negotiate for effective integration? What agenda do we have to ensure that our boys and girls, our companies and our services go across the border? 

When you go to Busia or Malaba, there is no kiosk for Uganda; it is very painful. When you go to the health facilities in Kenya, Ugandans are mistreated. This is not the integration we are looking for – (Interruption) 

MR BESISIRA: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. It is for that reason that I think you should be our next candidate for the East African Community – (Laughter).

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, colleague. We live in the future and we are planning for the future. We agree that we have done whatever has been done but a lot still has to be done. We need to holistically integrate our government departments and make sure we have agendas and even programmes to make sure that every ministry- Under the East African Security Programme, we must know what defence is planning for this integration; we must know what Ministry of Trade is planning for integration; we must know what agriculture is planning. 

We have a comparative advantage in the region as far as agriculture is concerned, but how many farmers have we prepared to ensure that we have a favourable bargain across in Kenya to sell our maize at a better price rather than the Kenyans coming to Uganda. This is the type of integration we should work for. They buy from the farmers and cheat them and our farmers remain in the gardens breaking their backs. 
I appeal to you, colleagues, to sit down and get out of the comfort zone. Our people are looking for solutions in the market; they are looking for trade, employment and easy travel. This is the direction we must work towards to ensure that we improve the livelihood of our people by providing better markets, better trade and better terms of trade. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.29
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

Members have talked about relations. I thought the integration was for us to live peacefully. However, recently, Ugandans were chased from Kenya and their merchandise was confiscated. The majority of them were from Bugisuland because the border is near Bugisu and they normally cross over. If you look at the check centres in Mbale, you will see that most of the trucks which come to pick maize are Kenyan registered trucks. In Bulambuli, they go deep into the villages and sometimes they even buy the maize before you harvest it from the garden and they pay you in advance. 

I tried to fight that system but the peasants said, “We need the money”; but those people are creating food shortage! Honourable members, let us have a clear food export policy where we can agree on certain quantities to be exported and the rest remains. This will help to avoid shortages. 

Secondly, we should encourage the traders from Kenya to have a one-stop centre instead of going to Bulambuli deep into the villages. Some ruthless farmers have started fighting with them and they do not even know the laws here. So, let us have one-stop centres where they can purchase the commodities rather than going deep into the villages. 

Mr Speaker, we also have to harmonise our taxes. Our country is levying 13 per cent excise tax on soft drinks like soda while Kenya is charging seven per cent and Tanzania is charging five per cent. So when you are in Bulambuli, you can take a soda from Kenya and this soda comes in through smuggling, so Government is losing a lot of money. I have raised this matter before but someone from URA told me that they are strengthening URA controls to curb that. However, the money spent to strengthen these controls should actually be used to harmonise the taxes so that whoever wants to run to Kenya will find that the cost is the same. 

The same applies to wheat flour; wheat in the whole of the eastern region now comes from Kenya still due to our high taxes. So, as much as we are trying to look for revenue, we should balance to avoid being out of the bracket because we are losing a lot of money. I know someone in Mbale, around Mt Elgon, who owns a wheat processing plant but he is closing it down because there is no market; people now buy wheat from the other side. So as much as we are looking for revenue, we should harmonise the taxes and also have clear centres for doing business. 

You cannot go to Kenya and do the same as they do here in Uganda because they are so rigid. Here, a person can find any company on Nkurumah and they trade but in Kenya they are so rigid. So, in terms of the integration, let us have clear procedures on how to do business in our countries. I thank you.

5.34
MR JOHN NIZEYIMANA (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I am impressed by the unification of the East African countries. It seemed a dream that at one time these countries would work together. I agitate for all African countries to unite and start working together. 

Mr Speaker, we know that the East African countries are brothers but every brother in a family must learn to operate their own family. We benefit much from the East African Community, from the integration, from trade with other countries like South Sudan, Rwanda, Kenya and Congo but strictly with the East African countries. 

Uganda must develop a taxation policy so that we should not be exporting raw materials just like that, for example. Look at a scenario where maize grain is being carried out raw and we cannot add value to it; this does not convince me. We need to export what we can earn from and reduce trade imbalance. 

Last month, I got an opportunity to go to Roofings Ltd and I discovered something very funny; Roofings Ltd imports raw materials from Japan! These raw materials are just rolls of steel or iron ore got from Africa, taken to Japan and brought back and sold to Roofings Ltd. When I interacted with them further, they told me that they were the main importers and that after they import, they also export to countries like DRC, Rwanda and Kenya. This revelation almost made me shed tears.

I have heard that we have iron ore in Kabale and in  Kisoro, which can last that factory more than 50 years, but now you can see iron ore being imported from Japan after it has been exported from Africa. What is it that we are doing? I did some calculations and I noticed that the entire budget of Uganda could be financed by this factory –(Interjections)– Yes! I noticed that we are losing trillions of shillings in importing and reprocessing at Namanve.

Look at the electricity system, the regulatory authority does not visit these factories. They are incurring losses because there is always irregularity in the supply of electricity and our industries cannot compete with others in the region. I would, therefore, like to request the Minister of Trade and Cabinet to consider these matters. 

Consider tourism, for example; we are competitors even though we are part of the East African Community. Look at how much is injected into tourism in Rwanda, Kenya and Tanzania in advertising only. This is cutthroat competition where we need these people to come in and we tap this money. We need this foreign currency so that we can have balance of trade.

One time I was with the Committee on Tourism and Trade in Kisoro and I sat down with the UWA board and the minister and showed them how we can generate Shs 9 trillion from tourism in Kisoro alone through just simple things. Now we are leaving the marketing of tourism to private companies and yet Government should be seriously involved in this. 

I inquired why Rwanda is getting a lot of money from tourism and the chairperson of the board told me that in Rwanda, every minister is a minister of tourism. That is what she told me. Wherever they go to Europe, America, they keep advertising their country. This is easy money! People are here running after things like oil but oil will get finished and tourism will remain forever. (Member timed out_)

5.40
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for doing a good job but I have some issues to raise.

Recently, we heard about the problem that happened between and Kenya us, where Kenya tried to refuse the importation of our sugar into its territory. However, when you go to our supermarkets here, you will find a number of Kenyan products on sale. I would like to urge the committee to help us on this, in conjunction with the ministry, so that we can balance our businesses very well.

Recently, we were in Mombasa and we found out that our tea from Uganda is taken by Kenyans and rebranded to appear like it is made in Kenya. This is another issue that the committee should take up and try to suggest a way forward so that products from Uganda are respected and taken seriously. 

Mr Speaker, I attended a launch of business companies of East Africa and I found out that there is double taxation on products that come to Uganda through Kenya. Some products like the cars that come to Uganda are taxed twice but goods going to Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda are not taxed twice. This is another area that the committee can investigate and clear out. 

As you are aware, we are here to benefit from the integration; not only one country should benefit yet we are all supposed to. I was actually told that the taxation is done in such a way that our people should pay more than other countries. We should have our people in Uganda taxed fairly. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.43
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work done. As you are all aware, the Committee on East African Community Affairs is a new committee and so we should appreciate what they have so far done.

That said, when I looked at this report, I was not impressed by the achievements but because this is a new committee, we can say that it is not a fault of the committee. I notice that most of the achievements captured are on areas of benchmarking, coordination and consultation - that they went around the country asking people their views about what they know about the East African Community. 

We need to see this committee starting to work together with all stakeholders in forging ways to move Uganda forward. We need to position ourselves with the traders and see how we benefit from this integration. We should not just focus on the question. If you asked Ugandans what they know about the East African Community, save for the consultations that were carried out, most of them will tell you only about the leadership and who wants to be the President of the East African Community.

We want to see this country benefit from this integration economically. Hon. Mathias Kasamba just mentioned that Kenyans come to Uganda to buy our maize; I want to urge the committee together with the Ministry of Trade to work with Ugandans and show them how to benefit and how to position themselves to reach out to this market instead of outsiders coming here to pick their maize from their gardens. That is exploitation of the farmers. This is what we want done and this is what would benefit Uganda, if we are to benefit from the balance of payments. At the end of the day, we shall all benefit. 

I also wish that this committee would interest itself in the properties of EAC that were given back to the member states when the community first fell apart. We have always cried about the issue of Soroti Flying School; since that time, the only flying school in the country has been left to waste. The EAC had let each country to manage the assets that were left to them but how has Uganda managed the only flying school in East Africa? At the end of the day, a region like Teso, which is the host community, and other Ugandans have not benefited out of this –(Member timed out_)

5.47
MR SIMON ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I wish to take on from where my sister has stopped. I had noted this as one of my strong points. As we talk about the East African federation, we have areas of integration. She has talked about the Soroti Flying School and I recall that I led a committee, which interacted with the officers of the school. We discovered that this institution has suffered as a result of the collapse of the EAC then. Now that the EAC has been revived, member states should come in and fund this school so that it is revamped.

I have heard most of the members lament every time we talk about the EAC that Kenyans and Sudanese rush here. The problem is not other people rushing to Uganda; the problem is that Ugandans are very complacent. Ugandans are not aggressive. I want to give two scenarios here. Ugandan forces went to Somalia and the Kenyans and some other countries also went there, but along the way those countries allowed their citizens who have the power to invest to go there –(Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you. I have followed this issue quite closely and it is not about the power of the businessmen behind this; it is the state which is doing this business and they are behind these business people. So, it is the Ugandan Government which is complacent because it does not support those entrepreneurs.

MR ALEPER: Mr Speaker, he has a point but there are also individuals who move on their own initiative to pursue business without necessarily waiting for Government to tell them to go.

I want to give the example of South Sudan; while the Kenyans were going to invest in banks and hotels, Ugandans were carrying tomatoes, bananas, chapatti and cabbage. How do you compare a businessman from Uganda who goes to make chapatti or ride a boda boda with a businessman from Kenya who has got a supermarket? It is high time Ugandans started becoming aggressive like other East Africans-(Member timed out_)

5.50
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Benson Obua-Ogwal): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. According to NEPAD, regional integration is a prerequisite for Africa’s inclusion and development. When you talk about the East African Community, you are talking about regional integration. 

Many people who lived towards the end of the colonial time and during the early independence days have a lot of nostalgia for the East African Community; that was a time when services were common for all the East African states. I am speaking with authority because I did some academic work on regional integration. East Africa at the time was the most advanced in terms of regional integration globally. Even the EU as we know it today managed to come to where we were very recently. We had a common currency and we had very many common services, which I cannot go on enumerating because they were so many. 

The point I am trying to make here is that it is very difficult to resurrect a dead body; it is easier to heal a sick body. What we are trying to do here is to resurrect something which died but which we need and so it is not going to be easy. What saddens me is that from the way we handle it, it is like regional integration is some kind of collegiate issue between heads of state where they can sit and try to discuss issues devoid of input from the local person.

On the issue of awareness, no systematic attempt has been made to help the common man in Uganda appreciate what regional integration is. We may be here talking about regional integration and its benefits but unless we –(Interruption)

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I appreciate the Shadow Minister for East Africa coming to make a presentation but it would be appropriate if he had introduced himself as the Shadow Minister and defined what the committee has presented. May I know, procedurally, whether he is providing information or he is replying –(Interjection)– Excuse me, I am addressing my concern to the Speaker.

Mr Speaker, I would like to know from you whether our shadow minister is replying to what has been presented in this House. He should have introduced himself so that the Hansard can capture the reply to the policy position. Maybe he is just providing information. I want you to clarify.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When I called the honourable member to Speak, I called the shadow minister to speak.

MR OBUA-OGWAL: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think Atat Cecilia Ogwal was not listening when you invited me to speak. He invited me in my capacity as a shadow minister. However, for the benefit of others, my name is Benson Obua-Ogwal, Member of Parliament for Moroto County in Alebtong District, on a UPC ticket if you like. I am speaking as shadow minister for MEACA (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, permit me to say that we, as a country, need to move fast, and the committee made that point here. We need to move fast and ratify all the laws that will help us get integrated into the East African Community. From the way we are moving now, we are very slow and the rest of the countries will go ahead of us. 

Mr Speaker, it is also a shame to note that up to now, we still do not have a policy. I do not know what this “animal” called “policy” means to our Cabinet ministers. There are some policies that have remained at the Cabinet level for more than 11 years. Does this go to confirm the cry of the President, which I will not talk about?

Mr Speaker, we are talking about awareness creation and a lot needs to be done. The committee has recommended here that more money should be given for workshops to raise awareness. Much as I agree that it is good to conduct workshops, as far as I am concerned that is not the best way; there are many other methods of raising awareness in the Community other than workshops, which to me is quite wasteful. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, there is also the issue of lack of awareness or ineffective dissemination of MEACA outputs. The ministry is not giving out what they are really doing so people do not know. How can we appreciate and help you when we do not know what your outputs are? Most stakeholders do not know about MEACA because they have not been reached. You owe it to yourselves, as a ministry, to let us know exactly what you are doing.

A quick look at the ministerial policy statement of last year shows that the performance indicators that were put here were deceptively impressive. I want to submit that they were deceptively impressive in the sense that the ministry gave themselves a very low performance expectation; they were not ambitious enough. I challenge the ministry to raise the bar and make sure that their performance indicators are higher.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR OBUA-OGWAL: Mr Speaker, for the time that the ministry has been in existence, over and over again we have been told that there are vacant positions, and the committee has also raised this. How do we, therefore, say that the ministry is positioning itself to give us good performance? What is difficult about getting competent people to fill positions in the ministry? We have very many competent people who are looking for jobs; why can’t the ministry fill these vacancies? We, therefore, recommend that these vacant positions be filled with competent people as soon as possible and this should go a long way to enhance the efforts we all yearn for.

Finally, Mr Speaker, we recommend that the East African Community affairs should not be presidential matters; let them be people-centred. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, too. Minister of Finance, I do not think there is any issue for you in this matter. Is there any? –(Interjection)– Okay, arrears.

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for generating a good report. 

The issue of underfunded priorities is recognised but does not only apply to the Ministry of East African Community Affairs; it cuts across all sectors. Where funds are not available, surely those priorities remain underfunded. However, I want to say that the Ministry of Finance will improve on the budget for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs as soon as resources become available.

You will realise that this financial year, Shs 23.5 billion has been given and we have arrears of US$ 5.2 million, especially to the Inter-University Council for East Africa and unpaid contributions to the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation. However, in this financial year, we provided Shs 3.07 billion as part payment for the arrears and the rest of the other arrears are being verified by the East African Community and funds will be availed for settlement.

Mr Speaker, there is the issue of the common market, where there is free movement of goods and services. The honourable member from Bulambuli talked about goods from Kenya and Tanzania being cheaper on the Ugandan market. The essence of the Community, especially for the East African Common Market, was to ensure that there is free movement of goods and services – tax-free and quota-free. 

There is what we call a common external tariff where all goods entering the East African market are taxed equally so that there is no inequality. However, there is domestic taxation, like the excise tax and VAT, which is imposed by the individual countries; the countries impose their own taxes. 

What we do in such situations is that before every budget is read, the finance ministers meet and harmonise some of those issues. There is the issue of sugar from Uganda, for example, where Kenya wanted to license the sugar in order for it to enter their country. Government did intervene because the East African Community Protocol provides that we have to have quota-free and tax-free movement of goods and services. So at a high level, this matter was discussed, and even at the level of the Summit. Now both countries are handling it. 

This has also happened to goods which are produced by companies like Mukwano Industries and Roofings Ltd. This also affects goods from other countries like Tanzania, from where we import wheat and some other goods. We verify to make sure that those goods that come to the country actually originate from the member countries in order for them to qualify for tax-free and quota-free entry into our market.

Regarding the non-tax barriers, our countries are working together and they have substantially reduced. That is all I have to state in that respect. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.05
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I thought this is the right moment for us to find out why we cannot cross the border to any of the countries which fall within the East African Community without passports or official documents. We need that matter to be sorted out and then we can talk about free movement of persons.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, you are the right person to address my special concern, which I have raised on this Floor before. You happened to be the leader of the delegation to the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly and I am aware that East African Community is supposed to come up with a common position on EPAs. For those who are hearing it for the first time, EPAs are Economic Partnership Agreements. These agreements must be developed by the five countries that make up the East African Community. The respective parliaments must also be made aware because whatever funding they get through the EPA avenue goes to augment our budget and also our development. 

Up to now, I have not seen this. Maybe it was presented when I was not in the House and if so, I beg to be forgiven. However, I have not seen any document produced on the Floor of Parliament by the ministry telling us about the issues raised in the EPAs and the controversies that concern EPAs. 

What I am reading from the public media is that Kenya wants to go alone in negotiating and signing the EPAs because they are losing a lot in terms of exporting flowers. That is what I have been able to pick up. If that is true, then in a way we would be fragmenting our efforts to benefit from the EPAs and the funding from the European Union. I think this is the time for the ministry to come up clearly and define their role in as far as EPAs are concerned. 

Two, what is the country’s programme, which was presented for negotiation? Three, who has mandated who to present anything for development on behalf of Uganda without Parliament approval? I would like those concerns to be addressed by the ministry. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will be having debate on the report from the delegation that attended the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly. Several reports have been presented and we shall have a day when there can be a discussion on those topics. (Ms Taaka rose_) On what point, honourable member, do you rise? Is it a procedural point? Honourable minister-

MR ASTON KAJARA: Mr Speaker, on the issue of EPAs, a decision was taken that the East African Community member states negotiate as a bloc and these negotiations with the European Union have been going on. The problem with the European Union is that they want to, as much as possible, impose on the Community what they want and what will not benefit us. That is why these EPAs have taken a long time. One example –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I raised a very serious matter and I am surprised that the minister would stand here and talk the way he is talking. Who is negotiating on behalf of whom? You are saying the issue is being negotiated but who gave you the Ugandan programme? That is what we are asking.

Mr Speaker, you are aware that I sat on that forum - the JPA - and we agreed as JPA that every country must have its parliament to participate in the formulation of the country programme. What I am saying is that you should have first developed a Ugandan programme, had Parliament give its input, and then go with our programme to negotiate with the East African partners. We do not even know the content of what you are negotiating. That is my concern. 

I thought you would plead that you are going to bring it because it is a serious matter. Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter. I just want you to humbly beg the Speaker to give you time to bring the Ugandan programme here so that Parliament can have a look at it so that when you go to negotiate with our partners, we would have told you where our priorities are. Now who has defined the priorities for you? Are you, therefore, in order to define the priorities for us when we are the representatives of the people of Uganda? Are you in order? Rt Hon. Speaker, is the honourable minister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Dokolo and the Chief Opposition Whip, negotiations are a prerogative of the Executive branch of Government. Parliament does not negotiate on behalf of this country. Foreign negotiations and diplomatic issues are the mandate of the Executive and not Parliament.

MR KAJARA: I want to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker for his wise ruling. All I have to state is that negotiations are on-going and East Africa is negotiating as a bloc. East Africa did constitute a delegation consisting of all the member states, which have been presenting to the European Union.

On the issue of visas and free movement of persons and goods, certainly the protocol provides that there must be free movement of goods and people without any hindrance. However, there are what we call barriers. We have been slow in implementing this but you know that under the tripartite initiative, Kenya, Uganda and Rwanda are now allowing free movement of people. Even without a passport, you can identify yourself with a national identity card. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the benefit of the honourable members, the negotiations of the EPAs are being conducted by the East African Community. The last negotiations, in my recollection, were between the 26th January to 30th January and that is where the issue of disagreement came in. The ministers of trade and ministers of justice were all in Brussels taking part in these negotiations and that is where Kenya started indicating that they would wish to go alone. The members were not happy with Kenya and the matter was resolved that way; so Kenya backtracked and now they are going together.

6.14
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report. I want to begin by informing this House that the Minister in charge of East African Affairs, hon. Shem Bageine, is right now in Arusha because EALA is in session. So I am here to stand in for him. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank Members for the issues raised and I want to thank them for the support. I want to begin by responding on the issue raised by hon. Bigirwa about the sensitisation in schools and districts. In accordance with Article 7 of the Treaty of the East African Integration, it is supposed to be people-centred and private sector driven. So the mandate of this ministry is to make sure that sensitisation campaigns are done for all stakeholders, even in schools. However, we have not been able to do this in all districts and schools because of lack of funds. When the funds are availed, we shall do that because it is our responsibility and we are willing to do so. 

On the question of who we meet when we go to the districts, first of all, we inform the area Members of Parliament, other politicians and religious leaders, traditional leaders, civil society organisations and we also hold talk shows. I want to take this opportunity to thank hon. Osegge who has advised us to do it in the local languages so that we can connect with the local people. We take her advice and we thank you. 

My colleague asked why Busia and Tororo were left out. The committee was telling us what they did. We were just informing this House where we did the sensitisation last financial year. This exercise is on-going and we carry out sensitisation based on the availability of resources. However, Busia and Tororo were some of the districts where we had started two years ago. 

I also want to inform you that the ministry is printing booklets. So far, the ministry has printed booklets in Luganda, Swahili, Runyankole and Ateso. We want to print more in other languages because when you see what has been done so far, not all languages have been covered. We will bring them out when we feel we have covered the major languages which every Ugandan can understand. 

On the issue of trade deficit, I want us, honourable members, to remember where we have been as a country. Previously, we were importing everything from the neighbouring states and continents but today, we have started to produce our own things. We may not have that balance yet, but we are moving in the right direction. At least we have now registered nine per cent compared to what we used to export in the previous financial years. So I call upon everybody to work with us; let us all invest as Ugandans and encourage exports so that we can balance our trade and perform better than we are doing now. 

Someone asked how the ministry has prepared to build the capacity of Ugandans to compete favourably. The ministry is working with key stakeholders like the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Trade to ensure that Uganda positions itself to compete favourably. Honourable members, I want to inform you that our responsibility as a ministry is to coordinate the other ministries. We have to work with those ministries but all these things cannot happen in one day; we have to move on slowly. 

I also want to state that this relationship is embedded in the common market implementation plan, which the ministry is implementing through the different ministries amidst resource constraints. The stakeholders in this particular area are the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, – and I want to thank the minister of finance who has given us some information here - the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Internal Affairs - mostly immigration - the Ministry of Trade and Industry; we have also the investment authority under the Ministry of Finance and also the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

The Minister of State for Finance has explained the issue of harmonisation of taxes and competitiveness. I will now talk about Soroti Flying School. This issue was raised by hon. Florence Ibi Ekwau. Soroti Flying School is an institution of the East African Community by virtue of Article 9 of the Treaty. The Ministry of Works is working out arrangements for the school to be handed over to the EAC. When this is done, the school will be revamped and partner states will be required to contribute to its development. 

Honourable members, given that Uganda is a landlocked country, we must work with other states to make sure that we benefit from the EAC. It is the responsibility of all Members to make sure that it goes on well. I also want to inform you that there is need to ratify the laws and protocols developed by the EAC. Uganda has so far ratified the following protocols: The East African Protocol on Defence Affairs; the one on peace and security; the one on the Swahili Commission; the one on science and technology; and the one on natural resources and environment. 

As the committee informed you, we still have our policy before Cabinet and we are going to make sure it is fast tracked. On the issue of staffing in the ministry, restructuring is going on in Government. As we talk, the Ministry of the East African Community Affairs has submitted a request to the Public Service Commission. We await a response, which we expect soon because we are constrained in terms of human resource. 

I want to thank you so much. When the funds are availed to us, we will do our part as a ministry. I want to thank you again. I thank the committee for the report and I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, who has taken responsibility for this sector. 

Minister for Finance and the Minister representing the East African Community, the point raised by the Member for Dokolo is important, that this House has got to be briefed on the stages of your negotiations - what you have done and how far you have gone. Members should not be picking things from the newspapers. It is your responsibility to come and say, “we have gone this far with these negotiations”. 

The EPAs, which are for negotiations, are for the whole Africa, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) region. Many of the Caribbean countries have not even ratified them; many of the Pacific countries have not ratified; and most of Africa has not ratified. This is because there are issues that they think are not very favourable to them. Because of that, there is need to continuously brief the House about the progress being made. 

The EPAs were introduced way back in 2007, if I recollect properly. Up to now, it is still being negotiated and we raised the issue in Brussels. The mere fact that it has taken this long to negotiate means there are issues that cannot be rushed around. So we need to be briefed about this thing. The honourable member for Dokolo is asking me to ask you to thank her, but that one would be a bilateral arrangement. (Laughter)

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to commit myself on that issue. I would like to request that immediately we finish handling the budget, you accord us time on the Order Paper to give an update on this country on whether it is going on well and where we have reached. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the sectoral Committee on East African Community Affairs on the ministerial policy statement on the budget for the FY 2014/2015. They have made many policy recommendations and also given budgetary figures that were submitted to them and now they have proposed these for our approval. As we said earlier, these figures have to be harmonised with the Budget Committee and then the final figures for supply will be done at that stage. I now put the question for the adoption of the entire report.

(Question put and agreed to)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for pushing this long. In one afternoon we have been able to handle two reports. That is a very good effort. It now gives me the encouragement that we could actually do four tomorrow, if we start in the morning. 

The reason is that we want to finish with the budget so that we can free the Members. Too many things are warming up in other places –(Laughter) – so if we finish you can be freed earlier to go and deal with other emerging issues. So, let us see if we can take on four reports tomorrow. I will have them on the Order Paper for tomorrow and we will go as far as we can. If we do two in the morning and two in the afternoon, that will be great.

I now ask the committees that thought they would present the other day to get ready for tomorrow as well. Those committees include: Committee on Public Service and Local Government, Committee on Presidential Affairs, Committee on Foreign Affairs and Committee on Agriculture. Just be on standby and ready to proceed just in case time is availed. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10 O’clock in the morning.

(The House rose at 6.26 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 September 2014 at 10.00 a.m.) 

