Tuesday, 25 September 2018

Parliament met at 2.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I would like to remind you about the National Prayer Breakfast, which will be hosted by the Speaker of Parliament, and the Chief Guest will be His Excellency the President. It will take place, as previously announced, on 8 October 2018, starting at 7.00 a.m.

You are reminded to send in your confirmation. If you have not done so and yet you intend to participate, please do so. We will make a proper announcement again tomorrow to remind you. A prayerful nation is one that survives. The nation that does not pray always has problems. Therefore, let us prepare to pray with the rest of the country and the rest of the world on that morning of 8th October, the day before our Independence Day. We need to talk to God directly to help us deal with issues of our country and its governance.

Honourable members, there are a few things that are almost reaching a level that is not sustainable. This afternoon, I will talk about one issue only, and this one has to do with something I have communicated about many times here - matters of urgent public importance. Matters of urgent public importance were created to take care of situations that are so urgent that a formal notice would not be sufficient or would not be able to deal with the situation properly. 

All questions in this Parliament are supposed to be asked with notice and they are normally called “questions for oral answer”. You submit a formal question in writing to the Clerk, stating the subject of the question and the nature of the inquiry, and then you forward it to the minister responsible. When that is done, the minister responsible is given a timeframe within which to respond, and that response is given to you in writing. You have a copy of the response and you study it so that when it comes up on the Floor, you are able to ask supplementary questions – very specific things. 

That is the rule. The exception to that rule is where the matter is so urgent - there is a disease outbreak, floods, a collapsed bridge and things of this nature - that it may not require this kind of notice, and that is when you come under “urgent matters of public importance”. However, from the way we are doing it now, we are making things that happened three or four years ago urgent matters. This practice is doing is a disservice to the Order Paper and the general business of the people of this country that we should be doing.

Just in the last two weeks, what was classified as “urgent matters” are running into 56 in number and they all have to be dealt with in one way or another. What happens to the rest of the business - the Bills, motions, petitions - that formally comes before Parliament? We are not assessed on the number of urgent questions that we handle. We are assessed on the amount of Bills we pass, motions that we will have debated and passed, reports that we debate and pass, petitions that we handle and several other matters that fall within that category.

Therefore, honourable members, please save the presiding officer. Sometimes, we become shy to tell you “no”, but you should have your own assessment. Think about the matter that you are going to talk to the Speaker about; is it really urgent? Sometimes, out of politeness, we accept these things, but they are wrong. I am giving you advance notice that this politeness ceases today. From tomorrow, henceforth we will stick to the rules. If it is not urgent, do not come to my office. Do your own assessment; if it is urgent, please come but if it is not urgent, prepare a parliamentary question and process it the way it should be done.

If you have issues on how to shape or frame your question so that it can become acceptable, we have a whole directorate that can help you. Please, honourable members, help us so that we can deal with the formal business of Parliament more seriously. We crowd this item and then by the time we are coming to the business of the House on the Order Paper, the time is gone. Some of these so-called urgent questions are so popular that they can attract a one-hour debate. 

Please, honourable members, let us get back to the rules. They were designed so that we have a system of delivering and processing things that happen in the House. I thought that I should point this out and also give notice that with effect from after this communication, the rules will be applied more strictly and I will not be shy about it. Even if you come with a smile, I will disregard the smile and tell you that it is not proper. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of the fishing community of Jinja Municipality East, Jinja District, represented by the hon. Paul Mwiru. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. I think that there are also other people who have come along with them. 

We also have a delegation of staff from the Parliament of Kenya in the public gallery. They are: 

    1. Mr Mohamed Jimale, Clerk Assistant;
    2. Mr Douglas Katho, Clerk Assistant;
    3. Mr Danson Kachumbo, Fiscal Analyst;
    4. Mr John Mugoma, Clerk Assistant;
    5. Ms Mary Lemerelle, Clerk Assistant;
    6. Mr Ahmad Guliye, Clerk Assistant;
    7. Mr Joshua Ondari, Clerk Assistant;
    8. Mr Mwembeo Mwangombe, Hansard reporter.

They are here to attend a programme on parliamentary practice and procedures at the Eastern and Southern African Management Institute (ESAMI). Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause) Thank you.

Honourable member, would you like to cite the rule on which you rise on guidance? I do not recall a rule where I am required to give guidance. Do you mean to rise on a point of procedure?

MR OKIN: Mr Speaker, I did not know whether I should raise this as a matter of procedure. As you have just been guiding us, sometimes we may not necessarily be able to interpret the Rules of Procedure effectively. However, I would like to seek your guidance on rule 25(6).

Rule 25(6) clearly stipulates that if items that have already appeared before Parliament for debate or appeared on the Order Paper are not handled to conclusion, then subsequently, they should reappear on the next Order Paper. This is where I would like to seek your guidance. When you look at the Order Paper of today, in our last sitting last week, the Speaker ruled that because there was no statement from the ministry concerned, other matters would not be debated. However, when you look at today’s Order Paper, those very important matters do not appear and they do not even appear under “business to follow”. 

We do not know how we should handle this because some of us are concerned about when these matters will reappear or perhaps if they will completely disappear. Would you like to guide us on that, Mr Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, if you speak generally, I am unable to guide. What is the specific matter that you are referring to?

MR OKIN: When you look at the Order Paper of Wednesday, item No.4, part I is on the mistreatment of fishermen at various landing sites and then part II is on land-grabbing in Chua County by the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF). This was not discussed the other time and now it is not appearing on today’s Order Paper. That is what I wanted your guidance on, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. That is usually supposed to be the procedure; a matter that has already appeared should be handled and finished. However, when it comes to responses or statements from ministers, they only come up when the statements are ready. When they are not ready, you cannot debate them. Therefore, instead of clogging the Order Paper with business that is not ready for processing, we always put it under business to follow.

It is possible that in the process of transferring this item to pending business or business to follow, there could have been a mishap. That is an administrative issue that should not cause you any problem. However, the statement about the fishing on Lake Victoria is ready and that is why it is coming up as item No.4 and we are going to deal with it today. I am sure the minister is here and ready to proceed with it.

Therefore, internally, we try to ensure that we handle business that is active and can be handled. There are Bills we have just not been able to move back because when we put them on the Order Paper, it turned out that the committee reports were not ready. Therefore, we handle business and then when we reach these items, we skip them and try to get to other business because these items are not ready. 

Therefore, ordinarily, that should be the procedure. The issue the Member for Chua is raising should be coming up as soon as we get a signal from the responsible minister that the response is ready. We shall deal with it immediately - probably tomorrow or the next day. 

2.15
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole South County, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

After a long dry spell, on the 19th of September rain with a lot of hailstones and wind destroyed Ayer Seed Secondary School; three dormitories were unroofed and the iron sheets destroyed. Not only that, in Okwor Primary School in Ayer Town Council, lightning struck one of the pupils and he died. He was called Odur Jasper, aged 13. As I speak now, some pupils are in hospital because many were injured. In the process, a number of crops and animals were destroyed. 

Mr Speaker, the second crop planted by the residents of Kole Town Council and Ayer Subcounty was completely destroyed. A similar situation happened last year and all the documentation was done and submitted to the ministry but no attention was given to these people. As we speak now, students are looking for where to sleep because three dormitories were destroyed. Seven students are also still getting treatment in Lira Referral Hospital.

Mr Speaker, I humbly request the Government and the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness to assist these victims with foodstuffs, materials for planting - if the rains continue - and iron sheets for roofing the secondary schools, so that the students can continue with their education. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member from Kole. I think there was a similar situation from Jonam, Pakwach - let us first finish with this matter.

2.18
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Pakwach District for the last two weeks has had problems. The first time, the Woman MP articulated this issue and today, I am here again to present a similar case to what happened in Kole District. On Friday, we had heavy rainstorms in Pakwach and as a result, four schools had their roofs destroyed, 17 households were destroyed and Pakwach Town Council office roofs and fence were destroyed.

Mr Speaker, I know that for all this, we need urgent support but our main concern is the institutions. Pakwach Girls, for instance, is the only girls’ primary school in the whole district and all the seven classroom roofs were destroyed. At the other three primary schools, at least some of the classroom roofs were not destroyed. We need urgent support for that, including for the households.

Mr Speaker, I have a report that the district gave to the Permanent Secretary in the Office of the Prime Minister in relation to this. This report and the accompanying letter were written after telephone calls had been made to people in the disaster preparedness department in the Office of the Prime Minister. As I present this, I also beg to lay on the Table the report which was sent to the Office of the Prime Minister relating to that disaster. 

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to forward a similar cry to that of Kole. Last year, we had a similar disaster that was mainly related to floods. Unfortunately, we did not get the support that we required and that is why this time, apart from the report going to the Office of the Prime Minister, we thought we should present the same to Parliament so that it can strengthen that process and our people are supported. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think that is a matter that was raised by the Member for Pakwach District and both Jonam and Kole have raised it.

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very sorry about what has happened in Kole and Pakwach districts.

About the lightning, this Parliament gave us money and we have started the procurement process for lightning arresters. Our teams have been all over the country to identify the schools that need urgent attention. With the money we have, we shall start with the schools that are prone to lightning strikes, especially those in districts that have reported cases where life has been threatened. 

Mr Speaker, about the buildings that have been destroyed, my ministry is going to work with the Office of the Prime Minister on this. Right now, we are compiling data and I think something will come up as soon as possible. I rest my case, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, can we leave it here now? You raised it and it has been responded to in respect of the schools. Is somebody coming to respond to the disaster threats so that I do not push this to tomorrow? Can somebody call the minister responsible?

MR DAVID BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is on his way coming to the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.23
MS LYDIA MIREMBE (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the dangers caused by Energo quarrying company to the people of Mabanda Subcounty in Butambala District. Energo is a road construction company operating in Butambala on Mpigi-Kanoni Road, which goes through Butambala District. They have been stationed in Mabanda Parish in Butambala. Their operations will however go mute on 30th of September this year. 

The works of the company are issues of national development but their means of achieving national development has negatively affected the community of Mabanda and the neighbouring villages, both socially and economically. The quarrying process has damaged houses of the community members. Some have broken down due to the high energy produced during the process of breaking these hard rocks. The process has also had an effect on the health of the community, especially on pregnant mothers, some of whom have lost their babies due to the intense vibrations resulting from the quarrying activities.

Energo has still confused the local leaders as well as the Government with its full compensation policy to the affected families, households and groups of people. Their current compensation policy provides – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I need you to deal with the urgent matter.

MS MIREMBE: Mr Speaker, what makes it very urgent is that this company will stop working on the 30th of this month yet people have not been compensated. Therefore, my prayer is that the people who have been affected be compensated before Energo leaves this area. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Works and Transport is being informed now to come to the House to respond not only to this question but also to others which are on the Order Paper. I request that we attend to this question immediately the Minister of Works and Transport is in the House, so that it is given the attention that it deserves.

2.27
MR MOSES KAHIMA (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the first budget call circular for the preparation of budget framework papers and budget estimates for financial year 2019/2020. It was sent to all accounting and executive officers for state enterprises and corporations and dated 14 September 2018. It was equally copied to us, Members of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, you recall that in the financial year 2017/2018, Cabinet passed a resolution and created 200 town councils and 196 subcounties. However, in the budget process for this financial year, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development sent communication to this honourable House that there were no funds to operationalise those new town councils and subcounties.

The Electoral Commission in July went on to constitute the leadership and councils for those new town councils and subcounties. Now, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has sent the first budget call circular indicating that there are no funds to operationalise these new town councils and the subcounties. Honourable members, it is my observation that if we allow this situation to continue like this, we shall be perpetuating discrimination of a section of Ugandans within the jurisdiction of these new town councils and subcounties yet they are fully legalised and instituted with leaders and councils. 

Mr Speaker, it is my prayer that this House resolves to compel the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Local Government to finance these town councils within the resources available. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The matter seems to be very well received by the Members. However, what the Member wants is a response from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, it is true that we created a number of town councils and subcounties. Yesterday, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury issued a first budget call circular indicating the resources available to help in the planning process for the next financial year. We are at a very early stage to make any conclusion on whether resources will be available for these subcounties in the next financial year or not.

While we take note of this issue and we are already discussing it within Government, I request the Member not to press the alarm button yet and allow the process of budgeting move on. Since the budget finally ends here at Parliament, we can look into it whatever he is requesting. However, it is too early to make conclusions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where did the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury get the information which he communicated? He has said that the money is not there and you are saying that it is too early to predict.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, in issuing the first budget call circular, we normally use our projections for the current financial year; for example, we have not discussed any new tax measures or any ways of raising extra resources well and above what we had for this financial year. Therefore, he is using the projections of the current year. During the process of budgeting, new ways of raising resources like tax measures and other ways come up. Therefore, it would be too early to conclude that there is no money for these new town councils.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the dilemma of the Member is: You have already said that they should not even prepare for these town councils. That is the alarm button he is pressing because the message is saying “do not raise any planning figures for these new town councils”. That is what the message is saying and yet you are saying it is too early to predict. So, which is which?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the budget call circular was from the Secretary to the Treasury and the statement I am making is from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We will be able to handle that.

MR KAHIMA: Mr Speaker, before I came here, I worked as the Chief Finance Officer (CFO) for Sheema District Local Government. Once these figures are given to local governments, they are called indicative planning figures. Therefore, the permanent secretary is notifying all the accounting officers that in their new plans and estimates for the next financial year, they should not include the new town councils and new local governments, which have already been fully institutionalised with councils by the Electoral Commission. This means that the section of Ugandans living within the new town councils will not be able to access any Government funding. 

Therefore, for the minister to indicate that it is too early – Indeed, the permanent secretary has already indicated that there will be no funds in the next financial year, but we are trying to say that the permanent secretary and the finance minister should consider those new town councils within the resources that are available. That is my contribution, Mr Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we have taken note of the issue raised by the Member from Ruhama and the suggestion to use the resources available to finance the town councils. We are talking about the next financial year, 2019/2020, which will commence almost nine months from now. Let us really take note of this and then we will come back to the House to see what we have resolved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the committee responsible for this sector should pick this matter up and have an interaction with the PS/ST and other agencies, so that this matter is corrected early enough. Chair of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, please take this up and interact with the responsible people and see if this can be corrected, so that the districts can plan properly covering all that is within their respective jurisdictions.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from the guild council of Kampala University, Luweero Campus, Luweero District, represented by hon. James Byandala and hon. Lillian Nakate. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

2.36
MR TOM ALERO AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I arise on a matter of national importance related to Moyo General Hospital. 

Mattresses and beds were procured for the hospital under the Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Programme but were recalled in the financial year 2013/2014 by the ministry’s national equipment and quality team because they were found to be substandard. Up to now, the mattresses have not been replaced and the numbers of those who are normally admitted in the hospital have risen from 100 to over 200, including refugees. As you are aware, we are a refugee hosting district, so the number is now overwhelming. 

There are only three oxygen cylinders in the hospital, which are not enough for the population because, as I said, we have both nationals and refugees who are using this facility. Additionally, mothers who undergo caesarean operations normally sleep on the floor, thereby getting infections and diseases. 

My prayers are:

1. 	This is an urgent matter which needs urgent attention. The number of mattresses and beds should be increased in order to cater for both the refugees and the nationals. 

2. 	The number of oxygen cylinders should be increased

3. 	The number of specialist doctors should be increased as well as nurses and midwives

4. 	There should be an increased supply of drugs to the general hospital and other health centres like Abeso Health Centre II, Aya Health Centre III, Goopi Health Centre III, Lama Health Centre III, Afogi Health Centre III, Bari so as to cater for everyone. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you have gone beyond what we had agreed. (Laughter) We agreed to deal with the urgent matter.

MR AZA: The urgent matter is that we really need beds, mattresses, drugs and specialist doctors to cater for the increasing number of refugees. Thank you very much. I rest my case.

2.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we would like to note the concerns raised by the Member from Moyo. The Minister of Health will be informed and will get in touch with the Member and the hospital immediately after here, so that we can see how to arrest the situation as soon as possible.

THE DEPUTY SPPEAKER: Honourable member, please follow up with the minister so that this matter is sorted without coming back here. Thank you.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES

2.40
THE DEPUTY CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Tonny Muhindo): Mr Speaker, I rise in accordance with rule 157 and rule 183 in respect of the matter of designating Members to various committees. I designate the following Members to various committees:

1. 	Ms Winfred Kiiza – Committee on Budget
2. 	Mr Patrick Ocan – Committee on Equal Opportunities
3. 	Mr Asuman Basalirwa – Committee on National Economy
4. 	Ms Betty Muzanira – Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE)

These are designations to standing committees.

THE DEPURTY SPEAKER: I thought we were dealing with sectoral committees? Can you deal with category B on sectoral committees?

MR MUHINDO: Much obliged. These are the designations:

1. 	Ms Winfred Kiiza – Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.
2. 	Mr Patrick Ocan – Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
3. 	Mr Asuman Basalirwa – Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

Mr Speaker, hon. Aol Betty Ocan, the Leader of the Opposition, has been withdrawn from the sectoral Committee on Health but retained on the Appointments Committee by virtue of her position.

Mr Speaker, I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are clear on this. The withdrawal is noted, but for her remaining on the standing committee, we are not going to take a vote. I now put the question for the approval of those Members that have been designated to those sectoral committees. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON MISTREATMENT OF FISHERMEN AT VARIOUS LANDING SITES

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Mr Speaker, this is a statement by the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs on the operations of the fish protection force.

Background

Mr Speaker, the fisheries subsector contributes significantly to the national goals of poverty reduction, food security, economic growth and national economic development and is a source of livelihood to many Ugandans. 

Enforcement of fisheries regulations has had challenges since the year 2000 when enforcement was done by fish guards. The National Fisheries Policy, 2004 brought in the use of Beach Management Units (BMUs) to assist the technical officers in grassroots fisheries management. This started well but later deteriorated, leading to a decline in fish stocks due to overfishing on the lakes.

The continued decline of fish stocks and the limited capacity to regulate the subsector at the centre led to the use of parallel enforcement systems, the use of "authorised officers", and the subsequent mushrooming of imposters, which led to further decline in fish stocks. The decentralisation system also widened the gap between the centre and district local governments in as far as regulation of the fisheries subsector is concerned, even worsening the situation further. Effective regulation requires one chain of command and the absence of it brought more weaknesses in regulation.

Mr Speaker, in the financial year 2014/2015, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) established the agriculture police unit but its operations were short-lived and regulatory services remained wanting. As all this was ongoing, 15 fish factories out of the 21 that were operating in Uganda closed, leading to reduced exports to prime markets, reduction in fishermen’s incomes, and increased fishing pressure in search of more fish, including reduced fish for local and regional consumption. The six factories that remained were operating at far below capacity.

In February 2017, His Excellency the President made an intervention to revive the fish potential by creating the Fish Protection Force (FPF), hence the ongoing operations. This was in line with the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, objective No. XXVII, of the Constitution of Uganda. It clearly provides for the state to promote sustainable development and public awareness on the need to manage land, air and water resources in a balanced and sustainable manner for the present and future generations.

It also emphasises the utilisation of the natural resources of Uganda to be managed in such a way as to meet the development and environmental needs of present and future generations of Ugandans. In particular, the state shall take all possible measures to prevent or minimise damage and destruction to land, air and water resources resulting from pollution or other causes.

Enforcement Operations

Mr Speaker, the current operations are on lakes Victoria, Edward and George as well as on the trade routes, which have so far revived stocks of the Nile Perch quantities in Lake Victoria and reduced foreign exploitation of our water resources. I would like to inform Members that in the neighbourhood of Wakiso, for instance, on Lake Victoria, the gazetted landing sites are 30 but before the enforcement of this protection force, we had 76, meaning that 40 of them were illegal. As a result of the FPF intervention, four fish factories have started operations and two are scheduled to resume operations next month, bringing the total number of operating factories to 12. 

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has financially and operationally supported the operations since February 2017, despite inadequate financing to cover all lakes, markets and trade routes nationally. The Fish Protection Force continues to operate hand in hand with the Directorate of Fisheries and to implement fisheries laws and regulations as required.

Mr Speaker, the above achievement has come against challenges arising from continued use of illegal gear, political pressures, elicit business, criminals from foreign countries, illegal landing sites, robbery at sea (lakes), initial and current resistance of the operations by illegal fishermen, and resource use conflicts

Allegations Raised Against the Fish Protection Force

Mr Speaker, as already indicated above, the Fish Protection Force was set up to assist MAAIF in regulating fisheries malpractices. Despite the successes registered, many complaints have come up and require redress to realise the long-term intended goals. The issues alleged in the petition about the operations of the Fish Protection Force include the following:

Allegations 1 and 5: Indiscriminate Destruction of Boats and Selling Of Mature Fish and Engines

It is alleged that when boats are confiscated, even with mature fish, the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) soldiers break the boats and sell off the engines as well as the fish catch, and that this is a very lucrative activity at the expense of citizens.

Mr Speaker, the UPDF enforcers are conversant with the roles for which they were deployed. Before UPDF personnel join operations of FPF, they all go through training on fisheries laws and regulations and they operate alongside subject matter specialists, that is, fisheries officers. They know what mature fish is and what it is not, as prescribed in section 2 subsection (r) of the Fish Act, Cap 197. If there is any person who can differentiate immature from mature fish, it is the FPF personnel.

Certainly, it is not true that the enforcers apprehended persons with mature fish. The officers confiscated immature fish as prescribed by the law, which says “Any person who in any waters of Uganda captures, kills or injures any fish which is immature; or buys, sells, exposes for sale, or is in possession of, any fish or part of a fish, which is immature and was taken from waters in Uganda, commits a crime”.

As far as boats are concerned, only boats carrying immature fish and are of illegal size are destroyed.

The applicable laws are the Fish Act, Cap 197, and the Fish (Fishing) Rules, 20l0, Statutory Instrument No.33, rule 26(6) gives powers to any authorised officer to seize and detain any fish, fish product, fishing appliance, boat, motor vehicle, conveyance, machinery or other implement which he or she reasonably suspects is liable to be forfeited under these rules.

The Fish Act, Section 30(b), gives powers to the authorised officer to: “destroy any vessel, the interior overall length of which is no greater than twenty-eight feet, net, long line, basket, trap or appliance found on the shore beside or in the water of any waters where either the use thereof or fishing is prohibited under this Act.” Guided by these legal instruments, the UPDF is mandated to remove illegal fishing gears and dispose them as stipulated. Mr Speaker, enforcement is very difficult. When you are doing enforcement, the offenders are always very ruthless.

Pursuant to the above provisions of the law, the UPDF enforcers have confiscated engines, which are in the custody of Government. There is no evidence on allegations of selling of confiscated engines. We, therefore, request anybody who has information on the same to bring it forward to the UPDF leadership for redress or the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for attention. We have provided pictorial evidence of boats whose sizes are not acceptable on our lakes and nets and hooks whose dimensions are not allowable, and the presence of local leadership/communities when disposing of illegal gears. (Attached as Annex A). Mr Speaker, when they are being disposed of, they make sure that the local leadership witnesses the process. 

Allegation 2: Ban of smoked fish

It is also alleged that the ban of smoked fish of all types affects the livelihood of the people whose life revolves around fish for breakfast, lunch and dinner.

Mr Speaker, there is no ban of smoked fish of all types except immature fish as defined under the Fish Act, section 2. Of course, the UPDF enforcers do not confiscate mature fish. However, smoked or non-smoked fish, on account of contravening the provisions of section 27 of the Fish Act, become a subject of confiscation by the enforcement. Pursuant to the discussion above, we provide photographs of immature smoked fish. (Attached as Annex B)

Allegation 3: Killing Citizens

The petitioner alleged that a number of citizens have been beaten to death, citing the example of Othieno and Omondi Fredrick.

Mr Speaker, it is not true that UPDF led to the death of Othieno George and Omondi Fredrick. The truth is that these incidences happened at different times. Around February 2017, after the beginning of enforcement operations, one fisherman who was identified as Othieno George jumped into the water to hide away from the enforcers who were on patrol in the wee hours of the morning. At this point, the marine enforcers embarked on the process of rescuing him. Despite the fact that they got him from the water alive and gave him first aid, he collapsed before and he could not reach the health centre.

The District Medical Officer (DMO) conducted a post-mortem and a Criminal Investigations Department (CID) Officer investigated the matter, which concluded that Othieno died of drowning. His body was thereafter given to the family for burial. The post-mortem report of the deceased is attached as Annex C.
	
As a follow up action and based on UPDF institutional culture of reasonable suspicion, the two soldiers, Lance Corporal Kibirige Joseph and Pte Opio Steven, who were on duty at that time, were arrested and subjected to the Unit Disciplinary Committee (UDC) of the Marine Brigade. They were later released after serving one year.

The second alleged death, of Omondi Frederick, came to the knowledge of the Fisheries Protection Force three days after the rescue incident of Othieno George by the fishermen who reportedly recovered the body about five miles from the operating area. The FPF therefore has no hand in the alleged death of Mr Omondi Fredrick.

Mr Speaker, if there is anyone with information that can pin these officers, he or she should bring it forward so that we take appropriate action. We, therefore, find it unreasonable for some leaders to judge UPDF’s enforcement on the account of false or wrong information and unfairly generalising the entire UPDF as brutal and extortionist in nature without any evidence.

Allegation 4: Confiscation of Motor Vehicles

It is alleged that the motor vehicles confiscated over the last three years have been parked at Nakasongola and it has been asked how the citizens will recover them.

Mr Speaker, the operations of this force started almost one and a half years ago. Anything that happened three years back is really not the responsibility of this protection force. The force has only been operating for one and a half years.

Mr Speaker, we refer to the applicable legal instruments - the Fish Act, Cap.197, and the Fish (Fishing) Rules, 2010, Statutory Instrument No.33. Rule 28(e) of the Fish (Fishing) Rules, 20l0 gives powers to the authorised officer to seize and detain any fish, fish product, fishing appliance, boat, motor vehicle, conveyance, machinery or other implement which he or she reasonably suspects is liable to be forfeited under these rules. 

We can only talk about vehicles impounded in the past one and a half years when UPDF started enforcing the fisheries laws. We are afraid we are not competent to talk about the motor vehicles that were confiscated three years ago. I would advise the honourable members and those persons whose vehicles were confiscated three years ago to go to the Fisheries Department at the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Pursuant to the instruments mentioned above, the UPDF, in accordance with the other actors, have confiscated motor vehicles, engines and boats, among others, in a manner that is professional and legal. 

We attach evidence of some of the impounded vehicles that have been used in the contravention of the mentioned law. The impounded vehicles are parked not only in Nakasongola but at Masaka and Kasese where they are secured. (See Annex D.)

The second part of the question requires a response on how the citizens recover their items. Section 30 of the Fish Act, Cap l97, subsection (d) (i), (ii) and (iii) define the manner in which confiscated means of illegality should be handled. 

Allegation 6

It is alleged that on 16 September 2018, the Rt Hon. Speaker was extremely embarrassed when two Kenyan Members of Parliament, accompanied by their County Assembly Speaker, came to complain about UPDF brutality against Kenyan technical marines and Kenyan fishermen.

The allegation of brutality against Kenyan technical marines and Kenyan fishermen is false. There have been four cross-border security meetings between Ugandans and their Kenyan counterpart. The membership included both political and regional security meetings. From the communiques at hand, these allegations have never been discussed or documented. (Please find attached communiques as Annex E)

It is, therefore, a surprise to us why Kenyan Members of Parliament complained to the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament with such false allegations that are not even known on ground by the local enforcers, who were actually part of the drawing up of the communique, and who are purported to be actors or victims. The UPDF is aware that on that day, the two Kenyan MPs entered with armed guards. Because of this border engagement, they were not arrested, even when they were armed.

Allegation 7: Arbitrary Arrest and Detention without Due Process of the Law

Mr Speaker, the claim of arbitrary arrests and detention without due process of the law is false because the authorised officers of the UPDF Marines (FPU) strictly follow the Fish Act and the fish rules and regulations. In the execution of their mandate, they synergise with other institutions like the police and the Judiciary in ensuring the processes uphold the principles of rule of law.

We provide evidence to prove that the claim of arbitrary arrest and detention without due process of the law, as evidenced from the records of magistrates’ courts all over the country - Records are attached as Annex F. The fact that cases of suspected illegal fishermen have been handled by competent magistrates courts in Kasese, Kalangala, Nakasongola, Buikwe (handling also Buvuma Islands), Greater Masaka, Jinja and Buganda Road shows that the process and procedures exhibited by FPF in its routine work are in line with our laws and therefore legitimate. Certainly, the FPF cannot and shall never act contrary to what the NRA/UPDF fought for and is obliged to defend.

Allegation 8: Allegation of Torture and Extortion of Money

The claims of torture and extortion of money are a falsehood. All those arrested are subjected to the due process of the law. Arraigning more than 2700 people through different courts in the country is proof that actually, the operation follows the law because all of them have gone through court.

In conclusion, it is not an institutional policy of the UPDF for its rank and file to extort money or engage in indiscipline activities. We have never received complaints. If there are any cases or incidences of extortion, let them be reported to the leadership of the UPDF and the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for necessary action. 

I would like to assure this august House that the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs will continue to work with national local leaders and MAAIF to ensure that the operations of FPF are within the law and any undisciplined officer or man will be punished accordingly. We need our fisheries resource. We should work together to make sure that our lakes are restocked so that our citizens can go back to enjoy fish protein. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. This is a statement that was expected and has now been presented. 

Honourable members, unless there is something from the agriculture ministry, I will now proceed to deal with this particular debate. However, let me say this: When these matters come to Parliament like this, it is because the people we represent somehow are affected and they raise complaints. (Applause) When they raise complaints and these matters come here, we do not come to extenuate the complaints. we come to find solutions on how to move forward so that both the fish industry and fishing communities continue their lives the way they have lived, continue to earn the way they have earned, and continue to sustain and look after themselves the way they have been doing so.

Therefore, this House is a solution-finding House. (Applause) This House does not exist for any other purpose - purposes like using sharp words or tones. That is not for this House. The purposes of acting things out in a dramatic way are always preserved for the next building behind us. (Laughter) Here, we find solutions. In debating these matters, there have been allegations that have been raised strongly by people affected in those communities. Now you have heard the response from the minister. Let us debate and debate will take one hour - Can we agree on how long? 

You see, honourable members, if all of you rise to speak – Let us agree because these matters are serious. I am still speaking so I expect you all to resume your seats. The Speaker is still speaking, so I expect you all to first sit, including those who have not heard. (Laughter) Honourable members, if we all rise to speak and debate and take one hour, then we cannot have sufficient time for each Member. I am going to start with Members from the affected communities and then we roll it out to the general debate for the rest of the House. You are not that many. Let me start from Buvuma then Bukooli Islands in that order and then we shall see how to move. Can we agree that this debate will take an hour? We will start with the people who raised this issue. Let them set the tone. I will give them five minutes each. 

Let us start the debate. Let us not start with procedural issues because when you start with points of procedure, you will then involve the Speaker in your debate; let us debate. 

3.13
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma Islands): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to speak on this matter. 

I get disappointed when the minister keeps on challenging matters that we bring up, which affect the people in our constituencies. I would like to implore the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs to look at the Fish Act. He has told us that the enforcers on the lake - the army - are following the laws of Uganda critically and they were taken through the laws. 

I would like to read from the Fish Act, Cap.197, closely, so that the minister can follow. Section 2 (q) of the Fish Act, under the interpretation, says, “‘hand line’ means a fishing net not fixed in position but worked by hand without a rod.” These are the hand lines that are used with the hooks. Everyone knows that even without the nets, someone can fish using hooks. That is why it was included in the Fish Act. 

Section 2(v), still under the interpretation section, goes ahead to define “long line” to mean “a fishing line to which numbers of hooks, baited or otherwise, are attached at intervals and which is hung in water in a fixed position.” This is also acceptable by law. 

Tell us whether these soldiers have not refused people from fishing using hooks. I have even brought one for demonstration, as someone from the lake. This is the long line that is put on the hooks, which the soldiers refused our people to use for fishing. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay it on the Table. This is why our people are mistreated every day. They are told it is illegal yet this method is allowed by the Fish Act of Uganda. 

I would like to show you what a long line net is and how it is put on the hook. The hook that is acceptable ranges from size 9 to 1. However, the soldiers deceive the people that long line is the same as a monofilament net. These are totally two different things, which were put in the Fish Act.

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the minister -(Interjections)- Okay, for record purposes, I would like to lay this on the Table so that it can be referred to in the future. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am just wondering how we will put it in the library for Members’ reference. (Laughter)

MS EGUNYU: Mr Speaker, besides that, I got disturbed when the minister said the soldiers know the law concerning fishing and the lake at large. For us in the islands, the only way of preserving fish is by smoking, salting or some other methods. This has been our livelihood, especially for the women and other people. This is because fresh fish is perishable; you cannot stay with it for a long time.

Honourable minister, in the islands of Lake Victoria, people were refused to smoke fish. However, I would like to implore you to allow me read to the House the different sections of this Act. I would like to read them verbatim because while the minister said that the soldiers have not stopped people from smoking fish, my people in Buvuma Island are not smoking fish despite the fact the fish they catch is of the recommended size. I am very aware that the recommended fish size is 18 inches onward for tilapia and five inches for Nile perch. Therefore, if someone gets such a fish, there is no way one can refuse them from smoking it for either sale or some other purposes. 

I would like to now go to the Fish Act, Cap. 197, and show the minister what this Act meant by processing of fish. The Fish Act says thus: “‘Processing’ means curing by smoking, drying, salting or other method, whether similar to the foregoing or not, so as to preserve fish.” So, may I know why people in the islands are not allowed to smoke fish despite the fact that the fish is of the recommended size? I thank you.

3.20
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I do not know what happened to my friend, the minister, today because his statement is full of falsehoods. What we are actually dealing with is the legal regime governing fishing in the country. There is a law and under that law – (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I arise to raise a point of order against my close friend, hon. Paul Mwiru. The honourable minister who presented this report on the Floor of Parliament is actually a diehard member of the bush war team. In the bush, they were trained with an ideology of siasa and the minister has that siasa in his bloodstream. (Laughter) I am wondering whether it is in order for hon. Paul Mwiru to refer to somebody who survives by siasa that he is lying. Is in order to say that the minister was lying? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member who has just given a point of order eats a lot of fish. I am sure he did not have any this morning. Probably, that is why these matters are coming the way they are.

Honourable members, this House does not allow imputation of motives other than the good ones. That point of order borders on assigning an attitude or - things that have the implication suggesting that somebody is speaking in a dishonest manner. The rules do not permit that.

Therefore, although you rose on a point of order, you are completely out of order. (Laughter)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by demonstrating to this House that the minister - maybe simply because we do not have a minister in charge of fisheries in this country - he has no facts about what he is talking about. 

The fishermen who are in the gallery here, whenever they were assaulted by the UPDF, they raised these issues with police. They were even examined and the matter was brought to the attention of president’s office, ministry of fisheries, the RDCs, the army commander and everybody.

For instance, one of the people in the gallery by the name of Henry Kamoga had his house torched by the UPDF, which report was filed in the president’s office. I will at an opportune time lay a copy. Still, among the other people who are in the gallery, there is another fisherman called Lukungu who was one time undressed by the UPDF. Here is the photograph - undressed by the UPDF. All this was brought to the attention of the president’s office because we have letters addressing these same issues to the president’s office, to the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF) and everybody concerned with this matter.

Mr Speaker, still among the affected people, is one who was beaten up and undressed by the UPDF. All these things we are talking about were brought to the attention of the UPDF command because we have letters to that effect that these issues were complained about to the minister. 

Among them are women - this is a woman - if you look at her face – (Interjection) – yes, she was also beaten up by the UPDF in these landing areas. There are many - we have police reports and letters written to the relevant authorities in this country.

However, Mr Speaker, what is the issue, which we need to address? The framers of the law vested powers to do with fisheries in this country into the commissioner fisheries as the authorised officer. The presumption is that the fisheries officer is a professional in that area. That is why even under Rule 25 of the rules referred to by the minister, when fisheries officer, as an authorised officer, appoints people under, for example, the BMU Fisheries Rules, they take these people for training, to start with. 

However, as we talk the legal regime has been overthrown by the President. He has discarded the fisheries trained people and entrusted this function with the UPDF personnel who have no training in fisheries. This business has become very lucrative to the UPDF to the extent that while these soldiers are in the field they do not listen to anybody.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that we do not support illegal fishing; I would like to make that very categorically clear. We are also alive to the fact that fishing contributes 2.5 per cent to the GDP, and that they are over 500,000 Ugandans who participate directly in fishing as a way of livelihood, and that fisheries supports over two million Ugandans.

However, what is happening now is that a handful of people have taken over all the fishing areas in this country, monopolised them and allowed these maims to happen to the people engaged in fishing.

What is our recommendation? I have two, the first being that there should be appointed a minister in charge of fisheries so that when issues of this nature arise, we address them to that minister as a colleague in respect in this House. This is because apparently, there is a gentleman called Maj. Nuwagaba, when you call him; he says he only talks to the President. The minister himself is here - I don’t know whether he can even - because we have already tried to talk to him and this is what happened.

Second and most importance, is that the powers to manage fishing activities on the water bodies should go back to the commissioner of fisheries  so that in case there is any help needed should be requested for by that commissioner and in case there is deficiency in the sector -(Interjection)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, hon. Mwiru, for ceding to this information and thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true, like you have said, we are here to pave way for solutions as the temple of solutions for the entire country. It is true people have been brutalised during this act of enforcement yet the due court process has not been followed. 

The information, in form of proof, that I would like to give to reinforce what my honourable colleague from Jinja said, is that a one Yasin Ssenkungu had his vehicle impounded even when he had a licence to trade in the by-products. For example, there is what we call haplochromis, commonly known as mukene, which is not illegal fish though it is tiny in size. This man’s car was impounded and taken by Cap. Ewagi. The court issued an order for the release of his vehicle - this was Lambu Landing Site in Masaka – but when this gentleman went to the barracks to claim his car, he was tossed about and detained. He was later produced in court. The magistrate even got rid of the file and told them that prosecution never appeared in court for nine months to present a case against him. 

This man lost his vehicle, all his products and his livelihood. What country are we living in where there is lawlessness to this extent? These are the documents, Mr Speaker. Hon. Mwiru can lay them on the Table as well.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I beg, with your indulgence, to lay these documents on the Table so that if the honourable minister is seeking for information, these are documented received copies and also for purposes of follow up because all these copies were received in various offices. I beg to lay on the Table the letters to the various authorities as far as this sector is concerned, including the President’s office and the agriculture ministry. I beg to lay them on the Table with the annexures thereon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the rules of laying documents before the House are almost similar to those used in court. Therefore, for me to confidently receive that on record, we must know the authors, the dates and how you accessed these documents so that we can say that you are ably laying them because they are for evidential purposes. Otherwise, we will just take your facts as they are and at an appropriate time, the documents can be brought to the attention of whoever will be handling this matter. 

MR MWIRU: Most obliged. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a letter dated 8th November, 2017, addressed to a one, Brigadier Mike, the immediate supervisor of Major Nuwagaba. It was received by the president’s office on 8th January, 2018. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who wrote the letter?

MR MWIRU: It was written by four members namely Mr Jamada Lukoya, one of the victims, Mr Kamoga Henry, Mr Yahya Siraje and Mr Godfrey Musasizi. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we will take that as a sample.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay, on the Table, a licence to a one Ssenkungu Yasin whose vehicle was impounded and the fish therein disposed of without the due process of law as submitted by hon. Nsereko. I beg to lay, thank you.

3.33
MR ABOTT OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Mr Speaker, one good man in Uganda used to say, “I shudder.” I was born in the island and would like to categorically state that I support the Government’s programme of making sure that the lake is not depleted.

I know that even as we talk today the people we represent are going to be caned and tortured. Honourable minister, the Book of Galatians 6:10 says, “…do good to all people but most especially to the family…” As Parliament, we are a family and so we cannot come here to tell lies.

Mr Speaker, Mr Omondi and his friends were killed in Lolwe and his left eye was plucked out. I was called to cool the population. We cannot operate under such conditions. People have been beaten and killed in my constituency. Why are we inciting the public against us, members of Parliament? 

The minister talked about people from Kenya -(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, for giving way. I do not represent a fishing area but I was born and raised on the shores of Lake Victoria. Just last night - for people who watched NTV - there was a story on people who were lamenting how they have lost their body parts. For example, one man said he had lost his eyesight after he was beaten with a butt of a gun. And one of their major complaints was that there is no due process and so they cannot defend themselves because the soldier is the prosecutor, judge and witness and he executes the sentence. Others said they had lost their houses by any extension and that is the fate of a fisherman.

Finally, the last piece, which colleagues need to reflect on, is that the fact that fishing issues are now being defended by the minister responsible for the military, is a problem. 

MR OUMA: Mr Speaker, last week the army captured engines from 20 boats in the middle of the lake and left the occupants in those boats floating in the waters not minding whether these people would end up in Kenya or Tanzania. If you want to know the truth let a committee move and find out what is on the ground. 

The UPDF is praised for being a very good force but I request the army captain in charge of Sigulu Islands to be withdrawn; I request you in good faith because there are so many people in the army who can do that work; I request you – we are going to land in problems.

Mr Speaker, you are now chairing this House but in 2017 I raised an issue on the Floor of Parliament that when I talked to Nuwagaba, he said this to me: “I am a soldier. I do not talk to civilians. I do not get free money the way you get it in Parliament.”

If we have people who do not respect us and the House - they beat people and tell them thus: “Let your Parliament rescue you.” Please, let us prevail over these people. I am just requesting you – I don’t have much to say but as a Member of Parliament, I am crying.

Mr Speaker, I was in the Island when the Speaker went there and indeed when you are human, you see men’s and women’s backs – you will sympathise with people. Let us have a solution for this country. I have never spoken like this but I request –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, for the second time I would like to repeat this that on the 15th September, 2018, I was part of the Members of Parliament with the Kenyan delegation that was on the island on that fundraising day. 

I was ashamed because I am a very good supporter of my political party, the NRM. However, when I shouted, “NRM Oyee” I cannot repeat the words I heard from the people; I will be ashamed, Mr Speaker. I pray that the lights are not going off intentionally to block the words that I would like to mention -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on information.

MR MACHO: It is true that the outcry of two members of Parliament, hon. Wanjala and Dr Oburu from Bondo – they informed everybody about the outcry of Kenyans and therefore, I would like to inform the House that I got shocked that a whole minister, one of the historicals I have been respecting, came to this House and called the Speaker of Parliament and the members of Parliament from Kenya liars. This degrades us as members of Parliament among the people we lead in our constituencies. This questions also the integrity of the leaders in this country. 

Lastly, the minister told the august House that it is a big lie to say that Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) soldiers are now getting money from the people. On Saturday, two UPDF officers namely Lance Corporal Ahabwe Moses and Pte Obbo John, driving a grey Toyota Premio registration number UAV 065C, followed a businessman carrying mature fish from Mayuge to Kenya and started shooting into a foreign country; look at that! Shooting bullets into a foreign country? The vehicle they were driving is not a UPDF vehicle to show that they only wanted extort money from people using a hired vehicle. 
I would have labelled the minister as a liar but being that the report was just given to him –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a point of information.

MR MACHO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OUMA: In conclusion, Mr Speaker, my prayers are:

1. 	Captain Ssebukeera, who is commanding the force on the waters of Bukooli Island, be withdrawn because I know the acrimony that is already there and I know what will follow. People want to come here and eulogise but I pray that should not happen.

2. 	I also pray to the ministry concerned - what is the work of Association of Fishers and Lake Users of Uganda (AFALU)? This organisation has entered and taken control of the army. If the army wants to operate, they should do so without AFALU because these people are also doing business. They are now the ones funding these people, accommodating them and removing fish from people by force. There is a man called Lukwago John from Lolwe who went to Namayingo with soldiers and grabbed fish worthy Shs 9,000,000 – (Member timed out.)

3.44
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In December, 2017, the UPDF grabbed a motorcycle from one of my voters called Hyuha Paul. I am told that it is in Nakasongola - all the way from Mayuge. I tried to share this information with my friend, Brig. Ola but he said he could not manage those people. I tried to share with the Minister of State for Defence who is also an army man but he also said he cannot manage those people. 

I wrote a letter - because the victim petitioned me – I have a copy of that petition on my phone, which I will lay at the Table when I get a hard copy. Anyhow, I wrote to the Minister of Defence a letter attaching the petition, around April or May. The minister has never responded. 

I drove to his office – to reach there, one has to walk a distance of about a kilometre. They said it is only the minister’s vehicle that can be driven up to his office. Other people have to walk there - (Interjections) - yes! Only the vehicle of the minister can be driven to that point. They told me they would call me back but up to now, nobody has done so.

I would like to request that the Minister of Defence takes charge. I tried to share some information with army men but they said, “That minister only knows laws; he does not even know how to use a pistol. There is no way he can manage these army generals.” (Laughter) 

Therefore, there is a problem in the army. Honourable minister, what happened to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries? Why can’t that ministry take charge? He should not just sit. I am told that right now the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries does not know the Headquarters of Operation Wealth Creation. Let the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries take charge.
 
My last prayer is that as a starting point, the Ministry of Defence should release all the motorcycles – because it is not only my voter’s motorcycle, which is in Nakasongola. There are so many of them. Let the Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs release all those motorcycles before we do any other thing. Thank you.

3.48
MS IDAH NABAYIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for the defensive report given to this august House.

The honourable minister has said that in Wakiso District the gazetted landing sites are only 30 but by that time the UPDF carried out their operations they were 76. They closed the other 46 landing sites to make them thirty. 

I would like to cite an example from Kalangala District. Before the UPDF operations, we had 64 gazetted landing sites. However, as of now over 10 landing sites have been closed by the chairperson who has just been elected. There is a merger of landing sites. One can now find a landing site with two chairpersons or more. I am wondering how the honourable minister is going to handle those villages with many chairpersons.
 
The other thing is: our people have been tortured. They give them 20 minutes to vacate the landing sites to go anywhere they want. I am a person who does not support illegal fishing but the way these operations are handled is bad.  It is my prayer that the way the operations are handled be streamlined. These soldiers are saying that they are only answerable to the President of the Republic of Uganda, leaving us out; they don’t listen to anyone.
 
My other concern is still about the operations, which are done partially. You find them in Kalangala but not in other places. When you go to Owino Market, there is immature smoked fish - one time, we went to General Muhoozi complaining, as leaders of Kalangala - we told him that while the people of Kalangala were doing their work there was still immature fish in places like Owino Market. He told us he was going to work on it but still nothing has been done.

My prayer is - I know our people do not want to engage in illegal fishing but they lack empowerment. There was something called a Fisheries Fund - the people in Kampala are given funds; there is a Youth Livelihood Fund and money for women. How about the fishermen? They should give money to these people to buy legal fishing nets, engines and make legal boats then we shall do away with illegal fishing –(Interruption) 

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you colleagues for giving way. The information I would like to give is; what is happening in Kalangala is also happening in Bukoto East, in Bukakata Sub-County. It is one of the villages that have been affected. Most of these villages are also polling stations. We would like to know the fate of the Ugandans that are affected by evictions from these polling stations.

The other information I would like to give concerns what was given on this Floor of Parliament. The minister was requested to release all the properties of the people that had been affected when they confiscated their property. 

In the barracks in Masaka, we have motorcycles, cars, bicycles among others. All those properties belong to Ugandans and they are not earning a living from them anymore. That is the kind of information I wanted to give.

MS NABAYIGA: Thank you for the information, honourable member. Mr Speaker, I would like to make my last prayer. We have the Fisheries Act that was made in 1964. You find that there are very many changes. So, honourable members, it is within our mandate to amend laws. I beg that we amend the Fisheries Act to fit the changing situation today. I thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, like I said at the beginning, we want to find solutions, but what we are debating will not take us there. What we are debating are issues that came from affected people through their members of Parliament to form what are now called allegations.

So, the minister’s statement is in response to eight allegations, about some matters of fact that the minister has received responses to, and that the honourable members have also got information from the key constituencies.

A debate on the minister’s statement alone will not provide us with the solution we need to deal with this matter. It will not provide us with the means to deal with this matter. I am accordingly referring this matter to our committee in charge of agriculture - not the one for UPDF; it should be committee responsible for fisheries, so that they can talk to the fishermen and women themselves that are affected. They need to hear their testimonies and then they can come back with a clear report and recommendations.

As for now, we are just gathering scattered recommendations from Kalangala – somebody speaks and says that I recommend this. There is no way of processing these recommendations and accessing their viability, and then taking a formal decision from this House.

So, honourable members, this matter stands referred to the committee in charge of fisheries to handle expeditiously - and this time, I mean expeditiously, and come back to the House and guide us with this matter. Thank you very much. We can have the next item.  

Honourable members, I decline to debate by procedure. It makes me participate in the on-going matters in the House. I decline – unless there is serious procedural matter, I will not be entertaining such matters, like procedural that are not based on – yes, if it is not a procedural matter - honourable member, proceed with your procedural matter.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for your wise ruling. The matter that we have just been handling borders between life and death. I represent a fishing community and we lost one person that was even reported on national televisions and in the print media. The same continues - the torture, the death and the impounding. 

Is it procedurally right that the committee goes  - but the minister has not given specific instructions in as far as either directing his troops to halt the shooting on sites, like it happened in my constituency, and the torture of both women and men that are nursing wounds in hospitals.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the procedural matter?

MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, my humble procedural matter is just one. Is it not procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for you to further direct the minister, as we await the undertaking by the relevant committee under your instructions, that the shooting at sight and the torture be stopped, just like you did with the sand mining in Masaka? I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have guided, and I have directed the committee responsible for agriculture that are directly in charge of fisheries to handle this matter expeditiously. If there are supplementary issues to be dealt with, we will deal with them. As for now, my standing order to the committee is to handle this matter expeditiously. We can have the next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table, a comprehensive students list benefiting from the students’ loan scheme, for the financial year 2018/19. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this particular matter stands referred to the appropriate committee in charge of education to handle, and come and advise the House. If there are issues with this matter, then we will see how to handle it. We can have the next item.

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a list of accredited firms benefitting from the funds provided towards the stabilisation of maize prices.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. This stands referred to our committee responsible for finance to look at, and come and advise the House of the nature of this particular matter, and how we can deal with it. We can have the next item.

4.01
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Ms Angeline Osegge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table, a report of the sub-committee on public accounts that handles classified expenditure, and give a brief on it as provided for in the Rules of Procedure.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you. Mr Speaker, Sir, the subcommittee said above took a study visit to the United Kingdom (UK) House of Commons and House of Lords and we picked a few lessons that we think we can share with this House –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, is it in order to have strangers who are maybe from the technical desk sitting in our place here? I do not know this gentleman behind here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which Member are you referring to? I see the hon. Bakabulindi, Member of Parliament for Workers; hon. Kasolo, Member of Parliament for Kyotera; hon. Rwakajara, Member of Parliament for Workers.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, is this one a Member of Parliament? I was not aware, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know who you are talking about.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Bakabulindi.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have just read to you the Members of Parliament sitting there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay. My apologies to you if he is a Member of Parliament –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair please continue.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will not read the whole report but pick only a few things. Mr Speaker, in carrying out this visit, we learnt a few lessons and we got to understand that in the UK, there are two houses of legislation- the House of Commons and House of Lords.

The House of Commons has legislative powers while the House of Lords is an advisory chamber. The House of Commons goes on with other parliamentary business and Members have to choose where to be due to the competing parliamentary activities. I am reading this because I hope we can learn lessons from them.

In carrying out its oversight function, the House of Commons uses questions for oral answers as one of the mechanisms. Members go through a ballot system to get an opportunity to ask questions. Members who do not get the opportunity to ask questions are allowed to ask supplementary questions. Members can also ask written questions which are answered in writing and published without going through the chamber.

The Members elect chairpersons for the committees during the Committee of the whole House by secret ballot. This ensures impartiality of the leadership. A formula is developed according to the strength of the party in the House. There are 28 elective positions. The parties submit the candidates to the Clerk who publishes them on the parliament website.

Select committees do not handle Bills. Ad hoc committees are appointed by the Speaker to handle Bills. An ad hoc committee is given a number of days in which to consider a Bill. This is done depending on the size of the Bill at the second reading of the Bill. The Bill committees sit two days a week, twice a day. The chairperson is elected for a term of Parliament and a Member is allowed to chair a committee for only two terms.

Mr Speaker, the United Kingdom has a unicameral system of Parliament. The House of Lords serves as an advisory chamber to the House of Commons. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is bicameral.

MS OSEGGE: Sorry, bicameral. Thank you. The Speaker of the House of Commons relinquishes his or her seat once he or she is elected Speaker. This ensures impartiality in the administration of the Office of the Speaker. We recommend that when a Member is elected Speaker, he or she should resign from representing a constituency or district. In the alternative, the Speaker of Parliament should be chosen from retired Judges or Justices.

All special events in the history of the United Kingdom are recorded and history is preserved. It is a good practice to record our history properly and visibly for future generations. This will also promote the tourism industry in the country.

We also learnt that time management is key in the running of an institution. Twenty-four questions and at least two supplementary questions were asked and answered in one hour by the defence secretary. The questions are sent to the ministers before and –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, when I look at the Order Paper, the Member holding the Floor is supposed to be laying the paper at the Table. However, the way in which she is proceeding, she is reading the whole report I think preparing for debate. I do not know whether it is procedurally right to lay the papers by reading the whole report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the rules were revised. Rule 34(1) and (2) provide exactly what you are raising. She is proceeding very well under those new rules.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We also learnt that the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in UK can make inquiries into any sector or organization to ensure public service delivery. Any company that has a contract with Government should be under the watch of Public Accounts Committee. However, the mandate of sectoral and standing committees is well drawn out to avoid conflict of roles. The whole House votes for all chairpersons of the select committees. 

We also learnt that committee sittings can go on even when there is Plenary. This allows committees more time to consider their business. Whenever there is a division in the House and a vote is required for decision making, the bell is rung and all Members go to the House to take the vote. This practice can be replicated in Uganda to enable committees with busy schedules like PAC to handle the current backlog.

We also had an opportunity to meet with the chairperson of PAC of the House of Commons. We learnt that preparations are made two weeks or at least 10 days before the meeting of the committee. The committee meets twice a week when Parliament is in session and produces two reports per week to the House. Currently, PAC is working on the role of private sector companies that provide public services - public service contractors. There is no official position of deputy chairperson.

Meetings are held with civil servants to find out how the programmes they are handling are performing. Follow up is done to ensure all the challenges being faced are ironed out. This ensures successful implementation of Government projects and programmes.

Members are briefed on the nature of the work to ensure smooth running of the committee. Meetings are held 10 days before the session starts. Questions are raised and shared between the chairperson, lead members and the auditors. This ensures a well-organized and focused meeting.

Only the chairperson looks at the classified documents. The auditors bring the papers locked in a brief case and show them to the chairperson. The chairperson can choose to talk to the secret service about the issues if he or she needs any clarifications.

Classified expenditure figures are only looked at by the chairperson. There is a work overload however, because only one person looks at them. No one is looking at the spending. In addition, absolutely classified expenditure budget is in security M5 and M16.

The National Audit Office audits the classified expenditure just like we do. These auditors are cleared by security before they undertake this work.

The Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament has more access to the security systems and issues not discussed with the chairperson of Public Accounts Committee (PAC) are explained there. In the intelligence and security committee, the security chiefs appear and defend their activities. The reports of this committee are not presented to the House and the meetings are closed to the public.

There has never been a minority report in the period of 156 years that the PAC has existed. The party members ensure that money is not wasted. They do not meet politicians and so politics does not play a role, the numbers are clear and the evidence decides the kind of recommendations they arrive at. When we looked at their financial scrutiny and security, there is a unit in the Parliament of the House of Commons which provides support to the select committees in analysing documents introduced in the House. The financial scrutiny unit provides financial analysis for all the committees through the whole year.

A regular event like the budget is analysed with or without instructions beforehand while briefs are done on request. Coordination is done with the relevant clerk of the committee to raise questions for Members on a particular subject being discussed in a committee. I hope there is something we can learn from there.

There is a pool of staff that can be called upon to provide support services to the committee. This unit is the equivalent of the budget office. House of Commons has no Committee on Budget. This calls for the financial scrutiny office which provides a technical guide to the members on the committee.

Lessons learnt: 

i) 	The departments are proactive and the documents are analysed before the analysis is requested. They are not demand driven. There should be a brief to the chairperson every day before the meeting starts. 

ii) 	The report of PAC does not have to be considered by the House. The report is sent to the responsible agency for implementation of the recommendations. This saves time. 

iii) 	Not all reports of the national audit officer are considered. PAC only picks areas of interest where improvement is desired. The other recommendations of the Auditor-General are implemented as stated in the annual report of the Auditor-General. 

iv) 	Most of the reports in United Kingdom are on value for money. They are not aimed at eliminating corruption. They are for improving service delivery. The reports of PAC should not only find fault but should propose ways to improve systems in government. 
v) 	PAC should always follow up on the recommendations made aimed at improving systems. This helps to improve administration, transparency and accountability. 

vi) 	In the UK not all members are on committees. The PAC of UK has only 16 members. Members should be in one committee at a time.

vii) 	The report of the PAC can be published before presenting it on the Floor. The responsible agencies start implementing the decisions in the report as soon as it is published.

We also had an opportunity to meet with the Auditor-General. The National Audit Office is charged with auditing Government departments of the United Kingdom. The office in charge of defence at the National Audit Office audits the defence ministry spending with regard to defence equipment, personnel and defence systems. The office has 800 staff.

The National Audit Office audits all government departments, agencies and government companies, local governments and central government. The office does not audit local councils; which are audited by the local private sector auditors. Financial audit is done annually occupying 450 auditors. Value For Money (VFM) audits are also conducted as well as investigations, which are shorter and more focused onto particular topics.

The Office of the Auditor-General also supports PAC by providing briefings and helps with preparation of their reports and has built relationships with select committees, which look at the particular departments. They also look into requests from members of the public and the Members of Parliament. The office is independent and decides its own work programme. Topical areas of interest are identified on a regular basis.

The office produces about 60 reports a year to Parliament. At least six VFM reports are produced in the defence department. Parliament sits on Monday and Wednesday every week of the 40 weeks in a year. Topics depend on defence of the nation, media insights and Parliament's topical interest. The audits focus on affordability, prudence in allocation of finances and financial management, capability and workforce organisational reform and management and major projects.

Affordability and financial management audits look at how the department can make savings and make sure that the funds are available to finance the budget. The department has a l0-year programme that indicates the expenditure. They look at affordability on the defence spending. Departments should think more about how they can afford what they intend to have with a view of achieving the highest possible VFM but also make savings for the country.

The National Audit Office audits the capability and workforce segment and does the ministries to see if the ministries have the capacity and skills they need to do what is required of them in the navy, infantry and air force.

They also look at organisational reform and management segment; whether the ministries have the necessary departments like overseeing training, air bases, procurements and equipment maintenance. 

Mr Speaker, I will jump a few things.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you have given a good introduction because they are going to debate it. You could pause it there and we find time when we can have a full debate.

MS OSEGGE: Can I just give the lessons learnt?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know how long that is going to take?

MS OSEGGE: It will take less than five minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you summarise in two minutes? 

MS OSEGGE: Okay. 

(i) 	We also learnt that classified audits should target the high cost centres in the budget. They should be able to tell whether the funds were spent appropriately. 

(ii) 	The office of the Auditor-General should focus more on Value for Money audits in the classified areas. This will help the country to know if the funds are helping the country to improve its security and defence systems. 

(iii) 	At the time of budget, specific segments should be established in the budget against which the audit will be conducted. This will help to establish if there was value for money at the end of the financial year. 

(iv) 	Audit should not focus on financial statements but also the sustainability of the various defence and security programmes. The audit report should be able to tell how sustainable the programmes run by the country are to avoid unnecessary spending.

(v) 	The audit reports should also target particular programmes like personnel management, accommodation, military equipment, security systems, air force to ensure proper analysis and recommendations.

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, we recommend that the Government should conduct value for money audits in the defence and security sectors to establish if there is value for money. This will enable the committee to establish the extent of funding required as well as transparency in the operations handled under classified expenditure. 

The agencies that use classified financing should avail all the information necessary at the time of auditing and enough information should be provided to the committee to enable it accomplish its work. By virtue of the fact that Defence is one of the highest key spending areas, it is paramount that high levels of transparency and accountability are maintained in order to keep the country safe. I beg to present, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson. You should be able to present the same report in full because we cannot debate based on this summary. You have to present it in full and then we have a debate on things that we will find there in future.

MS OSEGGE: I beg to lay a copy of the report on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. As I said, we will find time to debate this. Thank you very much.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

Q02/01/10 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Member for Ajuri here? He has appointed the Member for Kwania to stand in for him. 

MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): “a) Honourable minister, are you aware that there is no tarmac road in Lango subregion other than the Great Northern Road (Dokolo-Lira-Kamdini) which was part of the East African interconnection roads for trade and cargo transportation from the port of Mombasa to South Sudan via Uganda?

b) What plans are underway, and when does the Ministry of Works and Transport intend to tarmac the following national roads in Lango sub region, given that some of them have always appeared in the budget for over a decade now? (Rwenkunye-Apac-Pader-Kitgum Road; Lira-Alebtong-Otuke-Abim-Kotido Road; Alebtong-Dokolo-Kaberamaido-Amolatar Road; Alebtong-Amuria-Soroti Road; and Oyam-Minakulu-Myene-Nwoya Road).”

4.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to respond to question 02/01/10 asked by hon. Obua Hamsom, MP for Ajuri County. 

Mr Speaker, my response is as follows: Honourable members, Lango sub region just like other regions has been considered for connectivity with all-weather roads referred to as bituminous roads. 

Government has recently secured funds from the World Bank to upgrade the Tororo-Malaba-Lira-Kamdini road corridor to first class standards under an output and performance based road contract. The procurement for the works contract has been concluded and the contract signed in June 2017. The contractors mobilising to commence work starting with design. 

The following are the plans for tarmacking the other national roads in Lango sub region

1. Rwenkunye-Apac-Pader-Kitgum 

Government applied and secured funds from the Islamic Development Bank for the upgrading of Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur from gravel to bituminous standards. The procurement for the civil works contract is ongoing. 

Pre-qualification: Applications for contractors was completed and once the pre-qualified list is approved by the Islamic Development Bank, contractors will be invited to submit their bids.

Civil works are expected to commence by end of 2018 following conclusion of the procurement process.

The other section of the road from Acholibur to Kitgum is currently under construction for upgrading of bituminous standards with works substantially complete under Government of Uganda financing.

2. Lira-Alebtong-Otuke-Abim-Kotido Road

Government has secured financing from the African Development Bank to undertake the design for the upgrading of Lira-Abim road, which is 125 kilometres, from gravel to bituminous standard. 

The procurement of the design consultant is currently ongoing and the design study is expected to commence by December 2018. The other section of Abim-Kotido which is 64 kilometres has been programmed for the procurement of the design study to commence in the Financial Year 2018/2019 financed by the Government of Uganda. 

The civil works for the above roads links are programmed to commence in the medium term and that is 2018/2019 to 2020/2021 subject to the availability of funds. 

3. Apac-Kole-Oyam-Omoro Road

The design study for this road is planned to commence in the medium term and this is 2019/2020 financial year to 2021/2022 subject to availability of funds.

4. Alebtong-Dokolo-Kaberamaido-Amolatar Road

The designs for upgrading this road from gravel to bituminous standards was completed in 2017 and funds are now being sought for works. Upgrading works are planned to commence in the medium term; that is Financial Year 2018/2019 to 2020/2021 subject to availability of funds. 

5. Alebtong-Amuria-Soroti Road

Procurement for the design study for the upgrading of the road to bituminous standards is programmed to commence in the Financial Year 2018/2019 financed by the Government of Uganda as part of the Soroti (Arapai)-Amuria-Oreta-Akwanamoru Road, which is 143 kilometres.

6. Oyam-Minakulu-Myene-Nwoya Road

The design study for this road is planned to commence in the medium term and this is 2019/2020 financial year to 2021/2022 subject to availability of funds. I beg to respond.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Kwania, any supplementary questions? 

4.30
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the minister for his response. However, I would like more clarification from the minister on the Rwenkunye-Apac-Pader-Kitgum Road. I am not convinced by his response because this has been the same response that has been coming from Government for the last 20 years. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you give more light on the issue raised by the supplementary question? 

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This has been put on record and I would like to assure the honourable colleague and this House that what we are talking about is the truth and if you need to know the process of procurement and where we have reached, for instance, the prequalification list that was sent to the bank, we can lay the letter on the Table, at an appropriate time, to prove that we are in the process of procurement. I doubt that the letter was written 20 years ago; it was written a few months ago.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR TONNY AYOO: The Islamic Development Bank cancelled the loan for the construction of this road and the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) confirmed this. Can the minister prove to Parliament, with evidence laid on the Table, that the bank has finally accepted to clear the loan and procurement has started? This is the current situation and it has not changed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, where is the money and where is it coming from?

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to assure my honourable colleague and the House that the bank threatened to cancel the loan and the Government moved in very fast and rescued the situation. 

I would like to assure you, Mr Speaker, that there were some conditionalities that the bank gave and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has negotiated and we are on course. The money is available.

MR AYOO: Finally, Mr Speaker, the President told us that for other roads, apart from this, the people of Lango should choose between compensation for their cattle and working on those roads. No discussion has ever been held on that but I see the minister proposing here that those roads will be worked on in Financial Year 2019/2020. When was the meeting held between the President and the people of Lango to choose between tarmacking of other roads and compensation for the cattle?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that really a supplementary question?

MR AYOO: Yes, because it is about other roads in Alebtong and so on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not a supplementary question, please. It is not part of the response.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect to my colleague, he is overstretching me because this is not part of the question.

QUESTION 04/01/10 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

4.36
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): “When will Atiak-Afoji road be tarmacked in fulfilment of the pledge by H.E the President of Uganda?”

4.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A feasibility study and detailed design for the upgrading of Atiak-Adjumani-Afoji road was completed under the Government of Uganda financing. The Government has since secured a grant of Euros 50 million from the European Union to upgrade Atiak-Umi section, which is 67 kilometres and is in discussion with other development partners to secure financing for the remaining 37-kilometre section. I beg to respond.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Would you like to ask a supplementary question, honourable Member for Adjumani District?

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for this response, although it has taken very long. I still wish to know whether the tarmacking will commence next year, as stated by the President. He said it would start in February 2019.

Secondly, the Government is meant to co-fund the project. I would like to know whether the running budget has got the provision for co-funding because that is the agreement you signed with the European Union.

Thirdly, I wish to know whether you have initiated the process to cover the Laropi-Afoji component because what you are handling is only Atiak-Laropi but the promise was for Atiak-Afoji. Thank you.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the President makes a pledge, it is the wish of Government that we fulfil his pledge. Now that the Government has secured the money, the process of procurement is the only thing that will curtail us from beginning in time. However, we are working towards that interest to make sure that we fulfil what the President pledged. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development took a decision that it will not enter into securing money from development partners; whether a grant or a loan, if it is not sure that it has counter funding. This means that the moment Government engaged the European Union to secure this fund of Euros 50 million, it had the counter funding.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we are sure that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has the money to start the process. (Ms Ababiku rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, let him finish with the third question; you had three questions.

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Speaker, I stated here that regarding the remaining section of 37 kilometres, which goes up to Afoji, the Government is in discussions with other development partners to secure funding. We can categorically say that we have the resources for the 67 kilometres. For the remaining part, the Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, is in the process of negotiations with other funders.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

QUESTION 15/01/10 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the honourable member for Kiryandongo District present? The Member is not here. Has she delegated another person to stand in for her? No? Next item.

QUESTION 38/01/10 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

4.41
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka South County, Kyegegwa): “When will H.E the President’s pledge to tarmac the Kyegegwa-Kibaale-Miziizi road be fulfilled?”

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This road joins Kyegegwa District with Kibaale District at River Muziizi and Kiruhura District at River Katonga. To date, the pledge has not been honoured.

Mr Speaker, the Government approached the African Development Bank, which accepted to finance the feasibility study and detailed engineering design of Kazo-Buremba-Kyegegwa road, which is a section of 82 kilometres. The procurement of the design study is on-going and is expected to commence by December 2018 and be completed in 2019. 

Procurement of the feasibility study and detailed engineering design of the Kyenjojo–Nyarukoma-Kigarare-Rwamwanja-Kiruhura Road, which is a section of 97 kilometres upgrading project, is also commenced under the Government of Uganda financing, for which the design study is expected to commence by the end of 2018 and be completed in 2019.

Mr Speaker, funds for the works will be sought after the design studies are completed. I beg to respond.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Do you have a supplementary question, Member for Kyaka South County?

MR KAFUUZI: Mr Speaker, my question was very specific: I wanted to know whether there are plans to tarmac this road and when it will be tarmacked. However, the minister veered off and started talking about the roads in Kyenjojo and Nyarukoma, which is not the road I am referring to.  

I do not know whether his answer was meant for my road - the road from Kyegegwa–Kazo-Buremba-Kyegegwa-Muziizi-Kagadi - or he is talking about the road in Kyenjojo. 

My concern is that all roads around Kyegegwa District have been tarmacked, including the roads in Kyenjojo and he is now talking of the next road in Kyenjojo.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the specific road that the question addressed?

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that roads terminate into roads. Roads do not go and end up in a blind area. Maybe the mistake I made was that I expounded onto what we are intending to do. However, what the Member asked was part of what I talked about. In essence, I am saying that the Kyegegwa-Kibaale–Muziizi Road will be tarmacked after the detailed designs that are on-going are completed because it is part of the bigger arrangement.  

Mr Speaker, when it comes to the time when we shall be doing the work, of course works are a function of the designs. You cannot talk about resources or where to get the resources before you have done the design. I have said it here that the designs for this particular road are going to commence by December this year.

MR KAFUUZI: Mr Speaker, this pledge was made 17 years ago. However, the question the minister is answering is what I asked in March this year; about seven months ago. 

I get concerned when he says that the procurement for the designs will begin in December. It actually gives me the impression that it will take another five years. I need to understand this because it is a matter that is really hurting me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought this is a process, which starts with what he has said. 

MR KAFUUZI: Yes, but I am concerned with the slow nature of the process.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then that is another matter. 

MR KAFUUZI: Imagine 17 years and most likely, it may take another five years.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us go to the next question. 

QUESTION 48/03/10 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Member for Butembe here? Has he delegated another Member to ask this question? (Ms Katali rose­_) You need express delegation not just your presence, Member for Jinja District. The Member would like to listen to the answer and you are not his listening person today. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO MOVE A MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE THE ACQUISITION OF LAND BY THE MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT FROM HOIMA DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we still have some time and this is a motion, which will attract debate. However, there was a matter that had come before this House. We debated it and it was referred to a committee. It has now come back with a harmonised decision. I have looked at the report where the minister and the committee concur that this particular matter be approved. Can we deal with that committee report quickly and then go to the others? It is a very brief report. 

If that is okay, can we call item 11 and then come to the motion?

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF THE HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL (HIV AND AIDS TRUST FUND) REGULATIONS, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion had already been moved. However, we debated it and referred the matter for further consultation. The consultation has been done and the committee has come back to report. Therefore, we are not going to move another motion when the motion was already before the House. Chairperson, would you like to report?

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural point I am raising is, I would like to register the appreciation of the people of Kanungu that at last our road has been signed for. We are very grateful. I thought it would be procedurally right to let you know that all my fears and prayers are now going to be answered. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, that is a unique procedural matter. (Laughter) The Member is so happy that she cannot hide it and so she has sought this opportunity to do exactly that. Thank you. (Ms Opendi rose_) Honourable minister, this motion was already moved and debated but the matter was referred back to the committee. Therefore, you do not have to move it again. 

Could the chairperson of the committee report on the results of the consultations that you carried out? In fact, we had even proposed the question for debate and debate was done. Let the chairperson report and then we see how to deal with this matter. Honourable chairperson, was the matter withdrawn?

4.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS (Ms Judith Alyek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter was not withdrawn. First of all, I would like to take this opportunity to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings, which were conducted to conclude on the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund Regulations.

We have minutes of the meeting that was held on 14 February 2018 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just lay all the minutes together on the Table. 

MS ALYEK: Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes. 

MS ALYEK: Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to report back on the issues that were discussed regarding the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund Regulations that the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters agreed on with the Minister of Health. 

Mr Speaker, this is the report of the Committee of HIV/AIDS on the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund Regulations. The regulations were laid on the Table on Thursday, 12 April 2018 and referred to the committee for scrutiny and report back. 

As you may recall, Mr Speaker, the regulations were initially laid on the Table on 17 May 2017 and referred to our committee. The committee presented its report on 13 September 2017. In the report of the committee and the debate that ensued, it was noted that there was need to make some adjustments to the regulations to conform to the spirit of the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Act, 2014.

The honourable minister - hon. Jenipher Namuyangu - while standing in for the Minister of Health at that time, accordingly moved to withdraw the regulations and have further consultations made, taking into account the concerns that had been raised in the report. The honourable minister’s request was granted and the regulations withdrawn then. 

On receipt of the regulations laid on Thursday, 12 April 2018, the committee proceeded to scrutinise them with a view of establishing the extent to which the concerns raised on this particular matter in the earlier report of the committee to this House had been addressed.

I hereby wish to note and report that the concerns have been addressed and they include:
    a) The removal of the provision of a Fund manager, who had been charged with the responsibility of making investment decisions outside the object of the fund;
    b) Adjusting remittance to the Fund to conform to the provisions of the Act that require quarterly remittances.

Mr Speaker, if I can refer to this document, we are talking about the removal of the provision of a Fund manager. The Ministry of Health already has an accounting officer who will be in charge and responsible for this Fund and not the Fund manager that the regulation proposed; to have an investment decision on the Fund.

The second adjustment was done was on remittances of the Fund. This proposal did not conform to section 27(2) of the HIV/AIDs Act that says, “The tax revenue referred to in sub-section (1) (a) shall be remitted directly to the Fund on a quarterly basis.” 

This is what we have to adjust to; that when monies are remitted to the Fund, the revenues talked about in the HIV/AIDS Act should be remitted directly to the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund on a quarterly basis instead of going through the Consolidated Fund.

The committee accordingly recommends that the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund Regulations be approved by this House as required by Section 28 (3) of the HIV/AIDS Control and Prevention Act, 2014. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, there is a bit of a technicality there. It seems that the regulations were actually withdrawn and then brought back by a motion. I am going to ask the minister to conform to that formality and move this motion properly so that we can take a decision on it. This is because it was apparently withdrawn and then brought back to Parliament. Honourable minister, just move the motion for approval.

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you indicated, there is actually a bit of confusion because I thought we had laid the regulations on 12 April 2018. However, with your guidance, I beg to move that the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund Regulations, 2014 be approved by this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is that motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Silas Aogon, hon. Tonny Ayoo, hon. Simon D’Ujanga, hon. Atkins Katusabe, hon. Jane Avur, hon. Patrick Kasumba, hon. Rukiya Chekamondo and the honourable member for Kapchorwa. 

Honourable members, this motion is properly before the House. We debated this matter and referred it back to the minister to deal with the issues that had been raised by the committee. Those issues are now in the committee report and they have been handled.

Can I put the question for the adoption of this particular matter? Honourable members, I now put the question that the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control (HIV/AIDS Trust Fund) Regulations, 2018 be adopted by this House and approved. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we go back to the other item? Thank you, honourable chairperson and honourable minister.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO MOVE A MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE THE ACQUISITION OF LAND BY THE MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT FROM HOIMA DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Mr Speaker, the motion is moved under rules 55 and 123 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. This motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise the acquisition of land by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development from Hoima District Local Government.

“WHEREAS the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development requires land in Hoima District to construct a regional office for the coordination of oil and gas activities in the Albertine Graben;

AND WHEREAS section 34 (6) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 prohibits an accounting officer from transferring property belonging to his or her Vote without parliamentary authorisation; 

AWARE that Hoima District Local Government has consented to a request by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to provide it land, subject to parliamentary approval;

FURTHER AWARE that this proposed transaction is backed by a financial provision approved by Parliament in the Appropriation Act, 2018 under the ministry’s budget for the Financial Year 2018/2019 via Vote 017, sub-programme 1184 and output 72;

NOTING that this intergovernmental transaction has already been consented to by both parties subject to statutory requirements, parliamentary authorisation under the law inclusive;
 
NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by Parliament that:

    1. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and Hoima District Local Government is authorised by Parliament to acquire land belonging to Hoima District Local Government for purposes of establishing a regional office for monitoring oil and gas activities in the Albertine Graben.

    2. The ministry provides compensation to Hoima District Local Government at a rate determined by the Chief Government Valuer.

    3. The transaction be carried out in accordance with the existing laws governing Government-to-Government transactions and in accordance with established regulatory framework and Government procedures.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by honourable members for Usuk, Kamuli Municipality and Kanungu District. Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable minister?

MR D’UJANGA: Mr Speaker, the oil and gas operations in the country have progressed from exploration to development in preparation for oil production. This has increased the level of activity in terms of field work, studies, and construction works engagement, among others, in the Albertine Graben. 

In order to effectively manage the increased activity as well as address and manage stakeholder concerns and also for easy monitoring of oil and gas activities and enhanced participation of local leaders and communities, which is in line with the Oil and Gas Policy, 2008, the ministry proposed to establish a coordination liaison office for oil and gas activities in the Albertine Graben. 

In light of the above, the ministry engaged Hoima District Local Government for a grant of land to construct the offices. Following fruitful engagements, Hoima District Local Government allocated the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development one acre of land whose value was assessed by the Chief Government Valuer. However, before the transaction could be concluded, the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 was enacted and section 34 (6) of the Act prohibits an accounting officer from transferring or encumbering any property of a Vote without the permission of Parliament.

Consequently, the Ministry of Local Government sought a legal opinion from the Solicitor-General on the implication of the said provision and it was confirmed that the permission of Parliament is required before the transfer of land to the ministry is effected.

In this regard, Hoima District Local Government wrote to the Clerk of Parliament in July and in September 2016 requesting for approval to transfer land to the ministry but this has not yet been granted. However, the ministry has planned and budgeted for the acquisition of the land and construction of coordination offices in Hoima under the ministry’s budget of Financial Year 2018/2019 under Vote 017, sub-programme 118, output 72. 

Once approval is given by Parliament for the transaction, the ministry will proceed to acquire the land and commence construction of the office. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, that is the motion presented by the minister. Is the motion seconded?  

Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is that Parliament authorises the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to acquire land from Hoima District Local Government. Debate starts now. 

5.05
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the honourable minister because matters of oil are a concern for the country. However, I have a few issues to raise. 

Land is a highly contentious matter right now in the country. Recently, the Committee on Government Assurances was in Bunyoro sub-region and most of the citizens there are concerned about the manner in which issues of land have been handled. I have a question: you have talked transferring land from Hoima District Local Government to Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Where is the location of the land exactly? Which sub-county? How many acres is it? What is the valuation? 

Since you are seeking the approval of this Parliament, maybe some representatives from Parliament should go to the ground to ascertain this. If we do not and something goes wrong tomorrow, we shall be blamed, as Parliament, for having allowed transfer of land in a manner which is not transparent. 

I support the motion but let us follow up on these issues that I have raised. Thank you.

5.07
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to register my support to the minister for realising, as a ministry, how important oil is because we know that oil will really change the face of Uganda.

However, the people we represent have serious complaints. They allege that money is already being paid by foreign companies and that crude oil is already being sold. We are not sure about this. If this is true, then it is worrying because we thought that immediately oil exploration starts, we shall be made aware of what is going on. This is because the laws regulating oil production were enacted in the Ninth Parliament and they are good laws. 

Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to tell us whether it is true they have started selling crude oil and whether there is some money from that oil which they have not disclosed to us. We would like to know because this is Uganda’s money; it is money for our children and our nation and we expect that God will bless this money and we will become rich within a short time.

Therefore, we want to know whether it is true or false so that we can be patient or worry more. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a rule on relevance. This motion is about acquisition of land by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development from Hoima District Local Government. Can we stay on that motion? The other issues do not arise here. The motion we are debating is exactly what I stated earlier. 

5.09
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sure that Hoima District needs land. I am also sure that God has given the district an opportunity to make money. For the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to say they want to buy land - I would propose that the land remains in the hands of Hoima District and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development leases the land so that the district gets rental revenue. I will give you an example; we have a barracks called Bugema in Mbale, which is on Mbale District land. The Ministry of Defence is using the land and pays rent to Mbale District. That is part of our income.

God decided to put oil in Hoima and not Bugisu; so, they should be the beneficiaries of this oil and the district should earn from it. I would like to propose that we do not allow the transfer of land from Hoima District but allow the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to lease the land from the district. That means the land will still be Government land and the people of Hoima will also benefit, as the owners.

Mr Speaker, the reason we made that amendment in the Public Finance and Accountability Act was that many entities were losing property. You recall one property that was lost in London which we just recovered from the criminals. It is now important that we do not allow Hoima District to lose land. The moment the land goes to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, the district will never have a say on that land. 

Therefore, I would like to urge Parliament to allow the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development use this land but pay rent to Hoima District. I thank you. 

5.12
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have looked at the documents and the correspondences that have been going on between the ministries of Energy and Mineral Development and Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Hoima District Local Government. The land in question is one acre. The cost by the Government valuer is about Shs 50 million in this document.

I would like to believe that much as we would want the district to continue getting revenue from rent, it is also in the interest of Government to always have Government entities acquire their own premises with a title. 

Mr Speaker, with this Shs 50 million dangling against one acre of land, if the ministry was to choose moving to the next 50 metres away from this very land, somebody within the municipality would also offer prime land that the ministry would take. Therefore, for this matter, I suggest that as Parliament - there is somebody willing to sell and somebody willing to buy and much as we would say, “No” but there are also other options and we would like Government to have its properties registered and owned. It is not a very bad deal for the district. 

I would implore my senior member, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, to –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I have noticed in Government is that if they are valuing a Government entity, they undervalue. If they are valuing a private entity, they overvalue.

I will tell you this: a quarter an acre of land in Hoima town is Shs 100 million. If there are people of Hoima here, I have interests there and I am frank. That means that one acre is Shs 400 million. If they are telling us that the district is going to sell the land at Shs 50 million in Hoima District, then there is a big problem and there must be somebody who is doing a deal for something.

Mr Speaker, -(Interjections)- my brother, if it is Shs 50 million, I would like to ask that Parliament appropriates money to Hoima District, if they are dying to have Shs 50 million. However, the land should stay at the district and if the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development believes that they cannot get this land, they can go elsewhere. Let this land remain for the district.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If the question and the truth is that the acre of land in Hoima at the municipality would go for more than Shs 50 million, that is where the ministry has to come in and help the district by not squeezing them. The only contention is the cost of the land.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have they stated the amount in the motion?

MR AYOO: Yes, Mr Speaker. It is in the attached documents in the appendices. If you read downwards, you will find it. Maybe the honourable minister can clarify.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the motion says, with valuation by the Chief Government Valuer. That is what we are dealing with. I do not know any other document apart from the motion. Those of you who are looking for documents elsewhere, you are required to look at the motion.

5.15
MS MARGRET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. It is a blessing that we have oil in Hoima District and we have to develop it so that we can develop our country. We cannot develop without infrastructure. It is very important that we acquire this land so that we can put these structures for the coordination of the oil programme.

What is important is: Has the local Government accepted? The Central Government and local Government are sisters. The ownership of land by the local Government is similar to the Central Government. If they have agreed that they are ready to give this land, who are we to refuse giving them the land? (Interruption)

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this august House that as the honourable member said, these two authorities - the central Government and the local Government and the three area members of Parliament from that area have already seconded the motion. That means that the people within that area are in for the revenue. If we take such an amount of money to our local Government, then we are supporting our districts. Thank you.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you for that information. What we need is for that money to be given because at times, they will promise to give the money but they do not. Therefore, let that money be given first before we second.

Should the money be given first or we approve before the money is given? Otherwise as members of Parliament, I urge you to support this motion so that we acquire this land. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a little difficulty. The honourable member for Hoima Municipality, who is supposed to present is not here. The woman Member of Parliament for the district is not here; hon. Stephen Mukitale, the neighbour from Buliisa - all three of them were supposed to second this motion but are not here.

Are they now withdrawing formally from this motion? Is it deliberate or is it by some coincidence? Coincidence usually happens to two but when it comes to three, it stops being coincidence. Honourable members, I am reluctant to proceed with this without having secondment from Hoima because none of the Members who signed up the motion is here.

Hon. Bategeka is not here, hon. Kahwa is not here neither is hon. Mukitale. Therefore, I need confirmation from the people who seconded this motion before we can proceed with it. Let me get this confirmation then we proceed with this motion tomorrow. One night will not make this thing die. The matter is deferred. Next item.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO MOVE A MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO HALT THE PROPOSED -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this Item No. 8? No. That matter has been requested that it is stayed. The honourable member is upcountry. We would like to move that motion when he is around. Even item 9 should be stayed. Move to the next one. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO DR AMOS NYATHIROMBO FOR HIS ROLE IN THE INVENTION OF MOXIDECTIN TO TREAT RIVER BLINDNESS

5.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to move this motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Dr Amos Nyathirombo for his role in the invention of moxidectin to treat River Blindness. I rise under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS objective XX of the National Objective and Directive of State Policy, under the 1995 Constitution of Uganda mandates the state to take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population;

AND WHEREAS Objective IX of the National Objectives and Directives of State Policy under the 1995 Constitution of Uganda mandates the State to encourage private initiative  and self-reliance in order to facilitate rapid and equitable development;

AWARE THAT Dr Amos Nyathirombo, an Ophthalmologist and a fellow of the East African College of Ophthalmology was the only Ugandan among l2 African doctors who conducted research on the effective treatment of River Blindness in Africa and other parts of the world; a research that took five years to complete from 2007 to 2011 and led to the development of the Moxidectin drug as a more superior and safer drug for human use;

NOTING that the Moxidectin drug has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Authority (FDA) as being potent and safe for treatment of River Blindness in humans;

AND APPRECIATING that Dr Amos Nyathirombo's selflessness and dedication exhibited through the development of Moxidectin for the treatment of River Blindness, a disease that has ravaged Uganda, Sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America and Asia for centuries deserves the recognition of this Parliament;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that:

1. 	Parliament collectively congratulates and pays the deserved tribute to Dr Amos Nyathirombo for his selfless contribution to developing medicine for mankind and assisting in eliminating River Blindness from Uganda, Africa and the world at large.

2.	 Parliament urges and encourages all Ugandans especially the youth to emulate the example set by Dr Amos Nyathirombo by engaging in gainful work through innovation, hard work and determination in order to contribute to the well-being of the community and national development.

3. 	Parliament urges Government to approve the allocation of more funds towards research in the science, technology and innovation sector.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by several members of Parliament. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MS KWIYUCWINY: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One of the many things we must do is to be proud of our success. I stand here to expound on it because this research comes from very far.

Dr Nyathirombo was born in Zombo District. He went to an ordinary school, Nyapea College, which has produced many prominent people including the former Prime Minister Cosmas Adyebo and the former Minister of State, hon. Fred Jachan Omach. 
Today, he is one of those people who are critical about the health situation and who diligently undertook this study, which took five years.

Dr Nyathirombo lived in DR Congo in Rezi Ituri Province where he administered drugs in this research for 18 months. He worked closely with 460 participants and followed them keenly for over six months to ensure that these tests and research delivered the results it has done today. There were four other sites in Ghana and Liberia.

This research was looking at curing river blindness, which had been a problem in Uganda and other parts of the world and is found near fast flowing rivers. The areas of West Nile, western Uganda and northern Uganda have been suffering from river blindness for a long time.

For a while, there was another medicine which was being used called Ivermectin, which was administered twice a year but the Moxidectin, which Dr Nyathirombo and his colleagues invented, is a far more effective drug with no side effects.

It is known that it is very difficult to approve a drug and especially coming from less developed countries like Uganda. This is the first time in 20 years that the Food and Drug Authority is approving a drug to treat river blindness.

This development, coming from Uganda and Zombo District and from a dedicated boy who went to school and gave all his life is not a mean achievement.

Ivermectin has been good enough because as it was used in treating river blindness, a lot of many other diseases have been eradicated. These include the fleas which transmit plagues, intestinal worms and people will confess to this, scabies which is not seen anymore. I think Moxidectin will fight many more diseases and our people will be much healthier than before. 

For Moxidectin, once being used as an animal drug, to be used in humans, means some hard work was put in by Dr Nyathirombo and his colleagues. We were even told that the manufacturers of Ivermectin thought that this discovery was going to out-compete their product and resisted it but at last, the Food and Drug Authority has approved it.

It is our pride to be part of a development of drugs like this and we can benefit from our own intervention in development of drugs. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We will receive secondment from the Member from Bukuya County who is also our chairperson responsible for matters of health. 

5.31
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two points to make; Dr Nyathirombo is a 52-year old Ugandan who was born here, studied in Nyapea, Namilyango and Makerere University. 

He has also worked in Uganda; in Nebbi Hospital, Nyapea, Arua, and Mbale. He also taught at Makerere University and is currently teaching at Gulu University. The farthest he has gone is DR Congo and this is against the background of poor pay of medical professionals in this country. Therefore, he should be recognised as one of the most patriotic Ugandans and that is one of the reasons I support this motion. 

Mr Speaker, it is of much significance that this drug, Moxidectin, received the approval of the United States FDA. This is a significant step in eliminating River Blindness, which is affecting us here. It is important that it is a local solution to local problems. 

At the time he was awarded, it was just a week after another Ugandan had been awarded by the Royal Academy of Engineering, the African Prize for coding a device, which tests for malaria without drawing blood. In Uganda, this is clear testimony that we have the capacity to be at the same level with other people in the world. We have the brains which we can mentor and develop from here and be able to achieve like any other person elsewhere in the world. 

I would like to send a message to the honourable Minister of Health - who is here – recently, she wanted to import Cuban doctors instead of facilitating our own doctors to do the work. They are competent enough to do so. However, you want to bring Cubans and pay them more than what you pay the Ugandans whom you have failed to pay; it is unacceptable.

Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by calling upon Government, especially the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that we have had very many achievements in the health sector in Uganda. However, if I took you to the Virus Research Institute and you asked them how much money hon. Bahati gives them for research, you will be shocked. You may change the name from virus research to something else.

I, therefore, pray that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development this time agrees with Parliament when we propose to provide the Ministry of Health with a research budget of at least Shs 20 billion. I beg to submit.

5.34
MR SIMON D’UJANGA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Mr Speaker, I rise to second this motion because it is befitting and I request my colleagues to also support it. 

River Blindness has been notorious in my area for many years. It is spread by black flies, which reside in bushes and shrubs near the river. If you operate near a river or stream in Zombo, you are likely to get this disease. With River Blindness, you sometimes develop thick itchy skin; it is a very uncomfortable disease.

Government has indeed, as hon. Kwiyucwiny said, been controlling this by giving out tablets I think every six months. These tablets had some discomforting side effects and so, most people would shy away from them because of these adverse side effects.

The invention of this new drug by a group of distinguished doctors including one of our own, Dr Amos Nyathirombo, is commendable. I, therefore, second this motion and ask my colleagues to do the same. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is the motion that Parliament pays tribute to Dr Amos Nyathirombo for his role in the invention of Moxidectin to treat River Blindness. Debate starts now.

5.37
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kwiyucwiny for moving this motion to appreciate Dr Amos Nyathirombo. I would like to congratulate him and thank him for the tireless effort he has put to come up with this drug. It is not easy for a person from West Nile in Uganda to come up with a drug, which is approved worldwide to treat River Blindness. That is a big achievement. I would also like to thank those who supported him with the research to come up with this drug.

River Blindness is a deadly disease, which makes people blind not only in West Nile but also all the way from Busoga to Kioga and down to West Nile. All those people who live near big rivers contract that disease. They have been trying to eliminate it by spraying without success. Even the tablets that are taken every six months had failed. However, this new drug will save millions of people from becoming blind. It does not mean I became blind because of River Blindness; mine is glaucoma but if we can prevent people from becoming blind then it will be a big achievement.

I would like to thank him and I urge Government to support our researchers. Ugandans are very intelligent. I once went to South Africa for treatment. The first person who discovered the disease was a Ugandan; the one who gave a recommendation for operation was a Ugandan and the one who operated on me was a Ugandan. That means that we, Ugandans, are very intelligent. The problem is that we do not provide adequate resources to use for research so that we can utilise our brains to bring development to Uganda. 

I also support the President for saying that anybody who has come out with research must be supported so that we innovate and bring new development to help our people.

I would like to congratulate and thank Dr Nyathirombo and also recognise the people of Zombo for bringing up such a brilliant doctor. Continue with the research. Thank you.

5.40
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank Dr Amos Nyathirombo for this wonderful achievement. Those of you who live near fast-flowing rivers know what Onchocerciasis has done to our people. Onchocerciasis is the same as River Blindness. It has really affected our people. 

If you go to fast-flowing rivers and look at the bodies of communities that live around especially those suffering from onchocerciasis, you feel hurt. The body looks like scales. Therefore, if this doctor is participating in this research and did this commendable work, we should recognise him.

I would like to also thank the investment that was put in this research; $13 million from the Global Health Investment Fund to fund this research is a lot of money. We also need to appreciate the Global Health Investment Fund for this wonderful investment.

We also call on our Government to invest in research because we have people who have the capacity to perform wonders but we are not investing in research. Mr Speaker, even at universities, the money that is invested in research is very little and cannot do much. I would like to urge the House that we should always raise appropriate funds to do such kind of research. Thank you.

5.41
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, let me thank the mover of the motion, which I second. Secondly, I also thank the doctor for the invention and innovation in the field of medicine. 

Mr Speaker, as Ugandans, we all know that our key priority now as a country is to develop the aspect of science and technology. 
Recently, when the Kiira vehicle was invented, the Government paid a lot of attention to that and even set up an Authority to handle the issues regarding the manufacture of that vehicle. I think a similar intervention should be done in the field of medicine. 

If a Ugandan who studied in Uganda and has worked in Uganda has come up with this kind of innovation, it should not just be an issue of a resolution of Parliament but Government should take action and try to see that this medicine is manufactured in Uganda.

Therefore, I urge the Ministry of Health to take it seriously as part of innovation, science and technology and as part of the development of the country to initiate a manufacturing plant for that medicine in the country. Thank you very much.

5.43
MR SAMUEL OKWIR (Independent, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the mover of this motion. Health is the most effective weapon in fighting poverty and if a Ugandan has risen to this level and done us proud with this invention, then we should support and give recognition.

Mr Speaker, I would like to urge that as we push for curative measures, we also as a country should put in more effort to invest in preventive measures. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.45
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and thank the mover. First, it is pride for us Uganda as a country that one of our own was among the 12 African doctors in this wonderful move. Now, for us to be able to motivate other doctors or other scientists to be able to continue in research and make Uganda more pride, we should be able to provide research facilitation.

I accept the idea of Shs 20 billion to begin with. Let our Parliament be able to allocate this money because when it is provided, many others will be encouraged to do research and make us proud. I sincerely thank Dr Amos Nyathirombo for this wonderful work.

5.46
MS STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the doctor for this wonderful invention. It has tickled my mind and I now suggest to Government that this is a precursor to indicate to us that the brain drain that we have experienced in Uganda is too high and the Government should think not only about medical health but also veterinary medicine, ICT and engineering among others. 

We have so many Ugandans that have been taken abroad - once such intelligent people are identified, they are taken. We should start putting it into our strategic plan to bring back our sons and daughters who are doing wonderful research outside Uganda.

We have relatives doing wonderful inventions and research abroad but we have not had a day to think and call them back to at least give us what they are doing there so that Government gets a plan on how to utilise them for the improvement of our economy in Uganda. 

I only see Government emphasising that Uganda will be liberated economically by agriculture but leaving our brains to go outside the country where they are received warmly. An example is my husband; he discovered a tick vaccine in Mexico University but because he was a student, his patent rights were denied and they retained the invention. 

He was retained because developed countries have the money. I suggest that in their strategic plan, Government thinks bringing back those brains in order to develop our economy with them. Thank you very much.

5.49
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. This is a rare motion without opposition. 

Mr Speaker, I sit on the Committee of Education and Sports and universities present their budgets but when you look at the budget on research - actually, research is usually considered as an unfunded priority. You wonder why Makerere has a priority of constructing a perimeter wall when research is not done.

Therefore, I am calling upon my colleagues and the Ministry of Health that we need to be serious with these institutions especially universities as far as the budget of research is concerned. They need to prioritise research because research means generating knowledge and as colleagues have said, we have so many brains but they do not get a chance to do research. 

I therefore support the motion and congratulate the member –(Interruption)-

MR AOGON: Thank you, colleague. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to offer is that it is possible for this Parliament to make a recommendation for Government to do something for the doctor in terms of maybe building a house for him and thereafter acquire a special vehicle for him -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that really information, honourable?

MR AOGON: It is information; I am just telling you that it possible, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

MR TUSIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.50
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you Mr Speaker. At times, I wonder why we misuse some good words like “being patriotic” or a “good cadre” - such words should be used when referring to Dr Amos Nyathirombo. Looking at what he has done, he is patriotic enough for this country. 

I have a friend who went to Mulago for consultation and when he was due for an operation, he refused saying he cannot be operated on from Uganda and went to South Africa.
In South Africa, he was requested to wait until the following Thursday. On the day of the operation, it was the same doctor he had left in Mulago who was to carry out the operation. This means that we have very brilliant Ugandans but at times we do not facilitate them to use their skills.

Mr Speaker, we should not only facilitate research but we also need to facilitate those that we already have such that they do not run away. We should make use of Dr Amos Nyathirombo, especially in areas where he can develop the young ones in research and innovation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.52
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest in congratulating Dr Amos Nyathirombo and our country for this great achievement. I would also like to thank the minister for this motion.

Mr Speaker, in encouraging the youth, I would like to propose that we have a specific strategy so that we keep watch on what our children are doing. I watched on television about what the two youth are doing to test malaria parasites without drawing any blood. However, they requested for funds from any Good Samaritan.

My proposal is that Government should have a strategy so that those who are in such initiatives are followed. They can get groups based on their skills and missions so that we get to know and support them. 

I would also like to propose that we need to track what is happening to the innovations that Ugandans have initiated. For example, the issue of the Kiira vehicle; this country needs to be briefed on how far they have gone, how we are supporting them and when the vehicle will be used by Ugandans. We need to see the product; without that, it cannot be a motivation to any person who is seated in class. When we have this product in the market, it can be a source of motivation.

What makes a university different from other levels of learning is research work. As long as we do not support the budget for research, we shall not be enriching the learning system because that is what makes universities different from other levels of learning. 

In conclusion, I would like to say that that we are blessed with brilliant children who are ready to do science and it reflects on the foundation of our learning levels. Therefore, it means that we have to promote science but ensure that the structures and human resource power is put in place so that we have more scientists and people to put our country to a better competitive level with other countries in the world. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

5.56
MR EMMANUEL KALULE SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity. I rise in support of the motion and agree with my colleagues that we need to persuade our brains that are outside this country so that they can come back and participate in the development of this country.

Last Friday, we interacted with people from the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) and they told us about so many innovations. Most of their inventions have never happened anywhere in the world. We are the first ones to invent them but these people are dying with their ideas; they want money to commercialise these innovations. 

I would also like to join my colleagues to beg Government to devote more money to our researchers; to give money to these people in NARO so that they can commercialise their innovations and be able to move this country forward.

Lastly, I would like to request Government to pay more money to these people who have managed to stay around. As colleagues pointed out, many of our doctors have run out of this country for greener pastures but what about those who have managed to stay around? Don’t we need to encourage them? Otherwise, if we do not do that, they will also run away and we shall lag behind.

Therefore, while I congratulate this doctor, I think Government has a duty to support those that have remained so that they do not also run away. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we are drawing to a close. I would like to take the Leader of Opposition and the minister. 

5.58
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol Ocan): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny for thinking of her person because that person is from Zombo District. However, I would also like to say that the Minister and the Ministry of Health have not done well; this should have come from the Minister of Health. 

I would further like to thank Dr Amos Nyathirombo very much. This is maybe the highest motivation that we are giving to Dr Amos Nyathirombo. What other motivation can be given to Dr Amos Nyathirombo apart from this recognition? It can maybe be in form of a tangible gift.  

I would like to observe that the way the honourable minister put it; Dr Amos Nyathirombo came from a humble background just like the late Dr Matthew Lukwiya. Dr Lukwiya died of Ebola and he was the one who discovered when people were fidgeting and saying that people were poisoning others. Dr Lukwiya said: “This must be haemorrhagic fever.” The samples were taken to South Africa and the Ebola was confirmed.

Dr Lukwiya also came from a very humble background. What am I trying to drive at is that we are leaving very many children with potential to rot away without exploiting them. The late Dr Lukwiya was able to reach where he reached because immediately after S.4, he was able to go further on Government sponsorship. University education was really on Government. 

However, today, many of our children and mind you, this is a very young country; they say the population is young. Young people are more than half the old people and we are not doing enough for the young people. This should be an eye opener that that child who is living very deep in the rural area has potential that should be exploited. How can we plan better for them? We can do better if we prioritise education and make sure that even health is given enough resources. 

We said that health should take at least 15 per cent of the national budget but we have never reached 10 per cent. 

I have been a member of the Committee on Health for a long time. One time, we even suggested that three very sensitive laboratories should be constructed in Uganda. One was supposed to go to Gulu, at Lacor Hospital. 

Instead of taking specimen elsewhere, the specimen would be handled from within the country and that would also promote research. I know that the one that was supposed to be in Gulu has not been constructed and the name is dying away.

It is important that we do a little more than what is being done. Uganda is a blessed country. That is why we have very intelligent people - maybe it is the food we eat. However, there is selfishness in Uganda where we do not invest in the vulnerable children. We need to invest a little more and also invest in research.

My last question is about the gift to Dr Amos Nyathirombo. I do not know whether it is hon. Kwiyucwiny who should come with that answer or the Minister of Health.
Thank you very much. We pray for a big blessing on Dr Amos Nyathirombo and we thank him.

6.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the benefit of hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I am the Minister of State for Health (General Duties). (Laughter)

I would like to add my voice to those of the various speakers in congratulating Dr Amos Nyathirombo, a young man who worked closely with the British Colombia University and Gulu University to come up with this discovery.

It is true that this drug is more superior to Ivermectin that we have been using. This is a new discovery. The drug has been available but for treating other diseases and certainly as the Ministry of Health, we have to take this up. However, we have to work under the guidelines of the World Health Organisation (WHO) since Uganda is a WHO member State.

Allow me inform the House that Onchocerciasis has been a challenge in this country since the 1990s and we have, over the years, been doing our best working with various partners, to eliminate this disease that has unfortunately left some of our people blind. 

You are aware that in 2012, aside from the Ivermectin that we have been providing to the population in the country, we introduced the spraying of the river banks where the black flies that actually cause this Onchocerciasis are resident. We normally do this twice a year. 

Just last week, I was in Northern Uganda to re-activate this intervention because most of the country is now free but we have eight districts in Northern Uganda with cases of not only the black fly but the populations are not doing well in terms of taking medication.

I would like to appeal to members of Parliament from the Acholi sub region, specifically, to encourage the people to take the Ivermectin that we do provide them with as we work with our partners to bring this more superior drug into the Ugandan market.

I have heard people saying that Government should give more funds to research but we are all aware that we have the Uganda National Health Research Organisation (UNHRO) that exists. We have the Uganda Virus Research Institute; we have the Natural Chemotherapeutic Research Institute and other research organisations under different organisations. I am talking about those under health.

It is true, funding to these research organisations has been quite minimal and much of the research has been funded by external partners and donors and sometimes, we lose it all because when they fund it, they even go with it and you find the patent of the drug is owned by somebody else. 

These are things that we need to take up as Parliament since the appropriation of funds is done here. Therefore, while you point to Government, please note that you are also part and parcel of Government and the actual appropriation is done by this House.

It may be difficult for us to come up and give a prize for Dr Amos Nyathirombo – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, have you done a cost-benefit analysis? If you invested this money, what would be the return? If the Ministry of Health came here and said that let us invest one trillion and the return will be 10 trillion, it would be availed because if you are aware, the Ministry of Health is the one losing most. 

In South Africa, all the doctors in those big hospitals doing research are Ugandan. If you go to America, the ones leading the ICT intelligence in the Pentagon are Ugandans. We have lost these resources and those people are the beneficiaries. I was a beneficiary of a scholarship to the UK – they take the best – they wanted me to stay in the UK because they saw what I was. (Laughter) That is a true story. You can ask anybody.

Why don’t we also harness these intelligent brains? Why don’t you come with a budget that Ministry of Health needs one trillion? Bring it tomorrow and we shall give it to you. (Laughter).

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, certain things are easier said than done. We all know that we do not have adequate funds to handle all the health challenges in this country and we have had very many unfunded priorities that Members of this House know. I do not think we need to get there. 

There are so many people who have innovated different technologies - for example, the sickle cell. We also have a young man who came up with a new innovation for malaria diagnostics in just a few seconds. We have others for TB diagnostics. There are so many innovations; so we cannot just talk about this for Dr Amos Nyathirombo because he worked jointly with the British Columbia University and Gulu University. 

We do commend him for this innovation but I would like to appeal to the House that we are now getting into the budgeting period for the next cycle. Let us look at the budget under UNHRO and UVRI and we put funds there because we have very good scientists.

Also, it is not enough to put the money there. We need to motivate these scientists better because they leave the country for greener pastures –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, honourable minister. Dr Amos Nyathirombo we are talking about is one of the best oculists in this country. He is an eye specialist. He is also a lecturer at Gulu University. Uganda sent him to Congo to work in all those UN refugee camps. He is a man of slight stature - I think he is the size of hon. Nzoghu, the one, who when he gets up, the Speaker asks him to stand up. He is such a small but intelligent and committed gentleman. He is from Zombo. 

This is the clarification I would like to get from the minister. In Zombo, we do not have a Government general hospital. Piadha Health Centre is a health centre III, Warr, where honourable minister Grace Kwiyucwiny comes from, is also a health centre III. 

Now, can we have – in honour of what this man has done – at least one of those facilities upgraded to a health centre IV or general hospital? That would be a good honour for the people and that is the clarification I am seeking from you.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, like I said before, certain things are easier said than done. His proposal is good but I cannot come here and declare that Zombo will have a general hospital named “Nyathirombo”. It must also be a district council resolution because general hospitals are under the district local governments. As the Ministry of Health, our work is to appropriate and ensure that the funds are available to construct these facilities. 

Mr Speaker, Zombo does not have a general hospital because we do not have funds to construct the general hospital, equip it and staff it just like it is the case with the other districts. Therefore, allocate the money and all will be done. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We have come this far and I would like to thank you for being part of this very important debate that touches on a key responsibility of this House. 

This Parliament is supposed to provide that environment that enables people to live up to their potential. We are supposed to provide the resources necessary, the security and all those things that we debate here should be able to make individual Ugandans live up to their potential. 

You know, hon. Zachary Olum is said to have made the original design for the hand tractor from Kabanyolo but because it was in association with other people, the Americans took it. These are things we hear about. Therefore, can we evolve a system that facilitates our researchers and inventers but also protects their rights when they eventually come out with things? (Applause). Things like these would create more avenues for people to get more inspired and do great things and help many more people reach their potential. Therefore, honourable members, a great thank you to Dr Amos Nyathirombo for what he has been able to achieve. 

I now put the question to this motion that Parliament pays tribute to Dr Amos Nyathirombo for his role in the invention of Moxidectin to treat River Blindness.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have Bills that have been on the Order Paper for the last three or four weeks but they are not ready. Therefore, we do not want to make the Members have the impression that they have done their work when they have not. The Bill, which is on Item No. 12, is not ready; the Bill on Item No. 13 is not ready; the Bill on Item No. 14 is not ready and the Bill on Item No. 15 is not ready. 

We are relegating them to Business to Follow instead of crowding our Order Paper and making it look as if we are ready with them when we are not. Let the chairpersons and members of these particular committees gear up and bring these reports back so that we can move with these matters forward. (Applause)

Honourable members, I think we have done very well. We have cleared most of the stuff on the Order Paper. We will be dealing with more tomorrow. I think there is a personal statement that is coming up tomorrow from the Member of Parliament for Bulambuli as well as other matters.

Therefore, Members, let us take a good rest and we resume this House tomorrow at the usual time. The House is adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.16 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 26 September 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

