

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 22 September 2021

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We interrupted the honourable minister in the presentation of her statement; she will complete it today. There will not be much Communication from the Chair today, let us go to the Order Paper.

There are Members who came yesterday and today and they have urgent matters that they need to raise. Let us deal with that today. 

2.10
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of urgent importance which is affecting my district. There is a high level of insecurity in Itirikwa Subcounty. 

Yesterday, the new information I established yesterday at 3.00 p.m. is that one person has been killed. They were three people in a group that were waylaid from their farm in Aliwara Village on their way home. 

The deceased is Edward Idro. The people of Adjumani are burying him today. Apiku Geoffrey was hacked, seriously injured and is admitted in Mungula Health Centre IV Hospital while Justine Buni escaped. 

My prayers are:

    1. Government should help us to tighten security to ensure free and safe movement of people in Itirikwa Subcounty, both in and outside Adjumani District. 

    2. We request that the attackers be traced and brought to book so that justice is served. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.12
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. To begin with, I would like to condole with the family of the deceased in this situation. 

Secondly, I am going to ensure that I link up with the ministries of Internal Affairs and Security right away to ensure that this is followed up. 

Next week, we shall be presenting a comprehensive statement on the state of security in the country. 

Additionally, we shall link with the Member to ensure that we follow up this matter to its logical conclusion. 

THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, had we agreed on when that statement was supposed to come? Has the time not yet expired? 

MR TAYEBWA: Mr Speaker, I think this statement was supposed to come this week. I request that we present it on Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: Tuesday next week? 

MR TAYEBWA: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Shall we have the comprehensive statement or a response to the Member? These things are ongoing, from what the Member is saying. So, while we wait for Tuesday to get a comprehensive statement, what happens in the meantime? 

MR TAYEBWA: Mr Speaker, at the beginning I said I am going to contact the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Security right away to ensure they follow up on this matter. 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since we started the 11th Parliament, a Member comes here on a daily basis with a matter regarding security. It has been flowing all around in all areas, in different regions. One time you directed the minister to come and present a report to this august House. 

I feel this will not come to an end just by presenting a report. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to request the head of state – the way it happened in 2018 when Parliament requested the head of state and he came and gave us comprehensive guidance. I think when he gave us that guidance, security issues became okay. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right if you requested the head of state to come to Parliament and guide the country, and tell us what can be done to solve this issue once and for all, the same way it was the other time? 

Members will keep coming every day telling us that somebody has been hacked or that there is a problem here. It will continue. That is the procedural matter I wanted to raise. We need to solve this matter once and for all so that we move peacefully as a country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, for raising that procedural matter. Yes, we had that done with the President coming to Parliament. The Constitution and our Rules of Procedure – I do not remember well but he made 14 points or more that he outlined on how to manage the security of this country. 

We also had a breakout session thereafter where further meetings were held at the Office of the Prime Minister to further discuss what the President had proposed. That would be a good thing to do. 

These discussions are underway to see if, by that, we can have a solution to this situation. You can indeed see that it keeps coming up and it would be a good idea to have the President talk to us about this matter, and we see how we can all get involved in the process of dealing with this matter. That discussion is under way. 

2.17
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Toroma, Katakwi District, is in grief about the murder of two family members on Monday night including two children who were seriously beaten. 

The people of Alelesi Village, Akisim Parish, Angodingod Subcounty woke up to the sad news of the death of one prominent farmer and business man, Ojilot Emmanuel and his wife, Teddy Achadot. 

These people were killed in their house and the children were beaten severely. As I speak, good Samaritans are taking them to Mbale Hospital for medical attention.

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that one, the sub-county of Angodingod does not have even a single policeman, so, we need the presence of police - a police post should be established. Two, there is no ambulance in Katakwi and even the police patrol car broke down. There is no single car for the police to do their work. I request the Government to try its level best and avail the district with a new police patrol car because the other one got an accident and is irreparable. 

Thirdly, when they brought in these dogs called “sniper dogs”, they arrived at 11 O’clock. I recommend that they should be accessed in every district in Uganda so that people are able to get these dogs, instead of relying on Mbale or Soroti.

Finally, Mr Speaker, the victims - who are the breadwinners for their families - have all gone. I request the Government to help and bury these people and also treat these children. I submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Government?

2.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Mr Speaker, apart from the emergency issue where we need to go on ground and ensure we take control of the security situation, it is very prudent for me to organise a meeting today or - if late – tomorrow between the Minister of Internal Affairs and the MP. 

Issues of, for example, the police patrol vehicles, the K-9 Service and police station would require a meeting between the minister and the Member to get comprehensive information and we do a comprehensive assessment.

So, I commit myself; I am going to do that. I am sure the Member will report back to you, informing you that I have done it, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

2.21
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, concerning illegal shooting and killing within Murchison Falls National Park.

Mr Speaker, it is alleged that early last week, game rangers within Murchison Falls National Park shot and killed three people, namely: Geoffrey Ocaya, aged 43; Robert Jawiyambe, aged 32, and; Stephen Ongeyowun, aged 42. They are all from Gwara II Cell, Karuma Town Council, Kiryandongo District.

This was revealed by the only survivor called Michael Otto, aged 28, who managed to run and dive in River Nile and was saved by his swimming skills. 

It is further alleged that when the game rangers within Murchison Falls National Park act illegally and shoot and kill either poachers or illegal entrants within the park, they sometimes abandon their bodies within the park or even throw them into River Nile. 

My prayers, Mr Speaker, are that the matter is investigated thoroughly. If the rangers acted illegally, then the Government should compensate the families of the deceased.

Secondly, I also pray that the management of Murchison Falls National Park hands over the bodies to the bereaved families for decent burials or help them access the park and, better still, assist them in searching for their bodies. As I talk, their bodies have not yet been recovered.

I also pray that the Government or the minister should restrain game rangers from shooting and killing but rather encourage them to arrest and hand over culprits, poachers or any person who illegally accesses the park to relevant authorities for further action. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the responsible minister here?

2.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Mr Speaker, I will begin with sending my condolences to the family of the deceased.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I happen to come from a constituency that neighbours the park and gets incidents of that nature. It is very unfortunate when you lose your beloved one. However, I also want to tell you, colleagues, that some of these poachers pose a very big danger to the Uganda Wildlife Authority rangers. I talked to some of them in my area. I told them that if they go to poach, they will have issues.

We have had some rangers who have been killed directly by poachers in those national parks. However, that does not give a licence to the rangers to also start killing.

So, the Member has tackled it very well by saying investigations should be done. I am going to link up with the minister in charge of tourism to ensure investigations are done and a thorough report made. If bodies are indeed still being held by the rangers, they should be released to the families for a decent burial. I am going to follow up on that, Mr Speaker.

However, Members, I call upon you to discourage your people from going to the parks for hunting, cutting firewood and all that. It is very dangerous; these are deadly areas. Animals can kill you; any time you can get into problems. So, we should discourage them as much as you are requesting us to discourage rangers from attacking these people in the parks. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.26
MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of urgent public importance.

Two days ago, on the 20th day of September, medical workers and support staff of Butabika Hospital went on strike. This paralysed operations at the facility and caused inconvenience to the facility users, particularly the mentally challenged patients.

Mr Speaker, they laid down their tools because of lack of enough security within the facility. They are operating at less than 40 per cent security. The other challenge is that they lack medicines that can be used to calm down these patients, particularly the anti-psychotics medicine. This is medicine that is used basically to calm down the patients.

You are aware that the patients that are received in that facility are basically aggressive, very violent and, therefore, need some power to be handled and to get medication. 

Nurses at that facility are in fear because the patients they operate on, are basically criminally irresponsible. The nurses and other medical staff have no legal protection at all; they are in fear. Many of them are on post-expository prophylaxis (PEP) because they have been raped by these challenged people.

The following are the prayers:

    1. That the Committee on Health visits and makes assessment of the prevailing conditions they are operating under.

    2. That Parliament orders the Ministry of Health to procure the medicines that are required in the facility.

    3. That since these people operate in a very risky environment, if possible, they also get risk allowances like other medical staff.

    4. They need enough security so that they can work in a condition that is favourable for their operations. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the urgent matter is that there is a strike. There are patients that need to be looked after but the medical workers have all decided to sit down and not do anything because they have issues. I think that is the urgent issue we need to deal with. The others, honourable minister, it is up to you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do you want to deal with this matter?

2.30
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have taken note of the urgent matter about the strike which is going on right now. The Ministry of Security, together with the Ministry of Health should come together to immediately go on the ground and assess the situation. Since it involves medicines, we also want the ministries to give them the medicines that are required.

Mr Speaker, I am going to handle this matter urgently with the ministries concerned. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we want action so that that place returns to normalcy and we go on with our business.

2.31
MS ANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise on a matter of urgent importance. 

On the 18th day of September 2021, in Mukono District, Mpatta Subcounty, Kabanga Parish, Gobero Village, Mukono County South, we experienced a hailstorm that affected 1,000 people. The hailstorm also destroyed crops and 50 households. In addition, animals like goats also perished.

THE SPEAKER: Did you say 50 households were destroyed?

MS NABUKEERA: Yes. It is 50 houses.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS NABUKEERA: In other words, 200 people were severely affected. One thousand is approximately the total number of the people in the village. 

Therefore, I would like to seek the Minister in charge of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, through the Office of the Prime Minister, to come on the ground to assess the situation and intervene. Otherwise, we need some shelter, food and seeds to replant in our gardens that were destroyed. I beg to submit. Thank you.

2.33
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLION (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to swap? (Laughter)

MS NAKADAMA: Mr Speaker, before I call the ministers in charge of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, we have the District Disaster Committee at the district level. If they get involved in this, then it helps us to know what is really on the ground, before a committee or members from the centre go to that district. Let that committee be involved and write an assessment report. Maybe from here, we can also send – at least, we need that information first. 

I request that you work with those members at the district level so that we get to know what exactly is happening. I know they must have been there immediately that problem happened. All the same, however, we are going to get in touch. I am going to talk to the Minister in charge of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees so that we see the way forward. Nonetheless, we need that report from the district. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

2.34 
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. 

In Budadiri County East, three subcounties have been largely affected by landslides. In Bukyambi Subcounty –

THE SPEAKER: When did the landslide happen?

MR SSASAAGA: It happened two days ago; that was on Sunday and Monday. The latest one was yesterday evening. 

On Sunday, in Bukyambi Subcounty, so many crops were washed away - coffee and matooke. Almost 100 farmers have been affected in that area. On Monday, in Butandiga Subcounty, the road network was washed off completely yet this is the road that connects Bukiise Subcounty to Butandiga and Elgon, up to the barracks in the Mount Elgon Region. The road network has been cut off and this road network is under UNRA.

In Bukiise Subcounty, yesterday evening, the landslide was so much devastating that around five houses were buried and several houses in that parish have developed cracks. The iron sheets were blown off. 

I have one prayer. The Ministry of Works and Transport, together with the Minister in charge of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, should work out a solution and open the road which has been blocked and washed away. This road connects to Mount Elgon Region, which is a tourism destination. The excavators should be sent as soon as possible to those subcounties.

In the other subcounties, especially in Bukiise and Bukyambi, we need at least strategic relief items in form of food items and other items, which can help the situation in that area. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is landslide again in Budadiri County East. 

2.37
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, I think this is the same answer I may have given the honourable colleague from Mukono. Can we get that report from the District Disaster Committee because it happened just two days back –(Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: For the purposes of the report, the district disaster response unit has ably handled the report, which is detailed enough. I have also been informed that somebody is on the way; probably by tomorrow morning, it will be in your office.

However, as the report comes, you need to do the needful especially to those homes that were buried and the road network. Thank you.

MS NAKADAMA: Thank you so much. That is very good. We are going to sit and see what quick means we can use to ensure those people get some relief, especially the food, plus opening the road. I know it has blocked many and they do not have access to many places.

Therefore, we are going to handle the ministries concerned; the Ministry of Works and Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. 

Oh sorry, the Minister for Works and Transport is here. You know at first I thought he was in charge of disaster but -

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for Works and Transport is here.

2.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Third Deputy Prime Minister. I will, immediately after, get details from my colleague. Fortunately, for the Mount Elgon Region, given what we have gone through over the years, we have equipment in Mbale that I will ask my officers in Mbale to immediately deploy to at least make the road navigable.

I can assure you that after here let me get the details from you honourable colleague then we do the needful.

THE SPEAKER: By “after here” means immediately he finishes speaking you step outside with him and sort it out. Not after the sitting session of Parliament. That is how it should be. The immediate solution is to give relief to the affected people. Honourable ministers, help us so that we can help people who are in distress. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF THE ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that we had taken a statement from the minister responsible for environment on item 3(1) and that statement had been made halfway up to page 11. We would like the minister to finish it to help us conduct a debate on this important matter.

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (MS Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was waiting for you to conclude.

Mr Speaker, again it is a pleasure that I have been given an opportunity to complete the report, which I was presenting to this august House on the status of the environment and natural resources in Uganda, our mother country.

As guided, we had gone as far as page 11 on the steps we are taking. My ministry, in collaboration with the local governments, will continue to adopt catchment management approach which is already in place to bring together the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Ministry of Internal Affairs and CSOs to consolidate the on-going programmes and activities for more tangible outputs, which include the following:  

    1. Demarcate and open boundaries of at least 6,400km of the 48 local forest reserves and 65 of the central forest reserves boundary. We intend to open 7,000km of wetlands, riverbanks and lake shore boundaries countrywide and gazette them. 

    2. We also intend to restore, rehabilitate and maintain 54,000 hectares of the section of wetlands, riverbanks and reforestation and afforestation of 78,000 hectares in the 48 local forest reserves and 65 Central Forest Reserves and hilly areas. 

    3. We shall establish 17,500 hectares of biofuel/energy plantation of mainly bamboo as a source of material for propagation in strategic 135 districts.

    4. We intend to provide quality planting materials to private forestry investors to plant - colleagues you will bear with me, we should be replacing the word “plant” with the word “growing” and I am passionate about that because if we say, “plant”, we are going to be dumping our seedlings in a hole somewhere and we go away yet we need to nurture it to growth. Therefore, let us think of growing and maintaining 20,000 hectares of trees on their private lands. These are trees which we want to grow on private land in collaboration with my ministry. 
    5. Prepare catchment management plans for major and critical wetland systems and forest estates, and develop at least 283 community-based livelihood enhancement projects to regulate access and use of environment and natural resources. 

    6. Mobilise and train 992 district staff on environment and climate change mainstreaming and integration techniques. We need at a local level more than at national level.

    7. Update the Environment and Natural Resources status countrywide and undertake valuation and cost benefits analysis, to determine the true values of our natural resources infrastructures and opportunities from investment in their conservation and otherwise other use.

    8. We intend to request the Inspector General of Police to beef up our protection police unit. Right now we have about 186, we would like to have an addition up to about 350 but in total we need about 600 and others we shall train them as the guide so that we have an enforcement arm which is fully beefed up.

    9. We shall recruit and train 600 environment protection force staff and manpower in a long term to add on to that. 

    10. Intensify surveillance and enforcement through the Environment Police Unit and other enforcement agencies.

    11. We intend to finalise and operationalize the draft natural wetland resource management Bill, and we are happy that the Climate Change Bill has already been assented to to help us in enforcing the existing laws. 

    12. We shall integrate the environment and natural resource and climate change issues into the National Development Plan III, and mainstream the environment and natural resources in other sectors.

	Honourable colleagues, the Bill which has been assented to will enable us to require a certificate of financial implication in our budgeting process as far as the environment and natural resources is concerned. We want to mainstream it.

    13. We intend to support planning and safe collection and disposal of solid waste management systems in 135 urban centres, through Public Private Partnership especially the cities and urban settings.

    14. We intend to establish and implement a holistic strategy to manage hazardous and electronic waste countrywide. This is going to be a time bomb when we look at how people own phones and you wonder where they dispose of the old ones. Those are issues we are looking at; old refrigerators, computers and the like. We intend to get hold of that before it becomes a problem to our country.  

15. 	We shall establish and operate weather and climate change database systems for reliable information collection and dissemination. 

16. 	We shall establish, operate and maintain weather and climate change equipment to collect and relay time-bound meteorological data on top of what we are doing. We intend to be more accurate and more responsive.  

17. 	We shall provide technical support, supervision and conditional grant to the 135 local governments to plan and manage for the environment and natural resources. 

18. 	We shall continue targeted awareness to all categories of stakeholders to mobilise them for cost-effective participation in environment and natural resource management. 

To achieve the above, we require a dedicated budget to undertake the actions in the short-term to medium-term and long-term. That is where my passionate appeal to honourable members of Parliament of this august House is, through you, Mr Speaker. 

How are we going to implement this? 

We intend to use the directorate of environment in the ministry. It comprises those sectors stated – you will read on your iPads. We have the three agencies namely; Natural Forest Authority, NEMA and UNMA to undertake what I have outlined above. 

At a regional level, the established concentrated Ministry of Water and Environment offices will also be responsible for coordinating and providing information, as we try to implement what we have outlined above in all the 135 local governments. 

We shall enable the local governments to implement activities at district level spearheaded by the chief administrative officer and supported by the district natural forest officers, the district environment officer and the district forestry officers. 

We shall intensify monitoring and evaluation - that will be carried out by the department of policy and planning at the ministry. 

We intend to communicate and give feedback - by the communication unit of the ministry. We are in collaboration with the Ministry of ICT and our media houses to ensure that this is well communicated. 

Once we put that in place, we expect tangible outputs - among them, we intend to have our boundaries of local forest reserves and central forest reserves, wetlands, river banks and lakeshores demarcated with pillars and beacons gazetted in a period of not beyond five years. 

The country should expect degraded sections of local forest reserves, central forest reserves, wetlands, river banks and the hilly areas restored and maintained; that is visible and the people can see it. 

We intend to seek commercial, industrial and domestic forests and bamboo plantations established, seen and maintained, as an alternative. 

At the end of it, we intend to see community-based livelihood enhancement projects developed and implemented. We have already started on some but we intend to scale it up. We already have a programme that is running - partnerships - and we intend to scale it up. It should be visible in most of colleagues’ constituencies. 

We intend to have quality-planting materials provided to the private investors involved in tree-growing on their private land. This is because this cannot only be on Government land. So colleagues, this is also an opportunity that those tree-growers can also seize and make money. 

We would want to see the environment and climate change mainstreamed and integrated into district plans and plans of other sectors. It would be a requirement if we want this country to move to another level. 

Urban and rural growth centres wastes categorised and safely disposed
As we see now, even the upcoming cities need to be organised on how to dispose of the waste. 

Environment Protection Police should be in place to act promptly. We intend to see tangible environment and national resources coverage, especially wetlands and forest ecosystems raised from the current 8.4 per cent to 11 per cent and 12.4 per cent, respectively - and they will be protected. We want tangible things to be seen at the end of the programme.  

As I had highlighted earlier, stakeholders’ responsibilities have been spread out amongst you, I and everybody. We have tried to see what household families can do. We have allocated responsibilities and they will grow trees, protect wetlands and use the natural resources sustainably. The local governments have already been given their responsibility. We want to see that by-laws are put in place to guide the environment and natural resources products. 

We want to provide the community watch out for non-compliance and this should be done at the local government, private sector, the CSOs. The local government should enact ordinances to protect the environment. The central government should provide policy guidelines and financial resources for the environment and natural resources activity and then development partners will provide a technical and financial support, assist in the technology transfer - which we also badly need as a country. 
Those are spread-out responsibilities, colleagues. 

Financial implication for addressing the challenges

Mr Speaker and colleagues, the financial implication can be referred back to Annex 1, where we gave the breakdown and allocation of how we want the money we are requesting for. 

Restoring the environment and natural resources integrity especially wetlands and forest ecosystems to a minimum projection of 10 per cent and 15 per cent coverage respectfully, as well as other fragile ecosystem stands at Shs 395.47 billion over a period of time. In the short term, an annual cost of Shs 79.096 annually. 

Honourable Members of Parliament, through the budgeting, we shall request you to avail this and then our dream will be realised. This is within the current ENR MATIF expenditure for environment and natural resources for the last five years. You can also refer to it in Annex 2, which is attached in the document.

Restoration and protection of the degraded environment section Mr Speaker, this will help the establishment and maintenance of commercial, industrial or domestic forests and bamboo plantations, preparation and implementation of community-based environment and natural resource livelihood, enhancement management plans and support establishment and functionality of the waste collection centres.

We shall also establish the weather and climate change information system and coordination capacity and governance of environment and natural resources. 

As I am about to conclude, I would like to also let the House know that we have already launched the Investing in Forests and Protected Areas for Climate’s Map Development Project, which is already running. This will help us to monitor all our natural resources from the offices. The officers are able now to see who is degrading the wetland and who is cutting down the forests from our system. We launched it two weeks ago and this is a milestone, which will help us to monitor our environment. 

As a Government, we have running projects, which is building resilient communities, wetland ecosystems and associated catchment project in Uganda. It has been running in 10 districts and at an appropriate time, it can found. This will go a long way and be a starting point for the communities surrounding our natural resources gaining rather than being degraders of the environment.

Conclusively, Mr Speaker, allow me to retaliate that the purpose of this statement is to enable Members of this House to know the status, trends, key issues and challenges of managing the environment and natural resources in Uganda. It was critical to know the critical importance of the environment and natural resources to the national development and consequences of mismanaging our environment.

We wanted this House to take note of the interventions that the ministry has undertaken so far to establish sustainably protected and managed natural resources. Colleagues, I would like to emphasise that it might not be so much that we have done but if there was no effort done, we would have no wetlands or forests to talk about. Let us build on what has already been done and do it in a much better way.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I wanted you to note the need for sustainable political support at all levels towards restoration and protection of our environment. We have a sub-committee of Cabinet under the leadership of the First Prime Minister, which is undertaking plans on how we can restore our environment in 10 years’ time. It is just in preparation and you will be given the information once we start rolling it out.

Honourable members, the cost of maintaining the status quo without taking remedial action would be a big disaster. My special appeal is that we need a budget that will help us to keep the little that we still have and then try to restore what has been lost. For God and My country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for presenting that statement, which took two days. I do not know how long the debate will take; maybe four days. 

Honourable members, rule 52(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda allows us to have a debate on this matter and the rules allow us an hour to have the debate. Issues of the environment are critical. I have just seen another motion on climate change and so many issues of saving forests and so many of these things are happening at the same time. 

I do not know when we will have an opportunity to deal with this matter in a wholesome way and give some policy guidance from our perspective as Members of Parliament to the Executive so that they can take some action on what we would be recommending. I think the respective committees on climate change and the ones in charge of the environment and natural resources should take interest in this matter and generate some kind of activity so that we have a holistic debate on this matter. 

However, the statement of the minister gives us an opportunity. The challenge we have is they come piecemeal. We have another motion on climate change and another one is going to come in another form. If there was a way of consolidating all these things and having one strong debate, which can last as long as we desire it to last and find some common grounds and make some recommendations to the Executive branch of Government to see what action can be taken to deal with this matter.

However, debate is for an hour and it starts now; debate without decision.

3.04
DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with the honourable minister, to a very large extent, except for the directive to evict smallholder rice growers in Busoga and Bukedi sub-regions. That is in regard to the wetlands. 

I acknowledge that the environment is getting degraded and it needs to be protected. I also do agree that rice is one of the “members” in that ecological community and it naturally grows in the wetlands. I have heard the honourable minister, right from the beginning of the speech to the end and I have not heard anywhere how rice is contributing to the diminishing of the wetlands from the 15 per cent to 8 per cent. On the other hand, people from Busoga and Bukedi sub-regions have had constant threats of how they are going to be evicted.

Honourable minister, the Government knows very well that these two regions are the poorest; Karamoja being the poorest followed by Bukedi and Busoga. The Government also knows very well - page 101 of UBOS report 2018 indicates how Busoga was leading at the time in terms of rice growing, closely followed by Bukedi sub-region. This is a crop that we cannot wish away. 

Again, Government is contradicting itself without mentioning how rice growing is affecting the environment. It is going on to implement procedures that evict these people from their activities, which is a major livelihood stream for these people.

Honourable minister, as you come back to respond to our reactions, inform the world that you are going to stay those directives since you have not mentioned how they are affecting the environment.

Secondly, the protocols that you are coming up with - the bylaws, let them be to the end that rice growing coexists with environmental conservation because this is a crop we cannot wish away. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries considers it a priority crop. It is also considered a strategic crop since it is a grain that can be stored and it is a high-market crop. 

The demand for rice in Uganda, even if you are to say that each Ugandan eats half a kilogramme of rice per month, would stretch to over 250,000 metric tonnes, which translates into over Shs 800 billion. 

Therefore, evicting these farmers – the alternative would be for us to import rice. Getting that money out of the country will distort our balance of payment. It will distort our balance of trade. 

Let us not look at this as a small issue. Let us look at it critically. Let rice farmers stay in that business. When you increase the wetlands, we shall be glad because we shall have a bigger area to do rice growing. 

In that, you will have all our political support. Instead, evict the people putting up petrol stations in wetlands and the people putting up – (Member timed out). 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have one hour. Can we agree on how much each Member takes? How many minutes? Three? Okay.

3.08
MR CHARLES TEBANDEKE (NRM, Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the statement from the Minister of Water and Environment, the former Mama Mabira. (Laughter)

I keenly listened to the minister, who was asking for our support in the political dynamics. Some of us have, indeed, done the needful. Personally, in Bbale, I have three main Central Forest Reserves, that is, Wamale, Kiula and Bajjo. Wamale was taken under the watch of the National Forestry Authority. Kiula was also taken in the same way. Now, Bajjo has been encroached on. She, and all the authorities, have my report. 

Surprisingly, people who are destroying these central forest reserves are the people whose names she asked us to forward. However, again, today, she has assured us that she has the technology to monitor the central forest reserves from the office. I remain confused. 

I need her indulgence. What is your relationship, as the Ministry of Water and Environment and the National Forestry Authority? In my region, they are the same people who go and chase away the locals, stopping them from destroying these forests. At the end of it all, they are the ones who open the boundaries and protect the sugarcane growers who have dismantled the central forest reserves. 

Mr Speaker, I would kindly ask the minister: if we seriously need to protect the central forest reserves, wouldn’t it be proper for her to reach these forest reserves, physically, and examine the situation therein? 

Some people are protected with guns. Others have come up on cultural basis to effectively utilise these forest reserves. 

The remedies given do not satisfy the solution to protect the central forest reserve –(Member timed out.)

3.11
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. She states that people living along the lakes are some of the people to be evicted. 

I would like to categorically tell the minister and the House that, actually, the lake has moved towards human settlement and it becomes very difficult to remove our people who are at the landing sites and camps, when it is the lake that attacked them. (Laughter)

Madam Minister, I would like you to study it case by case and come up with a lasting solution. At first, it was 100 metres from the lakeshore, the law moved to 200 metres and it has now moved to 300 metres, yet our people own this land. I do not know how you will help our people to maintain the campsites. 

Secondly, I was very interested to hear from the minister about charcoal burning. Some of us, who come from the east, see trucks moving towards the border. 

Whereas our neighbours have put a ban on charcoal burning, what are we doing, as a country, to make sure that charcoal burning and exportation is controlled? We can sing about wanting to protect the environment but, as long as we allow charcoal burning in this country and we do not find a lasting solution by lowering the price of gas, our people will continue being slaves in their own country. Thank you

3.14
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement.

I come from a gold-mining district. Whereas the artisanal miners were evicted from mining in their plantations and gardens in the hills, the Chinese have destroyed the forest reserve we have - Kasyoha-Kitomi Forest Reserve - and destroyed over 20 kilometres. 

I would like the minister to take interest in what is happening in that forest reserve because it looks like the Chinese there are above the law. They have destroyed a forest reserve and nobody seems to care. 

As we debate your statement - as you tell us how you are now better equipped - I would like you to take interest in what is happening in Buhweju because it concerns us and we want to know what can be done to restore that forest reserve. Thank you. 

3.15
MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to make a contribution to the statement made by the minister responsible for environment. 

I have carefully listened to the statement made by the minister and I would like to add value by focusing on one thing: capacity. 

We may all recall that in the early 1900s, Sir Winston Churchill visited Africa, and focusing on Uganda in particular, he saw beauty and described Uganda as: “The Pearl of Africa.” 

A century down the road, we Ugandans get out, look at our environment, together with the natural resources, and we say: “We are gifted by nature.” 

Today, we have heard a statement that we might lose this. In this case, therefore, my position would be that we need to emphasise capacity. 

We need institutional capacity to help us coordinate management of the environment. We need statistical capacity to help us measure our progress towards utilisation of the unfavourable environment we live in. We need human resource capacity to help us do the analysis, the planning as well as the budgeting. 

Taking a step back - and going back to Tororo where I come from - we are now aspiring to upgrade our municipality to a city. However, we have to guarantee a good environment. We are also aspiring to have industrial parks in Tororo but we need to guarantee clean air.

Mr Speaker, WhatsApp capacity, to me, is important because even when we look back in the first book of the Bible before God rested after creating the environment, He commanded man to subdue nature; meaning to control and harness it for his or her livelihood. In this case, therefore, we need that capacity to help us manage our environment. As such, I would like to add value to the statement by saying that as Government, let us develop and build capacity, capacity and capacity. I submit. Thank you.

3.18
MR PATRICK OCAN (UPC, Apac Municipality, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the minister for a very comprehensive report that she has just given. 

Mr Speaker, it is very important to note the contributions of environment and natural resources to our economy, as spelt out in the statement, regarding employment and its specific contribution to the GDP and others. However, in the report, I have not seen what the minister plans to do to prevent encroachers of wetlands, specifically those who have already obtained genuine land titles within our wetlands. Thank you.

3.19
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the report that she has made to the House. However, the report lacks a lot.

When you look at wetlands - the minister is busy squeezing our small-scale rice growers in the villages. You find someone growing rice in a swamp but the ministry is squeezing him or her, when we have key wetlands in this country.

Look at Lubigi Wetland, a very big wetland that is vital but you will find encroachers there, who have not been handled yet my rice growers in Igogero in Bugiri are being attacked. The community told me that the minister spoke on television and told them to move away from the wetlands.

One time, I even asked which wetland is here. Mr Speaker, what they call wetlands are very small swamps these people have been surviving on since time immemorial. I think what the minister should be concentrating on and telling this Parliament is how we are going to fight the big offenders; people who are doing massive investments in wetlands areas like Kampala Metropolitan and Mukono. That is where we should start from.

You find someone constructing a hotel, or a beach. There is that big swamp, when you are almost reaching Wakiso. There is a big beach there and that is a wetland. 

When you are driving through Namugongo, as you enter Mukono, you see washing bays. People are pouring sand in the huge wetland that separates Mukono and Wakiso districts. The minister is not talking about this, yet this is what causes flooding in Kampala and all the problems that we are having today.

Honourable minister, we want you to attack the big fish and leave the poor household farmers in the villages alone. Let us leave these people alone as long as they are using the environment sustainably. Otherwise, they are just growing rice. 

Ever since I was a child, Mr Speaker, I have never been told that rice growing depletes wetlands. I went to school with money got from rice farming. Hon. Basalirwa is laughing; he knows what is happening in our district; they are pushing away these people. 

Mr Speaker, we cannot stand in this Parliament and accept this to happen. We want the minister to remove that from her report and only start with the big offenders and leave the poor Ugandans who have small crops in small wetlands to earn a living. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are debating a report from a minister. I thought it was a ministerial statement but you have decided to present a report. I do not know under which rule you proceeded but I am now going to baptise it “a ministerial statement” to enable us debate it for the remaining one hour.

3.23
MR FRANCIS KATABAAZI (NUP, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the contrary, in my constituency, we have a very big rice farm, which is near Lake Victoria. These people use chemicals to spray the rice when they are doing their farming. This has led to the death of some fish in the lake. That means Lake Victoria is being contaminated by the chemicals from this farm.

Mine is not like the case of my colleagues that side. It is a big farm by one Chinese investor. Mr Speaker, we have lost a lot of fish. Lake Victoria serves about 16 countries. It is one of the second biggest fresh water bodies we have in the world. 

I know we love rice but we have to think about the future. (Applause) At the end of the day, if the fish is contaminated in the lake, we shall have a lot of trouble contracting diseases we do not understand. That will also affect our fish exports - the fish maw, from which we are earning a lot of income. We will not be able to fetch any tax revenue because once those people discover that there is any contamination, we are going to have a very big issue.

First of all, I would like to appreciate the minister for bringing such a statement but I request that you investigate that big farm and find out – We are likely to lose a big market of our fish and our lives because I know when many of you are going to Mbarara or Masaka, you always buy that fish. So, we do not want it contaminated. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

3.26
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement and to speak about equity. She mentioned a lot that is meant to preserve the forest. She also talked about the intention to degazette. Which forests are supposed to be degazetted?

I stand for the people of Kalombe Forest Reserve and Nsowe Forest Reserve in Gomba West. Would they be part of those? We do not know the reasons yet but they would want to be part of them.

When it comes to training of forestry officers to manage tree planting, we would want the locals to be involved because many times, they are left out. That is what has been happening and outsiders have been brought in and preferred to the locals yet they instead destroy the environment. They find trees there, chop them down and begin planting crops. As a result, the locals are disadvantaged. 

So, that is why I was talking about equity. Where does it come in? Can the locals be taken into consideration because they have the capacity to understand and take into consideration all that you are trying to do. I am glad to see that you can monitor from the headquarters. Please take these forests into consideration. Thank you.

3.27
MS SYLVIA NAYEBALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement presented. Although my colleague who comes from the same district with me has aired some of the views, I will re-emphasise others.

I would like the minister to take note that there is unfair and discriminatory licensing of forests. Most of the time, we get investors from outside who are given licences to do tree planting, which she has now renamed tree growing. 

While we appreciate tree growing, we need affirmative action for those that are normally around and preserve these forests for the longest time. 
My colleague has talked about Nsowe and Kalombe forest reserves, we are in total disbelief because investors came from Kampala and our local people were not given the opportunity and yet they had the capacity to embark on tree growing as she has named it. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  No, you cannot take information from a person who has violated the rule on the microphone. (Laughter) 

MS NAYEBALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the protection. I had not even seen where the information was coming from. Honourable minister, please help us on those forests. Thank you. 

3.29
MR HASSAN KIRUMIRA (NUP, Katikamu County South, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for presenting the report. The environment is a source of survival for many Ugandans and so, it is incumbent upon us, as leaders, to take care of it. 

Unfortunately, the application of the law is very selective. That is why you find some people being evicted out of the wetlands but on the other hand, you see industries cropping up in the same wetlands.

The other problematic issue I have seen in the report is about the data. Specifically, it addresses issues that happened in 2017 and 2016. I do not think the current data we have is coherent with this report. If we are to do a mini research on what is happening especially with our forests, you would find that it has not only reduced by 24 per cent as you have mentioned; it could be more. We could be having a very big issue. 

On another note, I am not sure of what kind of science is actually used to determine the water levels. You mentioned water levels declining yet on the other hand, we have reports showing increase in the water levels. The water level was at 13 metres by June this year. 

So, we need a comprehensive report on these issues to help us shade a better image for our country. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.31
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for presenting this statement. The issue of the environment and natural resources is very critical for our survival and the future. Our great grandparents left for us a very beautiful and good environment. That is why our country is called the Pearl of Africa. What are we leaving for our children and great grandchildren? That is the key question for us all to answer.

Honourable minister, I have read through your statement and noticed that there are about two or three things that have not been put very clear to me. One of them is the issue of the population. The population, to me, is a driving factor as far as the degradation of the environment and natural resources are concerned. It must be marked very clearly and seriously if we are to handle the environmental issues.

Allow me to go to page 4 of your submission. On that page, you talked about the current status of the environmental and natural resources in Uganda. You made mention of a decline of wetlands from 15.6 per cent to 8.4 per cent in 2017 and forest cover reducing from 24 per cent to 9 per cent in 2017. When you look at these, you notice that there is a very serious relationship between degradation and population increase. 

You made mention of the population increase but on page 5, you talked about the causes of this increase - industrialisation is related to population. Unplanned urbanisation is coming about because of population increase. People are cutting trees because they need fuel and space for settlement.

When you talk about agriculture, here in Uganda, the majority of the women are in agriculture and that takes me to this point that if we do not look at the population, any problem that we are facing as a country, leave alone the environment, we will have not yet done enough because all the pressure that we are getting is coming from the population.

I want to add that the women specifically are very key in this. They are the majority in agriculture. They are cutting trees to look for fuel. They have not been sensitised, honourable minister. In your submission, I have not seen a serious programme for sensitising Ugandans. All of us here have heard and talked about this very many times. We are yet to receive –(Member timed out.)

3.35
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Through you, I would like to thank the minister for her presentation. I have two issues of concern. I have been told many times by the people from the forestry authority that it is not advisable to plant eucalyptus because they dry up the soil. Even the water can disappear completely from the swamps.

When you move on Mityana Road, for example, you will find almost all the forests are of eucalyptus. When you go to Kampala-Gulu Road around Nakasongola, you would find a lot of these forests. If what I am saying is true – because it was advice from the forestry authority members - then what is your take on that? Why can’t the ministry advise and discourage them from growing eucalyptus trees and instead grow another kind of tree like cypress?

The other issue is on the burning of charcoal. I think all of us would agree that wherever you move to, you will find so many trucks carrying charcoal. I would like to know what strategy you have. If we are to prevent people from burning charcoal which people use - I do not want to say even some of us here – but allow me. What is the alternative? For example, in Kampala, what can people do? I know that there are some charcoal stoves that have been made which are eco-friendly but we are not popularising them.

What can be done to make sure that we change the attitude of the people to know that they have alternative fuel in order to move on? 

Mr Speaker, I thank you very much and I beg to submit.

3.37
Mr EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for providing us with a comprehensive report about the environment situation in the country and what they plan to do.

In the report, I thought I would find where the ministry is trying to link with other ministries. When I hear from my colleagues, they are calling for alternatives for some people, that probably you want to evict. However, when you want to provide those alternatives, I do not see how you are going to do that without linking to other ministries.

I would have loved to hear from your report how you are going to link up with the Ministry of Energy to ensure that as people are picked out of the use of firewood and charcoal, maybe the Ministry of Energy is doing something. When you are picking people out of the wetlands where they grow rice, there is an alternative with the ministry of agriculture to ensure that people’s livelihoods continue.

However, when I do not see that inter-linkage then I get afraid that by our recommendations may more become like high-sounding but very little. Those alternatives are very important for our people.

We also know that in our country, we have come up with a lot of good suggestions on very many things but they fail because we fail to implement them. Why we fail to implement is because we have not provided people with alternatives, and yet we also want those people to live.

Honourable minister, I would like to see the linkage between the different ministries so that I can be comfortable that other people are going to continue with their livelihoods in a fairly normal way. I beg to submit.

3.40
MR FRED OPOLOT (NRM, Pingire County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to say a word or two. I applaud the Minister for the Environment for her very comprehensive and informative report. In particular, her encouragement to all of us to grow trees and that is in relation to the deforestation that is happening in our country at the rate of 1.4 per cent. That is extremely alarming.

Mr Speaker, I draw attention to the framework to domesticate the international conventions on environment and the accompanying policy committee that has been set up by the ministry. In that context, I would like to make specific reference to carbon trading, that is a big business internationally.

Big international manufacturing companies emit a lot of carbon dioxide. That means that international conventions have restricted that and, therefore, these international companies are offsetting their carbon emissions by growing trees.

Now, by extension, there are other companies or organisations that are concerned with the environment. They will apply to the manufacturing companies to plant trees on their behalf and they get paid. Africa, and Uganda in particular, is fertile ground for that. That is when we make reference to my sister here who said that in her constituency, there are companies that come to jostle for space to plant trees. That is the reason.

Therefore, can the minister clarify on –(Member timed out.)  

3.43
MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the minister for the statement. Yes, we support securing our environment but to my disappointment, this is not the first time ministers are presenting such a statement or report on the Floor of Parliament.

I will start with charcoal burning. Honourable minister, we need to do more implementation. At least if we stop charcoal burning, what alternative do we have for our people? Like my honourable colleague said, it is impossible - by the way start with us. You cannot cook using electricity. If we stop the use of charcoal, what alternative do we have?

Back to the wetlands, it is unfortunate that whenever such programmes begin, they always start with our local people. Back to Rukiga, these are small wetlands where our people are trying to grow their food to feed their children. And when such a programme starts, they always start with local people which is very bad.

Take the example of Lukaya, acres of land are being used by a Chinese investor. Honourable minister, why can’t you start with such people? Why do we always oppress our common people who are trying to feed their families? I kindly request you, honourable minister, if you can make a communication to our districts, our people are suffering. 

He talked of rice growing in Busoga; Kigezi is known for Irish potatoes growing and everyone feeds on Irish potatoes sincerely speaking. Our people do not get much out of it. Honourable minister, I request you, if you can make it official, for example, I have a subcounty in Rukiga (Kashambya Subcounty) they entirely depend on that small wetland. Let them stop harassing them. Start with these so-called investors then at least our local people can benefit.

I thank you for the opportunity, Mr Speaker.

3.45
MR TOM EKUDO (FDC, Gweri County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are here to look for dynamics of how to conserve the environment. I am one of those who have been growing rice in Teso and I know the value of rice. If I sell my 10 bags, I will even construct a house. Therefore, there is no other crop that outcompetes rice.

I would like to ask the ministry to let us have an alternative crop that can get our people to get out of the swamps. 

In Teso, Gweri is the leading sub-county in rice growing. My appeal is, after we have got the alternative crop, we should empower the locals. Thereafter, they will discuss those issues and everybody will get out of the swamp. 

There is the issue of wetlands. In some regions, the wetlands are drained. Regions like Teso are restricted to use the wetlands so, we need equity. When we say, “No more cultivation of rice”, it must be a countrywide theme. 

There are individuals that have land and want to plant trees. Can the Government support these people? That is the information and discussion I have brought to this Parliament. I submit. 

3.48
MR ISAAC KATENYA (Independent, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Minister of Environment for the submission. I would like to say that Bulambuli and Kapchorwa have issues of industrialisation, especially on cement industries. We have about six quarries; Hima Cement, Kampala Cement, Metro Cement, Tororo Cement and others. The rudimentary methods they are using for blasting stones have devastated the environment from the Elgon stretch up to Bukedi. 

I request the Minister of Environment to check on those methods because the environmental impact assessment that was carried out by some officials from the ministry has not assisted us. As I talk, people are suffering from different diseases, people’s crops have been destroyed and a lot of animals are not productive because of the blasts. 

Those blasts have been interfering with reproduction in goats, chicken and so many other animals. When my people tried to talk to those people to compensate them, they instead took them to court. I would like the Minister of Environment to intervene and help my people in Bulambuli and Kapchorwa so that we are in a position to save the environment. 

Concerning the issue of corporate social responsibility to the community like planting of trees – You know, hills hold a lot of water. As I speak, most of the areas are flooded. There is no plan for planting trees and even encouraging people to dig trenches. We are overwhelmed. 

I would like to request the Minister of Environment to give us some attention and send a team so that my people are in position to be assisted. I submit, Mr Speaker.  

3.50 
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. The day hon. Beatrice Anywar was appointed the Minister of Environment, I am one of those that was very excited and happy because they had appointed somebody that has a lot of interest, vigour and passion for the environment. 

The interventions given in the statement were just giving hope; there are no timelines given that Parliament can base on to carry out monitoring and oversight on how some of them are to be implemented. I think we need to do much more than that. 

Last weekend, I was in Kasese. Just like the colleague who has just left the Floor talked of cement factories, the chimneys on these factories are a public nuisance. Scientists argue –(Member timed out.) 

3.52 
MR FRANCIS KAZINI (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Kikuube): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I would like to also let her know that I come from Buhaguzi County where there is a forest called Bugoma. Every one of us here knows that part of that forest was given to an investor for sugarcane growing but people own land titles in the remaining part and people are acquiring more land on a daily basis. 

Even the communities are encroaching on the forest. The reason is that there is no clear boundary. How can we protect the remaining forests in this country when we do not know their boundaries? 

May I, therefore, request us to open up the boundaries of most of these forests in Uganda, particularly Bugoma? This is because all the forests are going to be cleared. I submit. 

3.53
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statements he made. Indeed, the Constitution of Uganda, in Article 245, gives us the mandate to promote environmental awareness. Besides that, it encourages us to put laws and bylaws that will govern and protect our environment. It is our role and duty, as leaders, to support her. 

Honourable minister, I support that mandate and what you have told us. It is very important and we cannot underestimate the importance of forests and our environment. Mr Speaker, there is a tree species called shea nut in our area. When you move in all the savannah grassland areas, you will find it. However, it is becoming extinct because people are destroying it. 

I would like to implore the minister – the way she normally advocates for the protection of the environment – to come so that we safeguard this tree species that are being cut left and right because it is very good for charcoal burning as well.

There is a point that the minister raised here that she is going to recruit over 600 environmental protection units. I would like to propose to her that she instead brings forestry environmental extension agents. With this poverty, people do not have the alternative to look for sources of revenue but if you borrow from what other CSOs used to do, tree planting is going to move and many people are going to support it and protect our environment. It is of importance if you take it up.

Finally, the Acholi joint council meeting took place as we were sending off the late Lt Gen. Paul Lokech. They came out with resolutions and one of them –(Member timed out.) 

3.56
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this chance to thank the minister for the statement which, somehow, has some honesty. 

Madam Minister, when you brought out the percentage of the wetlands and forestry cover we are losing every year, I was very happy that the truth was being revealed. Nonetheless, I still wonder if you are the same person we got excited about when you took up that ministry. At the moment, the way things are moving, we should be seeing a positive change but we are seeing a negative one.

Particularly, I expected you to talk about Lake Victoria. The way people are mining sand from the lake – on the 13th of this month, I saw you on TV - NBS run a story about how Lake Victoria is being degraded by the sand miners. You were not happy with them because you made a statement that those people have regulations to follow but they have adamantly refused to follow the regulations.

Madam Minister, we expected something about Lake Victoria and the habitat of our fish for that matter. As Members of Parliament, we are expected, according to your report, to support you politically in finding a way of protecting our environment. 

However, you are not among those people who are doing a very good job; not only you, but the entire Cabinet. (Applause) Yes, that is the truth. There is no political will in protecting the environment of Uganda at the moment. Otherwise, we would not be seeing the Chinese in Lwera taking over the entire area.

Secondly, some time back –(Interjection)– My brother, let me finish. This is very important. Honourable minister, we suffered a lot when the road was damaged a few months ago, yet there is sand mining and that is why we are getting that problem. The lake is also getting the same problem and we are not – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, please, do not put on record what is not on record. If there is a comment outside and you answer it on record, you are the one who will sound “interesting”. If somebody has raised a matter, not on the microphone, it does not get on the record. 

However, when you respond to it, your response is the one which goes on the record. For example, the response of the honourable member - “my brother, let me finish”; finish what? There was nothing on the record to stop him but in the middle of his statement, he is saying “let me finish”. (Laughter) Okay, let me have UPDF. Oh, they are two? One is not in uniform; I want the one in uniform.

4.01
MAJ. GEN. HENRY MASIKO (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, this is my maiden contribution and I congratulate you upon assuming that big office. I would like to applaud the minister’s presentation, which is on a very touchy matter and I want to make a contribution from the security perspective. 

Environmental questions are a matter of life and death. There are issues of human survival and when we are making a contribution and guiding the country, I wish that touch to be emphasised. When I listened to the honourable minister, she talked of the stakeholders and taskforce, among others. My view would be that the ministry should endeavour to make the ministry or sector of security part of their strategy because what they are dealing with is a security matter and a threat to humanity.

Security means being safe from danger. When you have environmental problems, you are facing insecurity. 

Next question is her proposition on the consequences if we do not make any serious move. My view is that if we do not take issues of the environment seriously, nature will fight back and we shall have no recourse. Already, we are seeing mountains and water displacing us. Therefore, the consequence is not negotiable. The consequence is that nature will fight back, decisively.

Lastly, on the issues of the status, Mr Speaker, I would like to bring to your attention one big danger on the status of the environment today; the degradation of our heights. The heights are the natural water towers, where God puts water for us and all rivers come from the heights. 

When you degrade the heights - because God made the heights and put covers on them. When we do not pay attention to recovering and dominating the heights in our country, we are facing a bigger danger because the rivers are going to dry up and it will affect electricity generation. This matter nearly happened in Kenya and they had to go back to the drawing board and recover the heights.

Among the –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Your time is up, Sir. Honourable members, the one hour allocated for this debate has ended, yet I still have the Shadow Minister and the ladies and gentlemen from this side and the minister to respond. 

However, honourable members, I will use my prerogative to do the following. I have seen the minister in charge of trade here, I have also seen the minister in charge of works here and they both have statements in the next three items. Item No. 4 will be laying of papers, which does not take time.

Given the number of Members who would like to speak, and the significance of this particular matter, I will use my prerogative to extend sometime. (Applause) 

However, I will extend the global time but limit the individual contribution time so that as many Members as possible can express their opinion on this matter. Is that fair?

I am going to extend it by another 40 minutes so that we can use the last 20 minutes for conclusion. Honourable members, can we reduce the time to two minutes? Okay. To start with the two minutes, I will allow youth national. 

4.05
MS PHIONA NYAMUTORO (NRM, Youth Representative, Female): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. Allow me to express my dissatisfaction with the presentation of a 24-page document without clear mention of the youth anywhere. 

Mr Speaker, in a country, whose population is largely young, how do we plan for sustainability, without involving the young people? It is the young people that are best suited with the energy, resilience and willingness to conserve the environment. (Applause)

As we look forward to giving the minister the political support that she requested for, I would like to request her particularly, to indicate the role that the young people have in playing centrally and contributing to the protection of the environment in this country. Thank you. 

4.06
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this report. I also have a lot of queries.

My biggest concern is about mindset change. Like one of my colleagues has said, people in Rakai think that forests and swamps are the best places for them to be. Why? Because the mindset has changed over time, mostly, when there was an attack on Mabira Forest. From that time, people got to know that forests are not important because the Government made it seem so. 

Therefore, when you write such a report, people are going to be resistant everywhere you go, unless you first change their mind towards conserving the environment. 

Honourable minister, I see a looming eviction of people when we talk about restoring forests, boundary opening – it is not clear here. As Members of Parliament, before we think about evicting people and reopening boundaries, we need to first look at the alternative means. As Government and the ministry, we need to focus on why there is an encroachment on wetlands and forest reserves. Otherwise, the number one reason is population growth, which is not being addressed in this statement. This means that we are just going to be reactionary to what is happening, instead of solving the cause of the encroachment.

You are talking about bamboo plantations –(Member timed out)

4.09
MR STEPHEN MUGOLE (NRM, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say something. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, I did not hear one thing.

During the campaigns, the President, in the Bukedi Region, when the entire leadership was present, promised to Bukedi – our land holding per household in acreage is 1.5. The President said people should not be evicted from the wetlands until there is an alternative. I have not seen a particular alternative for Bukedi Region which has the lowest landholding ration per acre in the country, on top of being very poor. Yet, we sit on a table in the wetland. These people cannot go anywhere apart from harnessing resources from the wetlands in which they stay. 

I would like to re-emphasise that among the livelihood issues that you had proposed, in the case of Bukedi, for people to get out of the wetlands, there must be an alternative. Otherwise, there will be a problem with the people. (Interruption)

MR KINOBERE: I am giving information to my colleague because we come from the same district. If you look at Bukedi, as my colleague has said, we are purely in the wetland; the whole of Bukedi. This means that there is a possibility that the entire Bukedi is going to be relocated to maybe Karamoja or Katakwi. 

In the last Parliament, I was one of the Members who pushed the issue of having wetlands well demarcated. I wrote letters – I can even lay some copies on the Table. I wrote several letters to have wetlands demarcated but the ministries never acted. The only option they have, when the rice is almost ready for harvest, is that they send NEMA to come and slash it. That is the only benefit that the people of Bukedi could get. 

Mr Speaker, on many occasions, you have seen me struggle on this Floor to have wetlands demarcated. Whenever they see anywhere water is getting stuck, they call it wetland and they send the police to arrest our people. 

MR MUGOLE: My prayer – (Laughter) – the information is given and now the prayer –  

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable. You had two minutes, the person giving information took another two minutes. I will skip Kiboga because she is the shadow minister. She will have her own time. 

4.13
MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to debate on the matter on the Floor. 

Mr Speaker, you had suggested that this would not be time enough for us to discuss this matter exhaustively – 

THE SPEAKER: You are ruled out of order because you are not dressed properly in terms of masks. 

4.14
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for this comprehensive report. 

I am hurt and unhappy about our situation; we are watching the beauty of our country disappearing, when other countries envy us. People pay to come to our country to see what we have but we are watching it disappear, yet we are a very poor country. 

My proposal is: let us be firm to protect what we have. We have to go through this pain. I am sure that we have a department that does environmental assessment. Honourable minister, with all the cries – I know people have to survive but can we do assessment and look at what people need and what alternatives we can provide so that we take actions that can be respected? 

Secondly, I propose that the minister comes with a list of those who are defying our policies and laws. There is a lot being said that there are individuals who are encroaching on the forests and the wetlands but they are not touched. Isn’t the Government aware of these individuals? Who are they? We need to know them. If we are not going to have the list here, we are going to move in circles because they are watching us. They know that we talk but we do not bite. Can we have that list?

4.16
MR MUHAMMAD KIVUMBI MUWANGA (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. I happen to come from an area that has got a large forest cover and I will be very clear here that the enemy is with us. They are the officials of the Ministry of Water and Environment. If we did not have the National Forestry Authority, we would be having forest cover.

In my district, I am battling the NFA because the Authority is at the forefront of finishing forest cover. They are using protection given by defence and security –(Applause)– to protect large tree planters – (Interjection) - are they growers now –(Interjection)– yes, tree growers. They enjoy the protection by the army. So, the army General who invites security into forest cover is only inviting more destruction of forests. (Applause)

If we are to be honest, Mr Speaker, let us assure the minister here – task her to bring here a list of people she has licensed to do forest growing in this country. You will be amazed at who is who in Butambala and I know them. 

I have looked at that list. In Butambala and Gomba, it is the powerful of this country. It is the elite who know the dangers of environmental degradation that are at the forefront of destroying the environment. So, let us stop the pretense. In my district, Mr Speaker, we have literally, at the local government level, decided to do away with NFA because it is at the forefront –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.18
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to appreciate the presentation made by the minister. I would have preferred it to be a document presented to a foreign agency. So, now that we are dealing with indigenous issues, I have received the report with a heavy heart.

I would have expected the minister to come to us and demonstrate the commitment of Government in making a positive change. Parliament passed a law to ban the use of polythene and polypropylene materials. I would have wanted the minister to give us an update on how far we have gone after 15 years – (Applause) - of passing that law. I would have wanted to know that. 

Every year - apart from COVID-19 of the last year – Uganda is reputed for being one of the very active delegations in the climate change conferences. So, Uganda is a very critical delegate in driving policies. 

I am surprised that up to now, Mr Speaker, we have not heard a statement made on the Floor of Parliament to update us on how we are moving, as a country and what the world has done, what we are doing, what the programmes are and how much has been given to us to green our environment – nothing so far!

So, Mr Speaker, it is important that we request that the minister, every year, gives –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I now have the following please? I will have the members for Kalangala District, Nakaseke, Bukoto East and thereafter, I will come to this side.

4.20
MS HELEN NAKIMULI (NUP, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for her report as presented. On page 7, she talked about planting trees for timber. However, I have not seen this activity in Kalangala. I wonder whether Kalangala is in Uganda.

Secondly, Government has not considered the importance or it has given less importance to the trees that make sense to us. For example, all the island districts do fishing. One of the materials used in fishing is a boat and instead, we get the timber used to construct those boats from the Democratic Republic of Congo. This is because Uganda does not have this timber. I do not know its scientific name but in my language, it is called Omukebo. We do not have it; we import it from the Democratic Republic Congo. 

Why do you give us mango tree seedlings to plant, yet we can also get other tree seedlings, which can help our people? If we have them here and do not import them from the DRC, our local people shall get some money and our boats shall be permanent. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

4.22
MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke County Central, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statement made by the minister sounds like a barking dog without teeth. The way I see it, the laws governing the environment and forests are available but they are not implemented.

Government officials are busy doing deforestation for charcoal and timber making but they are untouchable. The laws are available. So, we request the honourable minister to look for those untouchables.

Secondly, we have a divided mandate between NEMA, NFA and local governments. I think we should change this. The management of forest reserves should be centralised.

Lastly, when you say 60 per cent of the forests are privately owned or they are owned by individuals, that is not bad because it encourages commercial tree planting. However, when you plant these trees, you need to know that in future, we shall cut them. So, where are we heading to? We need to change – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.24
MR EVANS KANYIKE (NUP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement well presented.

Mr Speaker, the challenge facing environmental degradation is mainly the so-called investors. We have witnessed this in many areas of this country, especially the wetlands, being degraded mainly by the so-called investors.

On page 8, the minister states that there was a Cabinet directive to cancel all the land titles issued on land in the wetlands. However, since 2014, we have seen very many titles being issued in respect of land in wetlands, mainly by the so-called untouchables of this country.

In the constituency I represent, we have got many and I have come out, on several occasions, to condemn those so-called untouchables in Bukoto County East. So, honourable minister, it is my humble appeal that you come out with serious – (Member timed out.)

4.26
MS VICTORIOUS ZAWEDDE (Independent, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the minister for her report. However, I would like to give her information according to my own assessment in my district majorly. The locals are not destroying the environment, but the environment is destroyed by the so-called investors. A case in point is Lubenge Swamp. We share that swamp with Luweero, but we got some Chinese investors. They have degraded that swamp and caused flooding. People have been displaced. Even the gardens have been destroyed in that within the areas because of flooding.

As noted by the minister, NEMA gave us a sewage plant of Shs 4.6 billion, but for your information, if we do not protect Lubenge, we might not use this plant for sustainable development because the swamp is almost drained. The water is almost dried up. We cannot contain water and yet the other sewage operation plant needs water to filter all the wastes.

Honourable minister, may we implement the policies. We have some good policies in Uganda which can protect the environment. Talk about the Environmental Regulation Policy, 2020. Why don’t we use it? We also have the Wetland Resolution, 2020. Why don’t we borrow ideas from those policies so that we safeguard our environment and retain Uganda as the Pearl of Africa? As we enjoy the environment, we should also plan for our future generations for sustainable –(Member timed out.)

4.28
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Madam Minister, I thank you for the report. As far as matters of environment and natural resources are concerned, looking at the report of the status of environment of 2007, you realise that there are three specific factors that challenge the environment and they include overgrazing, deforestation and primitive agricultural production methods. That is what I want to address.

We have had challenges with our agriculture and all the time we are talking about funding agriculture to improve on production. Since it is a challenge to the environment, we should now be discussing sustainable use of all our land resources and agricultural production. 

I will not differ from my colleague from the Bukedi Sub-region because that region is entirely a wetland. If you now talk about displacing the people from those areas, it means you would have totally killed their livelihoods. 
Madam Prime Minister, you are here; we should emphasise the issue of sustainable use of land especially in the Bukedi Sub-region where I am the chairperson.

We have had programmes to address agricultural matters, plan for modernisation of agriculture – (Member timed out.)

4.31
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. To me, the Government is doing very little as far as conserving the environment is concerned. 

On forest cover, Government has gone ahead to continue leasing out forest reserves to private investors, specifically for sugarcane growing. In my district, we have so far lost two forest reserves namely; Nyamakera and Kibeka. The National Forestry Authority gave clearance to Kiryandongo Sugars, a company growing sugarcanes and dealing in sugar. As I speak now, they have cleared the once forest reserves and now the land is covered with sugarcane. The Government is aware of this – and I think the minister is aware too. Therefore, Government is doing very little to conserve the forest. 

We have been reading in newspapers and also watching on TVs the untouchable illegal timber dealers in the country who go unpunished and sometimes, they are escorted by guns. They go as far as encroaching on the thick nature reserves of the traditional forests. The minister watches this news and the Government is aware but these timber dealers are simply untouchable. 

In 2003, Parliament passed the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 which established the Tree Planting Fund. This has never been operationalised. Therefore, –(Member timed out.)

4.33
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to also thank the minister for the statement. Honourable minister, I will be looking for action points that you will raise. First of all, I am happy to note that you have told us about the monitoring gadgets that the ministry has acquired. We would be very grateful to know whether you are now able to capture those who are lumbering in Budongo Forest and go for them immediately.

Secondly, you have heard the cries on energy, especially charcoal for cooking. I would have also expected you, honourable minister – Whereas we cannot migrate at once to clean energy, you should have also told us the plans that the ministry has to fast-tract the fast-maturing trees for energy support to our communities. 

In the short run, you are going to start realising more problems arising from forestry. Many times now, when you visit a timber dealer, the size of trees that are being cut for the timber that we are consuming in our market is highly regrettable. People have resorted to cutting very small trees and raising a few pieces of timber which gives an impression that we are going for immature trees. So, you also need to move very fast on that to see how we can arrest that situation.

Madam Minister, you have heard the cries of our communities living along the lake shores and river banks. Water is now chasing them way. The water levels have continued – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I had already – Okay, I am coming to the Opposition’s side now. I will have Dr Bwanika. Had I not finished this side? I will keep alternating until – Oh, I had already picked the Member for Ruhaama County East. I am sorry.

4.35
MR BENJAMIN KAMUKAMA (NRM, Ruhaama County East, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for giving us a very elaborate report on the status of the environment and natural forests. I have critically read the report and there is where she stated that the rate of degradation - If we are talking in terms of ratios, degradation to restoration is in the ratio of 33:1. This is quite alarming.

Mr Speaker, currently, we are losing 90,000 hectares of forest cover every year. It estimated that in the next 20-30 years, we shall not have a single forest reserve in this country. That is why I would like to urge my honourable colleagues to support the minister on her request for clear funding so that we can protect our forest reserves.

Mr Speaker, the National Forest and Tree Planting Act, 2003 established the National Forest Authority but it also established District Forest Services. For a moment we thought that the problems of forest degradation were over. However, the Government failed to fund these agencies to do their work.

A case in point, you will go to a district that is supposed to manage 10 central forest reserves but you will find a district forest officer and an assistant managing 10 forest reserves. It is impossible – (Member timed out.)

4.37
MS MIRIAM MUKHAYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister has just given us a statement and shown us how our natural resources are being tampered with. She has shown the interventions that are to be done to rescue our motherland.

Mine is on the issue of sensitization, especially in the community. Now that we know that our motherland is being destroyed, the forests and wetlands are being encroached on, here and there people are constructing petrol stations on the wetlands, down there in the community people continue to use buveeras and they are destroying the soils that we used to plant our crops - If we can borrow from the Ministry of Health that has village health teams that help the ministry to know what is going on the ground. I would implore the minister to have people who can help and bring information on board for the ministry to know what is going on right there in the villages.

I suggest we have village environmental teams that can give firsthand information and we know what is going on. They can also help to sensitize the people on a daily basis. If we do not do something immediately, our motherland will be destroyed.

Today, people cover those buveera as they plant. Therefore, 10 years from now, the soils will be no more and yet Uganda depends on agriculture to survive. That is my –(Member timed out.)

4.39
DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister. I have listened attentively. We had a dialogue in the past about the need to gazette the natural resources in this country.

However, it is important, as we move to gazette the different natural resources, that we base it on science. You cannot grade the wetlands in Bugiri the same way with the Lukaya wetland that affects the lake directly. We need to base our gazettement and grading on science.

Mr Speaker, I would like to know from the minister - I have seen here in Wakiso, Chairman Matia Lwanga Bwanika has become a sole person fighting against the Chinese who are degrading our lake. Why is it that the ministry is keeping quiet? They are degrading the entire lake, a very important resource and we don’t hear your voice nor see you in action. They take away sand and breeding areas for the fish and this is very dangerous. We would like to see you in action.

Lastly, about the kaveera, we know that there is a law against the use of polythene bags. When are you bringing the amendment so that we can get the total ban? We do not want the exception of saying 30 microns. We want a total ban. We know very well that this kaveera –(Member timed out.)

4.41
MR HILLARY KIYAGA (NUP, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I would love to know to what extent corporate companies that deal in plastic related products have been engaged. Yes, we understand that they pay taxes but whatever their products are, what plans do they have? How can we engage them to see that they act with the Government and see how we can dispose of these deadly products?

Secondly, we need an alternative. If we are chasing people away from firewood and charcoal, what is the alternative? The alternative would be electricity, solar energy and gas but if we have these alarming rates on electricity, we cannot have an alternative. Therefore, your ministry needs to correspond with the Ministry of Energy to see how we can better the situation. I beg to submit.

4.43
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. On page 18 she indicated the cost of restoring the forests. That means that there is encroachment as a justification.

Mr Speaker, my father is a senior ecologist at Makerere and the botany department depends on forests to train students. If we substitute natural forests with planted trees like pine and eucalyptus, we will be left with nothing.

We will also affect medical research. You know most of the drugs or the medical nutrients within all the other components that help in developing drugs are derived from plants. (Interjection)- Yes, an example is covidex.

Recently, I was interacting with a herbalist and she indicated that most of the natural forests are a source of all the plants that they use in developing drugs. Therefore, we need to preserve the natural forests.

I totally disagree when you say that we need to plant eucalyptus. That policy of handing over forests to individuals is bad because they only focus on trees that are going to bring them money, not to preserve the natural varieties of trees, plants and herbs that we had in the original place.

Honourable minister, we should allocate money or new lands for those who want to plant individual forests – (Member timed out.)

4.45
MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, my issue is about the Ministry of Lands vis-a-vis national forests. The Ministry of Lands issues titles to these investors in the forest reserves. 

There is a forest called Namyoya in Goma Subcounty. It is divided and individuals own it, yet it is a national forest. There is also Namanve Industrial Park. That swamp has land titles; it is owned by the Chinese. The factories there are constructed in the wetlands and are operating. 

My concern is, why wouldn’t you go to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and see those titles issued to those investors? That is when you will get those people who are encroaching on the forest reserves. Thank you very much. 

4.45
MR RICHARD SEBAMALA (DP, Bukoto County Central, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, minister, for the statement delivered. First and foremost, I would like to re-echo my colleagues’ views on the police and deforestation. In Bukoto Central, it seems most of those small forests were not gazetted. Due to that, the police are actually protecting the people that are cutting down the trees. If you go to Dimu, Malembo and everywhere, all those small forests are being cut down each day. They even pass by the police stations when they are taking this timber. 

Even when you make calls to the officers in charge (OCs) and tell them to go down to the forests, they just go, look at them, confiscate their machines and then return them in the night. Then, in the morning, they do the same thing, again. 

My second issue is on the surface runoff. Most of us here are paving our compounds and the country is continuing to pave the surfaces. This means that there is an increase in surface runoff, which goes down to the swamps that are being encroached on. The people have decided to dump soil in the swamps and create trenches, which bring a lot of water down the stream. 

Take a look at Wampeewo Avenue. Just yesterday, it was flooding yet the design was for 2020. This means that they had anticipated that in 15 years’ time, that road would be able to take up the water volumes. However, it can no longer take up –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. As we begin to prepare to close, because we have done almost two hours now, I will have the following; the Members for Kaliro District, Tororo Municipality, Kasambya and the Member for Ora County, who chairs the Committee on Climate Change. 

4.49
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement. I would also like to thank you for allowing us to extensively debate this statement. 

When the minister was presenting the statement, of course, I had some perception that our natural resources are being degraded but her statement made me much more worried, especially when she said that we are losing forests at a rate of 33 per cent and wetlands at a rate of 70 per cent. 

Given that I have a mathematics background, I have done some simulations. I can foresee that in 20 years from now, if we do not do something right now, then, certainly, we are going to remain without any forest. We are not going to remain with any wetland and the consequences may not be good for this country. 

The other worry is that one of the minister’s challenges is that she is not aware of the boundaries of these natural resources. That is a big concern. I would like to ask the minister that, while we are willing to support you, you must also be willing to walk the talk. When we talk of protecting our environment, we request you to walk the talk. 

Mr Speaker, not very far away from the minister’s office in Kampala here, we have Lubigi Swamp, where I normally pass. When you see the kinds of activities happening, I do not know if there are no – (Member timed out.) 

4.51
MS BRENDA NAMUKUTA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you for the report, honourable minister. However, to a certain extent, it is unfair. My district has 15 subcounties and all of them have swamps. My district is also surrounded by Lake Kyoga. 

Last year, I was a member of the district council of Kaliro and they brought the demarcations. I am one of the victims, as I speak. They encroached on people’s land. I do not know which criteria they used for demarcations but they are encroaching on people’s land. They encroached on two acres of our land from the swamp, yet we have been cultivating it since I was born.  

My question to the honourable minister is, which arrangements do you have for the whole population of Kaliro? Are you going to evict the entire district? 

Honourable minister, it is my humble prayer and request that the people who are supposed to sensitise our people should talk to them in the right way. However, when they come to make demarcations, they bring the army and beat up people. It is unfair. This is an issue in Kaliro –(Member timed out.) 

4.53
MR APOLLO YERI (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for the statement. I come from Tororo in Bukedi region. If you compare our borders - immediately you cross into Kenya, you will notice that things have changed. You will find that it is green. Why don’t you borrow a leaf? When you are in Uganda, you just regret. We are the ones now exporting charcoal to Kenya, which is very dangerous and it is destroying our trees. 

Why don’t you meet, as East Africa, and discuss this policy? I thought that is why the East African community is in existence. If you cannot discuss these issues, we are really badly off. If you want to use the wetlands in Bukedi, you should get alternatives. Come out with a package. What are the poor people going to do in order for them to leave the wetlands? You cannot just tell them to leave the wetlands because they will not leave. Let us come with a practical solution, other than just talking. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not make it sound as if it is only the minister’s responsibility. We are all responsible. Let us see how we can also assist in whatever way because it seems we are all saying that the minister should do this. It is our responsibility as well. 

4.55
MR DAVID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I entirely want to agree with hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, that the enemy of our forest reserves is the National Forestry Authority (NFA). 

In my constituency, I have a forest reserve called Kyampisi and Kyanasiki in Mubende Municipality. However, whenever rich people in Kampala want to have land, they just walk into NFA offices and these people will just come on the ground and extend the boundaries of these forest reserves. Next, they will just hand over the forest reserves to these rich people. 

I would like to join hon. Sylvia Nayebale, who requested from the NFA that whenever they want to allocate these forest reserves, they should allocate them to our people because these are the people who keep the forest reserves. Why should they give these forest reserves to rich people, who even do not stay in our areas? 

Madam Minister, I will not blame you for this but your people in NFA get money from rich people in Kampala and they end up selling our forest reserves –(Interruption)

MR KIMOSHO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. The information I would like to give is that if we want to seriously examine the issue of the environment, we must look at it in a multi-sectoral approach. If we are only talking about displacing people, then what is the alternative that we must create? 

I would like to emphasize the information that I want to give to my honourable colleague, about the issue of NFA, including the National Environment Management Authority. If you are driving along Masaka Road and see the extension of rice in Lwera Wetland, you will realise that there is no point in whatever report we are getting in terms of goodwill to maintain and keep our environment. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you start giving information by using the word “if” then it is no longer information. That is a full debate. 

4.58
MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Honourable minister, I would like to thank you for your statement. It is this statement that has brought a good debate from Members and I would like to thank them all.

Honourable minister, Uganda’s economy of Uganda is environment, natural resources and climate change dependent. If we mess these three areas, we can collapse this economy. The energy is from natural resources and the energy sector, which we are prioritising is actually hydropower and solar, which is environment dependent. Without them, our economy cannot work.

We are talking about protecting the livelihoods of 68 per cent, who are actually small holder farmers, surviving on these natural resources that support their livelihood. The cost of loss and damage caused by degradation of the environment and climate change is very serious to the economy.

Honourable members, I would like to implore you that when it comes to budgeting and prioritising some of these issues step by step, we need to identify our priority sectors and attach budget to them so that we can now look at the implementation. In the meantime, we have to build the resilience of the population. Resilience means making the population able to withstand the impact of climate change and environmental degradation like floods. You have seen; there are natural ones like hailstones, storms that – (Member timed out.)  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we should draw this to a close. It is exactly two hours from the time we started. Since we have other business, it is only fair that we roll this up. 

I apologise to all Members who had expressed interest to speak but they have not been accommodated. That includes hon. Gilbert Olanya, who has remained standing and I am saying the time is up.

I am going to have the Shadow Minister of Water and Environment and then, I will have the minister. Honourable minister, you will take a very short time because I still have business. I have given you a lot of time. Shadow Minister, you have five minutes.

5.00
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving us the status of our environment and natural resources. 

Honourable minister, in the introduction, you ought to have presented a hope that despite the fact that we have a lot of challenges, adaptation measures are also included because people have always reported about the effects of climate change and what it has caused to them.

The composition of the environment and natural resources sector also needs to bring academia and research very near. When you look at the water sector and the technologies we are proposing to help us with water harvesting, we need researchers to help us in order to avert the flooding challenge. 

The document kept on referring to the National Climate Change Bill yet it is now an Act. Probably, it is because we took long before the Act came into force. Therefore, we need to now put up all our efforts to sensitise the public about the availability of a legislative instrument such that our people know the content of the act and where to begin from.

Honourable minister, on item 4.5 on the causes of environment and natural resources loss, we have a challenge of the diminishing – very many people are going to the wetlands and encroaching on forest land because the available arable land is becoming infertile. The effect of climate change on soil fertility is always forgotten but the farmers down there have already identified that it is a challenge and in order to remain in production throughout the year, they encroach on the wetlands to help them out.

In section 7.4 of your report, under the Sawlog Production Grant Scheme (SPGS), that was giving our people a chance to establish tree cover on Government land - We still have some people who, after being granted that opportunity never planted anything. In Kiboga near my home, we do have them. Somebody who took that portion has never planted trees for three years and the land is bare. There are very many others. Therefore, we need to identify them, remove that opportunity from them and give it to the natives who are ready to plant the trees immediately. 

On point 7.7, the minister came up with the resolution of cancellation of titles in wetlands. However, this is provided for in the Wetland Act that came into force in 1986 yet there are some of our people who hold titles before 1986 and they actually need compensation. 

The law only provided for those people who got titles after 1986. We have two categories and we need to be cognisant of this. Somebody who has kept the wetland for many years, to just go like that, is not easy. We need to incorporate some money to compensate those older title holders. 

On 7.8, honourable minister, you came up with an issue of directing refugees on how to conserve the environment, but we expect the honourable minister to tell us the capacity of Uganda as far as refugees are concerned. We need to define our carrying capacity. We cannot welcome refugees all the time. When we look at the people who have actually destroyed our environment heavily, refugees have a portion of the blame. 

On waste management - this is a serious challenge to very many urban authorities. There are upcoming wastes including diapers, sanitary pads and masks – recycling these things is still a dream. We do not know what to do. When you ask the urban authorities, they are also just leaving them like that yet it is an important thing. 

When we come to 11.1 on the issue of degazettement, the honourable minister has been provided with a number of applications for degazettement.

From the Forest and Tree planting Act of 2003, we need to follow the steps. Before we degazette, there must be an alternative. We should first approve the alternative. For example, the other time when Gulu University came up with 500 acres to reverse the 70 that they want to offset - We need to first approve the 500 before we approve the other one. 

There are even some other private people who are giving options on leasehold land. Leased land that has only 10 years left; after that we shall have no forests. We have to first approve the alternative before degazettement. They should move simultaneously. Not for the minister or any other person to come up with requests. 

Section 11.1 part 16, the issue of early warning has been prioritised. It is very important because it directs our decisions as far as agricultural livelihoods are concerned. 

Members, get this from me, the accuracy of the information is 70 per cent. 30 per cent of our early warning information – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, your time is up. 

MS KAAYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, we shall liaise another time. Honourable minister, we are ready to work with you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you have seven minutes.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for granting us such generous time to debate a very pertinent issue. I thank you colleagues for raising all the concerns. Indeed it is genuine and I take it in good faith.

I thank you for the spirit and concern of conserving the motherland. 

A lot of issues have been raised. The seven minutes might not suffice, Mr Speaker, but I will try to go over the few. 
Before I get cut off, I would like to say that this is the beginning of walking the talk and I believe we shall walk it. 

I will quickly go to some responses, which I have been given. I may not take one by one but allow me to just read a few. I am still available to colleagues who have raised issues, we can also add on outside this House. My office is open. My email and WhatsApp are open. Some colleagues had already contacted me and they are again raising the issues here. It is really appreciated. 

Wamale and Kiula Forests taken by – there are some of these undertakings that are before courts of law. It might look like nothing much is being done but we are following the law. Whatever undertaking we are making is following the law. 

Colleagues, the challenge we have is that people run to courts of law and we are curtailed to act beyond that. We have to let the law take its course. Some of these areas where you see no activity taking place for months, we are in court and we are battling court cases. 

Like I said yesterday, we would like to have environmental courts that will help us quickly dispose of these undertakings. In most cases, they hide there, after five years, you find the whole forest is already gone and yet we should have responded. 

Charcoal; it is a big menace and we are aware of it. It is being allowed to go across. Others are given some license to do that. With charcoal, alternatives have also been sought. I must confirm, for some colleagues who said we must liaison with others, we are working with all the ministries as I had earlier indicated in the report you looked at. 

The ministry of energy is supposed to be one of those. As you know, we are going to have gas production in this country. We expect it to be cheaper for the urban settings. We are undertaking this as an alternative so that gradually we can graduate out of it. 

We are saying that we are going to plant some fast-growing trees like the bamboos. Those are to help us quickly answer to the demand therein. 

The mining as it was raised by my son – he will remain a son even as an honourable colleague – yes, we are also aware of what is taking place, mining in the forest. It has been raised at different fora. The minister of minerals is also handling that. We can still link up and see that something is being done. 

As we were guided by the Speaker, we are not only going to talk but we can also engage colleagues and have solutions outside the House. 

There is also the issue raised from Gomba. I would like to let you know that it is not yet being degazetted. The community have been given about 10 hectares to plant trees. We have also taken note of where the colleagues have said that it looks like only foreigners are coming to plant in their areas. They would want the community to be engaged instead. 

They say that others were given but they never planted. We are already cancelling those licenses. Whoever applied and is able to grow the trees, we do not mind. It would be good if the community gets engaged in that. 

We have also heard colleagues in Bugoma raising an issue of the land titles in the forest reserves. Those are illegally being created and as you are aware, in the wetland, we are cancelling them. 

It is also true – the undertaking we are having right now is not a pleasant one. You find that we are trying to cancel these titles. We are evicting people from the wetland or from the forest and we are stepping on people’s toes. And some are colleagues in this House and they are not happy about it. 

This is the truth of the matter; indeed we are going to cancel these titles; the process is on. As colleagues earlier indicated, we also need to engage them – we did not engage. Actually, it is good to engage them, even if we are going to evict them. As a colleague was saying, we should not just go and bump into the community and say, “Leave this place”.

The process is that we are going to engage even those who we want to evict. We need to talk to them, including the manufacturers of plastics – the issue was also raised. Next week, we are also meeting them and engaging them. I want you colleagues, from this, to be firm. If we give double indicators –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the subject matter of this debate is crucial. What I am going to do is to task the two committees responsible for these issues. There is the Committee on Climate Change and the committee that oversees your sector issues of the environment. Please take this report of the minister, plus all these other debates that have been taking place. 

Another motion is coming tomorrow on climate change. Take these all together and generate for us a report, where we can make recommendations to Government as Parliament. (Applause) 
A ministerial statement does not generate a decision for this Parliament. We just debate it and there it goes, without any decision points.

So, I am tasking the two committees. Please pick the piece you have and run with it. Tomorrow, we will be receiving another motion. I hope we will limit the debate on climate change, so that we have a more constructive engagement, pass resolutions that are advisory and make suggestions to Government and they see what they can pick from it. That would be a more well-coordinated process. I cannot even put the question because there is no decision required. So, we have just been brainstorming on this particular matter.

Honourable minister, you will not be able to proceed now because these matters are coming back on this. 

Thank you very much, honourable minister, for a very good report and Members, thank you for a very good debate. (Applause) 

MS ANYWAR: Most obliged.

THE SPEAKER: It was because of the nature of the debate that I gave you an additional hour but I know that there are Members who wanted to debate but have not been able to. When the matter comes back, the ones who have spoken will not speak until those other ones have spoken. (Laughter) I have the list in case you think I am joking – I have my list here.

Honourable members, we will deal with item 4, finish it and see how far we can go with the remaining parts of item 3. Item 4 is just laying of papers, then we go to item 3. Clerk?

LAYING OF PAPERS

REQUEST FOR GOVERNMENT TO BORROW EUROS 96,270,833.84 (EURO NINETY-SIX MILLION, TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY THOUSAND, EIGHT HUNDRED THIRTY-THREE AND EIGHTY-FOUR CENTS), EQUIVALENT TO USD 108,608,903.90 FROM INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE MASINDI-BIISO, KABAALE-KIZIRANFUMBI AND HOHWA-NYAIRONGO-KYARUSESA-BUTOOLE ROAD UPGRADING PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister?

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a proposal to borrow up to €90,278 – 

THE SPEAKER: Is it not 96; is it 90 or 96?

MR HENRY MUSASIZI: It is €96,270,833.84, from Industrial and Commercial Bank of China to finance the Masindi-Biiso, Kabaale-Kiziranfumbi and Hohwa-Nyairongo-Kyarusesa-Butoole Road Upgrading Project.

I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I am already pitying myself, when I have to put a question later on these issues, on how I will pronounce those difficult names. (Laughter) 
Can you lay it on the Table so the records capture it, please?

MR HENRY MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the paper and the accompanying Facility Agreement on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: It is supposed to be a motion and the accompanying documents. Let the records capture that. It stands referred to our Committee on National Economy to expeditiously examine and in case, not more than 45 days and come back to this Parliament and advise us on how to proceed with this matter.

STATEMENT IN RESPONSE TO THE CHARTER FOR FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022 TO 2025/2026

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi?

5.21
MR KIVUMBI MUWANGA (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Opposition response to the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility for Financial Year 2021/2022 to 2025/2026. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Also, because we received the Charter from the Government, we have referred it to our Committee on Budget. They are already looking at it; so, I now also refer this response from the Opposition to our Committee on Budget to examine together and come back to advise us on how to proceed with the matters. 

Can we go back to item 3, Clerk?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATE OF UGANDA’S READINESS TO PARTICIPATE IN THE DUBAI EXPO 2020

5.22
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Mr Francis Mwebesa): Mr Speaker, first of all, I thank you for inviting me. Mr Speaker, I thank you for this job you are holding of leading the House.

Secondly, this is my maiden speech to Parliament. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable minister. The honourable minister is protected. (Laughter)

MR MWEBESA: Colleagues and Members of Parliament, my coming here is on the state of Uganda’s readiness to participate in the Expo 2020 in Dubai. In this case, I am asking my Minister of State to present our readiness to go to Dubai – hon. Harriet Ntabazi.

THE SPEAKER: Is that also your maiden speech?

5.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Ms Harriet Ntabazi): No, no.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. You are a veteran, so honourable minister, please proceed.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my senior minister for giving me this rare opportunity to present in Parliament in his presence.

Mr Speaker, Uganda will join over 190 countries and international organisations to participate in the Expo 2020 Dubai from 01 October 2021 to 31 March 2022 in Dubai, UAE. 

The Republic of Uganda is participating at this Expo on invitation by the organisers, the Government of United Arab Emirates and the Bureau Internationale de Expo, which is in French – Bureau Internationale de Expo. (Laughter)

The theme of the Expo is, “Connecting Minds and Creating a Future”. This theme is divided into three sub-themes; Mobility, Opportunity and Sustainability. Uganda is participating under the sub-theme of opportunity.

This expo has four major objectives. Uganda is participating in the 2020 Dubai Expo to promote trade between Uganda and the greater Middle East market. 

The second objective is to attract investment into projects in the sectors of infrastructure, mining, health, agriculture, real estate, energy, industrialisation and oil and gas.

The third objective is to promote Uganda’s tourism more especially destination Uganda, which has won international recognition as a premium tourist destination in the whole world. 

The last objective is to enhance bilateral relations especially with the organisers - the United Arab Emirates. 

The second reason is, we made a market analysis and the Middle East had a total import bill of US$ 891.4 billion in 2020 and Uganda’s total export to the Middle East in 2020 were US$ 1.9 billion, which translates to 0.23 per cent market share. Our participation in the expo will increase our presence as well as market share. 

The priority products that Uganda shall promote at the expo will include but not limited to coffee, black tea, cocoa, fish and aquaculture products, particularly Nile perch and tilapia. Fruits will include avocado, bananas, mangoes and pineapples. When we go to vegetables and spices, we shall have hot pepper, ginger and cardamom. We shall also look at grains including kidney beans, mung beans and sesame. We shall have dairy products especially milk products and processed food products particularly dried food such as mangoes, pineapples, papaya and jackfruit.

The third issue is, we are looking at the mode of Uganda’s participation in this expo. Mr Speaker – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The microphone is on. Please proceed, honourable minister. 

MS NABATANZI: Thank you. The mode of Uganda’s participation will be a country pavilion. With the support of the Government of United Arab Emirates, Uganda has been offered a 213 square metre two floor pavilion in the opportunity thematic district. This is in line with the expo management of one country, one pavilion policy. The pavilion will have the country’s exhibitions on the ground floor and then offices and conference facilities on the upper floor.

We shall have a national day particularly for Uganda on 3 October 2021. This is the day that the expo management has dedicated to the promotion of Uganda at the expo and it will be held for only one day on 3 October 2021. The day’s events will include the official government to government economy. That event will take the whole morning and then additional country promotion programmes in the afternoon. 

The official ceremony will be restricted to only 50 members of the delegation from both countries, that is the Uganda delegation and the United Arab Emirates’ respectively. Of course, on this function, we are expecting His Excellency the President to be present and we shall observe the SOPs strictly on that day.

The additional country promotion programmes will include business meetings, road shows, flag processions, cultural performances and food tasting experiences. 

The other promotional activities will be the tourism, trade and investment day on 5 October 2021. The tourism, trade and investment promotional activities will also include a tourism, trade and investment forum, business to business and business to government networking events on 5 October 2021.

This activity is going to take six months. The country’s marketing programmes will take six months and the expo will run for this period. We need to seize the opportunity to optimise our participation and visibility at the expo. 

Uganda will ensure that there are constant engagements between the participating countries and Government of Uganda and our private sector respectively.

The six months’ programme will include business delegations, thematic weeks such as the tourism week which will run from 4th to 10th of October 2021, the single solo country’s exhibition participation in the expo thematic event such as the livelihood and agricultural week in February, and then the marketing scope activities and working visits to various businesses across Dubai and other neighbouring markets. 

Finally, I would like to inform you that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is leading the coordination of this expo. We have coordinated with all the members and we are almost ready to move. By the beginning of next week, we shall be preparing to set off so that we go and prepare to welcome our President and the delegations which will be coming from the country. We also need to be there to look and prepare the pavilion to see where every activity will be performed. Thank you. May God bless you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. This is an information statement. Arrangements are being made by this Parliament for the various committees to have the experience of the expo. It may not be the whole expo but there will be committee representation to witness this. It will not be on one day; since it is six months, we will do this in phases for all the committees to have this experience. We are trying to make that arrangement and the communication will reach you very soon.

This statement does not attract a debate, honourable members, even if you wanted to debate. (Laughter)

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE UPDATE OF CONSTRUCTION OF KABALE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT IN HOIMA

THE SPEAKER: This statement might attract a debate but not the other one. Proceed, honourable minister. 

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement issued for the purpose of providing an update on the construction of Kabaale Airport and expansion of Entebbe International Airport, as it was presented to the House by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in accordance with Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Progress of the construction of Kabaale International Airport in Hoima District, Bunyoro subregion

Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Works and Transport and Uganda Civil Aviation Authority (UCAA), is implementing a project for the development of Kabaale International Airport in Hoima District to facilitate construction of the oil refinery and support the development of the oil and gas industry. 

The project is being implemented under a loan facility from the UK Export Finance and only covers the first phase, which involves the construction of essential facilities to handle international cargo flights to facilitate construction of the oil refinery and support the development of the oil and gas industry. In the medium to long-term, the airport is envisaged to undergo further development to function as Uganda’s second international airport - an alternative to Entebbe International Airport - servicing both cargo and passenger traffic.

Contract details

Mr Speaker, I would like to appraise the House on the actors in this project and details of the contract as follows: 

Contractor: SBC (UGANDA) Ltd. 

Consultant: STUDI International in joint venture with STUP Consultant PVT Ltd in association with MBW Consulting Ltd.

Contract price: Total construction price is €264,777,144.48 Employer’s engineer/supervision: €4,000,000. 
Finance administration fees: €5,409,940 (1.75 per cent of total loan facility). 
UKEF finance charges: €35,203,674.65 (13.13 per cent of 85 per cent of total loan facility). 
Facility agent fees: €409,500. 
Grand total contract price: €309,100,259.49

Contract period 

(i) 	Date of contract signing: 5 May 2016.
(ii) 	Date of commencement: 18 April 2018
(iii) 	Substantial completion: 1,524 days.
(iv) Date of substantial completion: 19 June 2022.
(v) 	Commissioning: 153 days.
(vi) 	Operational training: 90 days.
(vii) Total time for completion: 1,767 days.
(viii) Expected Completion Date: 17 February 2023

We also have an independent consultant to monitor compliance with environmental and social safeguards, that is, M/s RINA International. 

Scope of work

Kabaale International Airport was designed to support the operation of large cargo and passenger aircrafts, with the following scope of work:

    i) Runway of 3,500m in length and 45m in width with 2-shoulders of 15m each, 
    ii) Parking apron of 81,500m2, 
    iii) Taxiway of 190m length, 
    iv) Cargo terminal of 3,240m2, 
    v) Rescue and firefighting facility, 
    vi) Airfield ground -

THE SPEAKER: Hold on, honourable minister. Let the lights come back. Okay, proceed. 

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: 

    • Airfield ground lighting system, 
    • Navigational aids system, a mobile control tower, and 
    • Internal roads and parking facilities.

Other key aspects of the project include:
    • Ground support equipment area of 5,000m.

THE SPEAKER: Is that meters squared? 

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Meters squared.

THE SPEAKER: Why are you not putting it on record?

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: 

    i) Ground support equipment area of 5,000m2
    ii) Landside road system and parking,  
    iii) Employee housing; six three-bedroom units for airport management staff and 15 two-bedroom units for airport operations staff and short-term specialists, and 
    iv) Road diversion.

Physical and financial performance

Mr Speaker, on the progress of physical works at Kabaale Airport project, I would like the House to note that;

    (i) The construction works commenced on 18 April 2018 and the overall physical progress of works by the end of July, 2021 was about 60.02 per cent with 67.9 per cent of the contract time elapsed. 

    (ii) The cumulative financial progress as at end of July 2021 was at 60 per cent with €187,360,871.

Benefits of the project

Mr Speaker, the anticipated benefits that will accrue once this project is realised include the following; 

    i)  Support for oil and gas extraction.
    ii)  Uganda will have a second international airport.
    iii) Capability to handle traffic during emergencies at Entebbe International Airport.
    iv)  Promotion of tourism and associated support economic activities. 
    v) Promotion of export agriculture and horticulture products.
    vi) Job creation at regional level. 
    vii) Promotion of the hospitality and entertainment industry.

Challenges to the project

Mr Speaker, I would like to share some of the major challenges that have impeded the progress of the project. They are; 

(i) 	The COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on the progress of the project, disrupting the procurement plan and supply chain of inputs, personnel and equipment. This is likely to affect the project budget and completion date.

    (iii) Inclement weather conditions in some months of the year.

    (iv) Inadequate funds to complete the construction works and also pay for supervision services (about €77 million). The ministry is having discussions with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on this matter. 

(iv) 	Inadequate land allocated to the airport of 3.19km2 did not consider future expansion requirements for an international airport. The total land requirement is 5.14km2 and additional land is required for construction of the passenger terminal building, expansion of the cargo terminal building, parallel taxiway, apron for general aviation aircrafts, cold storage and many others. 

The ministry has requested the Uganda National Oil Company to allocate additional land to the airport project and a response is awaited. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, since you have your statement joined, proceed with the next bit of the statement on Entebbe. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE PROGRESS OF THE UPGRADE AND EXPANSION OF ENTEBBE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority, is implementing a project for the upgrade and expansion of Entebbe International Airport in order to provide adequate infrastructure and facilities to meet the growing air traffic demand and promote service excellence. 

The project is being implemented under a loan facility from the EXIM Bank of China and only covers the first phase. The second phase of the project will be implemented in the medium term

Contract details 

Mr Speaker, I would like to appraise the House on the details of the contract for this flagship project; 

Contractor: China Construction Communications Company (CCCC) 
Consultant: Dar Al-Handasah
Contract price: USD $200,000,000.00 
Contract Period 
Commencement date: 10 May 2016 
Original contract period: 1,825 days 
Original completion date: 9 May 2021 
Extended contract period: 575 days 
Revised completion date: 5 December 2022

Scope of works and physical progress 

The scope of work to be done under the project for the upgrade and expansion of Entebbe International Airport is as follows: 

    i. Construction of the new cargo centre with a capacity of 100,000 metric tonnes. 
    ii. Construction of the new passenger terminal building.
    iii. Strengthening of runway 12/30 and 17/35 and associated taxiways. 
    iv. Strengthening and expansion of Apron 1 and 4 and Rehabilitation of Apron 2wo. 
    v. Expansion of Taxiway A 
    vi. Water supply system, fire and associated facilities.

Physical and financial performance 

The overall progress of physical works at Entebbe International Airport by the end of July, 2021 was 75.1 per cent, with construction works on the new cargo centre at 90 per cent; runway 12/30 and 17/35 at 100 per cent; apron 1 at 85 per cent; apron 2 and 4 at 99 per cent. 

The cumulative financial progress by end of July 2021 was at 64.2 per cent with USD $128,440 so far paid to the contractor. Construction works for the new passenger terminal have not commenced yet and are awaiting the shifting of cargo operations to the new cargo centre upon completion.

Challenges to the project 

I would like to highlight some of the major challenges that have impeded the progress of this project.  

    i) The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted on the progress of the project. The project has registered very low progress during this period due to restrictions on deployment of personnel, including foreign expert labour as well as procurement of materials from China and elsewhere. 

    ii) We have two contractors working in the same project area. Tristar Limited is constructing a fuel line along Cargo Apron and Apron 1, while CCCC is also working in the same area. The construction works by Tristar at the old Apron 1 fuel line have caused considerable delays for CCCC to complete rehabilitation works on Apron 1. Tristar has been tasked to accelerate works on the fuel line to enable CCCC to complete rehabilitation works on Apron 1. 

    iii) Changes required by end-users and requirements for the European Union on the standards and certification at the new cargo building have resulted into additional works and affected completion date for operationalisation of the new cargo building. This has delayed shifting of operations of the old cargo building to give space for the construction of the new Passenger Terminal Building.

    iv) We are currently focusing on completion of outstanding works on the new cargo centre to enable shifting of cargo operations and commencement of works on the new passenger terminal.

    v) Inadequate funds to meet cost overruns due to price escalations and Contingency items by the Government of Uganda and the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority. The contractor has pending claims arising from additional works executed outside the scope. The payment for such claims and activities is a challenge because UCAA's revenue collections were significantly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. All of us are aware of this. 

As I conclude this statement is primarily to appraise the House on the progress of the two airport projects being implemented by the Government and to put this matter officially on record and in the public domain. 

However, Mr Speaker, some of the challenges that I have highlighted will be tabled before the House at an appropriate time, purposely, to seek your support and approval. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister for this information paper. Are there any comments? It should strictly be points of clarification not debate.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the honourable minister pertains to Kabaale International Airport in Hoima. You have said that the delay in the construction is at 60 per cent and the completion date may not be realised because of the COVID-19 pandemic and one would be persuaded to believe in that. 

However, I expected you to also include the other challenge, whereby the road that is supposed to enable easy access of construction materials has not been constructed up to now because of speculators that have acquired land along that road. They have put up impressive infrastructural developments; even erecting houses built out of very cheap material but glitter on the outside. All this is intended to make a killing. 

Honourable minister, the clarification I seek is, why haven’t you included that outstanding challenge, knowing very well that most of the speculators are officials in your ministry? Finger pointing is – and you are laughing and indeed conceding. Could you please come out clearly and allow enough sunshine into these challenges that you have come out? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for updating the House on the construction of the International Airport at Kabaale and Entebbe. Honourable minister, in your statement, you expressed fear for lack of land. You have just stated that you have only 3.19 square kilometres for the International Airport in Kabale and that you lack about five square kilometres. 

My position is that we realised that prospective buyers went to that area and bought chunks of land around. We advise that you clear the issue of land before you start the work. The Government may start the work and inject huge amounts of money but the landowners may disorganise such Government activities. 

Therefore, work as a ministry to ensure you acquire the five square kilometres of land needed for the construction of the airport at Kabaale.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, work started many years ago at Entebbe International Airport and the minister stated that up to date, they have not reached up to 100 per cent. We are expressing some fear; looking at the amount of money the Government has injected in the expansion of Entebbe International Airport, especially now that the timeframe has already lapsed. How will the ministry handle this together with the constructor? You said you have two construction companies at the site; we need serious clarification on that. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, really – clarification, yes, hon. Angura. 

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I would like to find out from the minister is, we have been having persistent complaints from the project affected persons. I am aware they were resettled at the upper side but they continue to raise concern that their full resettlement packages have not fully been sorted out and that is in relation to the Kabale International Airport. Can you just clarify that that has been resolved?    

Furthermore, in relation to the five square kilometres of land to be acquired, isn’t this again extending to where those people have been resettled? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister of Works and Transport, and the entire Government because the work being done really gives us hope. 

However, I am challenged when I see the construction going on, taxpayers’ money is being spent, we are taking loans, which must be paid by Ugandans and we are not preparing our people to use those airports. The traffic we are expecting should be to our benefits as Ugandans. The people in Hoima and the people in Kampala should be prepared to export something using those airports.

Now, I zeroed down to education; very many countries are benefiting from education. They export education: students come in and they take knowledge and the country will be benefiting. That is a service, which Uganda has not taken seriously.

Therefore, with the Prime Minister in the House, it is very important to have that in mind to make sure the Ministry of Education and Sports together with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and other ministries, which can prepare Ugandans to use those airports, are really ready such that in future, we benefit from those airports, which have been constructed and expanded. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am well aware - and the minister has alluded to this - that the renovation of Entebbe International Airport is being funded by a loan, which was approved by this House. 

Again, on the challenges down on the last page, he is informing us that the constructor has pending claims based on poor collections by the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority. I wonder when we began banking on local collections as a source of funding. I wish you could refer to your report. Those collections were significantly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, implying that we are again mixing local collections moreover, from a sector, which has not deposited money to the Consolidated Fund. Maybe, we need clarification on that. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, honourable and then I come to Hoima; we will finish. Do not worry. Keep it brief; if person takes long, I will stop there.

MR SEKABIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. 

Last week, we were in the same area. Unfortunately, access roads to the airport have not been constructed because people from Kampala went and bought all the land surrounding the construction area. They have turned down the offers from the Government valuer of Shs 50 million. Furthermore, while the access roads are pre-financed, there is no construction on going yet the interest is running.

I want to put the minister to notice that there is no work in terms of construction at the site for the airport. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS ASINANSI NYAKATO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We also expected the minister to give the status report on the local content matter, whereby most of the casual workers are being imported to do the smallest work, which the locals could do. 

We also expected the minister in his statement to update us on the status of the environmental degradation in the area. Many resources are being depleted but there is no strategy to replace those resources. For instance, the forest reserves and wetlands around the area have been depleted. There are also some locals whose land has been taken for the construction of the airport but they have not been compensated. I have been coming to your office but there is nothing taking place.

Minister, we beg that the people of Bunyoro be updated, especially the people from Kabale about their compensation for their land, where they are constructing the airport. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS NAMUGGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, we do appreciate the delays and the causes but I would like you to inform the House on the cost implication, in regard to the original contract price versus the final contract price as far as delays are concerned. 

Similarly, what type of contract did we sign? You told us that there are certificates for payment that have been delayed. What is the implication of those delays to the Government in terms of the cost? Thank you.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My clarification is very simple but it is a point of concern. Originally, in geography we all learn that – 

THE SPEAKER: What clarification do you seek, honourable? 

MS BETTY AOL: We all learnt that Entebbe Airport was the biggest airport in Uganda followed by Gulu Airfield. It was to be upgraded at one time but it all died down. What can you tell us about Gulu Airfield? I am always forced to think that it is an airport not airfield. Can you say something, because you said it clearly that Kabaale in Masindi-Hoima is going to be the second international airport. How about Gulu?

MR SEBAMALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We thank the minister for his statement. I am a member of the physical infrastructure committee that was in Hoima last week. 

We realised that one of the roads that has just been brought for financing is one of those that are being pre-financed by that project. The contractor has done their part because they were supposed to start on the works. 

After starting on the works, we were supposed to pay them after one year. The year has elapsed but our loan has not yet materialised because Parliament had not yet received the document. Now interest is rising and all this cost is going to be on the Ugandan because we have been slow in presenting that loan to Parliament. 

I would like the minister to clarify to Parliament how urgently he needs this money such that the construction can continue as fast as possible. 

MR AOGON: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Can the minister tell us exactly what caused the delays at Entebbe? The project delayed for over a year and a half. Yes, you talk about the personnel and the equipment which was supposed to come from abroad, but I am aware that this project started way back in 2016. By then COVID-19 was not yet an issue; so what happened? You need to give us a clear reason. 

Secondly, on knowledge transfer; I am excited to see CCCC here. How I wish one of the Cs was for a Ugandan. But all the Cs are for China. What are you doing about knowledge transfer? Until when are we going to have all these contracts done by other countries’ citizens and not Ugandans? I need that cleared. 

Thirdly, contingency; you talked about the need for a contingency yet in every planning, you always bring figures here that include a figure for contingency. What happened to the existing contingency? 

Mr Speaker, I am disturbed because most often, we give money here in terms of loans for these projects – 

THE SPEAKER: Now you are debating.

MR AOGON: Now I am talking (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: We agreed on clarification points. 

MR AOGON: Okay. The last clarification. Honourable minister, can you tell us what went wrong with the contingency that was already there in the figures that we gave you for you to ask for another one? 

MR JOHN OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to say something. I have been keenly listening to the minister’s statement, especially on the issue of expansion of Entebbe International Airport. 

One of the challenges he mentions was the issue of COVID-19 where they were not able to deploy the foreign expatriates to come and execute their duty. At the same time, to also prepare some of the materials necessary. 

Given the situation at hand now, COVID-19 is still with us. I want to find out; when do we expect the expatriates to be deployed to speed up the process of the development at the international airport?

Secondly, I would like the minister to give us clear information on when and how are we expecting those materials which are very key and necessary for the expansion of the airport to be brought in place? I beg to submit. 

MR OTAALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the honourable minister is in regard to Kabaale International Airport which he said is 60 per cent complete. 

The project was started in April 2018 and by early 2019, we had the outbreak of COVID-19. The minister says that during the COVID-19 outbreak, there has not been any significant progress in the works. I am wondering how they managed to execute 60 per cent of the works within just a few months. Are we getting quality and value for money? How did you run this project in just seven months? 

THE SPEAKER: No, COVID-19 was early 2020, not early 2019. 

MR OTAALA: Thank you for that clarification. 

THE SPEAKER: I am in charge of the House so there are things I can correct.

MR TEIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification on the independent consultant to monitor compliance with the environment and social safeguards. I am wondering why we had to employ an independent consultant yet we have a full ministry and agencies in charge of environment and related matters. 

MR SIRAJI EZAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Work at Entebbe International Airport has stagnated. We are servicing this work with money borrowed as a loan. 

I wanted to know from the minister whether the money we had already borrowed will be enough to complete the project or will he also require to come to us again to ask for some money? 

MR CHARLES MATOVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister presented the timelines on when the contracts were signed but did not capture the timelines on when the contract was executed by Tri-Star that brought about the conflict. 

Would the minister try to indicate whether these delays would not surface again since he has not indicated when both contracts were executed? Thank you.

MR MPINDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is whether this time they have considered issues of accessibility. Right now, the airport is not accessible to persons with disability. 

I was embarrassed some three months ago when I had a delegation from the USA. 15 of them were using wheelchairs and they had to go one by one in the lift. And to access the other side, they had to be lifted on those old stairs of the airport. 

I do not know whether they have considered issues of accessibility. If they have considered them, are they following the accessibility standard book that provides for measurements of good accessibility standards? 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I will have the Members from Luweero and Burahya. Those Members who are rising after the event, we are now closed. Where is the Member for Burahya? Has he gone? Let us start with the Member from Luweero then I come to you. That is the last. Honourable minister, group the responses.
 
MS NABUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need clarification from the minister. Usually, when you are coming up with a construction project, you will have a plan, you have architects, physical planners and plans approved. That goes with those who live within proximity; you must know if they have been paid to move.

I am wondering that how come at this point, the question is arising that there are no access roads? You need to actually brief this Parliament how you proceeded to approve the plans without having access roads because that is very strange. Thank you.

MR KAGWERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is very simple. About a decade ago, the Kasese International Airport was much talked about, even before Kabaale came on board. Honourable minister, what has happened? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Oil. (Laughter) Honourable minister, please group your responses. (Laughter) Oil happened in Hoima and Kabaale.

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I see the questions are very many.

THE SPEAKER: Group them; you have a few minutes to respond.

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: I have answers for some of them. For some of them, I will go back and consult. For others, I will require Members to visit these premises and see. When some of us are flying out of this country, we just walk out through Entebbe Airport and then come back. 

However, the Rt Hon. Speaker has guided us that it is our role, as Members of Parliament, to supervise some of these projects. If you took two minutes and visited, some of these questions would not be coming on the Floor of Parliament. (Laughter)

I will start –(Interruption)

MS NAMUGGA: Mr Speaker, thank you. Honourable minister, I am very aware that you know that the honourable members of Parliament are aware of their responsibilities in the 11th Parliament. 

Are you really in order to remind us on how we are supposed to move from Ssembabule, pass through Entebbe and come here? Are you in order, honourable minister?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, from the contract, the one of Entebbe started in 2018. The one of Kabaale started in 2016. What the honourable minister is saying is that by this time, as Members of Parliament, there are questions we should not be asking because we should have been there. (Applause) We should have visited.

I do not think the minister is out of order because as Members of Parliament, from the time we started this term, committees should have interested themselves and briefed this House saying, we have been there; we have seen this. (Applause) 

These are areas where Government of Uganda is sinking a lot of money. We are borrowing money which will keep our people paying for many years so we should be interested. That is all the minister is saying so I cannot rule him out of order.

Please proceed, honourable minister.

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Someone asked –

THE SPEAKER: No, a Member of Parliament, not someone. (Laughter)

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: I am sorry. (Laughter) You know, these questions are direct -

THE SPEAKER: That is why I said that group them; they are related.

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: They can confuse one yet they are simple. A Member asked why the plan was approved without access roads. I do not want to answer something I am not sure of. The ministry must move to confirm the information they are giving us that there are no access roads. They must be there but you need the ones which are a bit standardised more than the ones which are there.

However, I commit that we shall move there and get more of this information then we shall report back to you –(Interruption)

DR BATUWA: Mr Speaker, while I was listening to the honourable minister in silence, I am convinced that he is unable to answer most of the questions. He needs the expertise and competence of some of the members in his ministry.

The procedural matter is, are we safe when we keep looking at him while he is holding words and not revealing his ineffectiveness in answering some of these questions? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I am unable to decipher any point of procedure there but the honourable member has a good time accessing the microphone. (Laughter) Honourable minister, if you need more time, say so please.

MR FRED BYAMUKAMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg that I answer about four issues then I will make an additional statement on the rest and we shall leave the Floor of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: No, proceed. (Applause) Why don’t you deal with those same issues when you bring the additional statement because you are going to end up with procedure, order and other information and clarification?

Honourable members, let the honourable minister come back with responses to those matters. (Applause) 
House is adjourned to tomorrow, 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.21 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 23 September 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 

