Tuesday, 28 September 2010

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House,
Kampala.

PRAYERS

 (The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you in a particular way; I want to hail hon. Okello-Okello and a close colleague, and hon. Ben Wacha for being dedicated Members of Parliament. (Laughter) You are exemplary. Thank you for coming.

As I told you before, your mandate expires in May and the public expects you to be in Parliament working. Hon. Lukwago, you are welcome - better late than never - and so is the member for Mukono North; you are welcome.

2.46
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to inform this House that two of my constituents, one Mr Simpson Mpirirwe, a businessman and also a prominent political figure in our area; and Mr Didas Ndamire who works with Voice of Kigezi as an accountant, were arrested on Sunday, the 19th of September at Kyanika border in Kisoro District. They were arrested by Rwanda security agents under suspicious circumstances. 

Since then, the families of the two have not been informed about their whereabouts and why they were arrested. As their Member of Parliament, I have tried, through our ambassador in Rwanda, to find out why they were arrested or where they are being kept but up to now, the Rwanda Government is hesitant to release any information. 

Mr Speaker, as you know the people of Kabale lost their property; they sacrificed a lot for the liberation war that liberated the Rwandan Government from 1990 to 1994, and we consider Rwanda as our sister country. We are wondering why a sister country can arrest citizens of Uganda without regard to the due process of the law. 

I want to inform the House about this but also request the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to exert diplomatic pressure on the Rwandan Government to explain why these people were arrested, where they are being kept and why they have not been taken to court if they committed any crime. I also request you to request them to release them in line with international law and the protocols signed by the two countries. 

In future, I think it is important that when countries in East Africa arrest citizens of other countries, they inform the respective countries so that we do not create suspicion that can lead to confusion. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.49
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have taken note of the issues raised by hon. Bahati regarding the arrest of two people from his constituency and the fact that a neighbouring country is likely to be involved. I will take this up with the appropriate organs of Government. Thank you.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE CAPITAL MARKETS AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “the Capital Markets Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the first time. Here with me is the Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MS NANKABIRWA: I have the Certificate of Financial Implications attached.  

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR OLDER PERSONS BILL, 2010

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “the National Council for Older Persons Bill, 2010” be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you have the necessary secondment? Okay, seconded.

DR OTAALA: Mr Speaker, the Certificate of Financial Implications has already been forwarded to the clerks and so I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for scrutiny and they will report to the House.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR DISABILITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, seconded. 

DR OTAALA: Mr Speaker, I have the Certificate of Financial Implications available and I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER SECTION 186(1) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT PROVIDING FOR THE EXTENSION OF THE TERM OF OFFICE OF INTERIM DISTRICT COUNCILS

THE SPEAKER: What is the position? Did the general debate end?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Debate on this motion was ended by this House and what is remaining is taking a decision. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, give us some time. Next item!

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT STOPPING THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE FROM SETTING UP A CIVIL SERVICE COLLEGE

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the mover. 

MR STEPHEN MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I was called out to consult on this item for two reasons: my seconder from the other side seems to still be involved and then also the Minister of Public Service who requested last time that we give him two days to allow him bring a written report is not in the House. Therefore, we request that the matter be deferred.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Because of pressure on the budget process, I would rather we go on to No. 7.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “the Finance (Amendment) Bill”, be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, seconded. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, when the Bill was tabled here and it was read for the first time, it was committed to the relevant committee and we were requesting majorly for two amendments.

We wanted to consider the announcement, which the minister made on the income tax for motorcycles, which was reduced from Shs 210,000 to Shs 130,000. This amendment was considered to be very relevant and therefore we decided to bring the issue to Parliament so that we clear it.

The second one was also very relevant. It concerns the issue of the polythene bags which were banned. We thought that we should also bring the amendment into the Finance Act which did not have the provision so that we can properly consider it.

So, these are the only provisions which we wanted to consider. That is all.

THE SPEAKER: Is it the Finance Bill, 2010 or the Finance (Amendment) Bill? I see the memorandum says, “An Act to amend the Finance Act, 2006.” I think the proper title should be the Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2010 because when you say Finance Bill, it seems like it is not connected with the earlier Finance Bill. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I corrected it as I was reading because what I was reading was “Finance Act, 2010”; I realised that there was a typing error. So, I corrected it as I was submitting

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, it is Finance (Amendment) Bill?

MS NANKABIRWA: Yes Sir, because we are amending the Act.

THE SPEAKER: It is okay. Committee chairperson, I expect a report from the committee. Is there a report from the committee? Is there any member from that committee who can assist us ascertain the position? 

MS ROSE AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As far as I am concerned, I know the reports are ready but maybe they are still photocopying. Maybe it is the reason he has not come here, but yes we signed the reports this morning so the reports are ready. I just do not understand why the chairman is not here.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members of this committee, you should know that these are very important Bills to support the budget. We have also received the Appropriation Bill. I hope it has been processed or it is being processed because we would love to see that we complete this process this week. What is the position?

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I would request to move out and try to look for him as we continue with other business on the Order Paper. 

THE SPEAKER: No, the position I have is that this No. 7 belongs to that committee, and No. 8 and No. 9 I think also belong to that committee as well. So, what do I do? I think let us deal with other business other than the Bills as the members of the committee sort out their problem.

We have two loans to request for - No.1 on notice of business to follow. So let us deal with that as the committee sorts out its affairs. So, the Order Paper is altered so that we deal with the business which is ready and whose committees are here. So, we bring up notice of business to follow and we deal with it as we wait for the chairperson of the committee.

REQUEST FOR GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 33,500,000 (US $52 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT (IFAD) FOR FINANCING PHASE 2 OF THE VEGETABLE OIL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

3.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. We have copies of the report which should be circulated. Some copies had been given out on Thursday but more can be circulated now. 

On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I would like to present the committee report on the request by government to borrow Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 33.5 million, equivalent to US$52 million, from the International Fund for Agricultural Development for financing phase 2 of the Vegetable Oil Development Project, commonly known as Kalangala Palm Oil Project.

This request was brought to Parliament as per Article 159 of the Constitution and Rule 152(2) (b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. The committee now begs to report. I will try to summarise.

The committee held meetings with:
1.	 The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  
2. 	The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the end-user. 
3. 	We went to the field with some members of the sessional committees on agriculture, animal industry and fisheries and that of natural resources.
4. 	Technical staff from the Vegetable Oil Development Project.
5. 	The management of BIDCO (U) Ltd at Jinja and Kalangala.
6. 	The management of Oil Palm (U) Ltd; and
7. 	Kalangala Oil Palm Growers Association staff.

The committee further studied and made reference to the following documents:
a) 	The Project Design Report – Volume 1 and Volume 2
b) 	The Draft Project Implementation Plan
c) 	The Loan Financing Agreement; and
d) 	The minister’s brief on the loan request, which copies you must have received when it was brought on the Floor; more copies are going to be brought from the printer.

I now beg to lay on the Table the appraisal plan 1 and 2, the design report and the minutes.

The Vegetable Oil Project was conceived in the mid-1990s to reduce Uganda’s heavy reliance on imported vegetable oil despite the good potential for domestic production and to address the low intake of vegetable oil by the population of Uganda. The project is an important thrust in the government of Uganda’s effort to modernise and commercialise agriculture by supporting vegetable oil production, agro-processing and marketing.

The project is highly innovative and introduced a new crop and a new form of public-private partnership in Uganda’s oil palm sub-sector. It has addressed rural poverty by involving the smallholder farmers in crop production and small scale processing; improving the nutrition of the population through increased vegetable oil intake, and addressing food security through the growing of alternative cash crops for income generation.

The project also supported the components of the Vegetable Oil Development Fund in traditional oil seeds and essential development, institutional support and oil palm development. The traditional oil seed component has to-date seen a substantial increase in the area planted for the traditional oil seeds, principally sunflower, with 80 percent of the production coming from Lira and neighbouring districts in the North.

There is also increased availability of crushing seeds which had in turn attracted investors in oil seed milling and refining. About 90,000 rural households have seen their cash income increase due to sunflower production. The institutional support component supported research and development and the application of quality standards, plus providing funding to a variety of stakeholder organisations, local governments, farmer organisations and project co-ordination for promotion of oil crops. I can now move to page 4. 

The Project Overview

The Vegetable Oil Development Project Phase II is a follow-on project to the Vegetable Oil Development Project 1. It is an eight-year project, planned to be effective by 2011. The current project has a closing date of 30 June 2012. The plan is to have a seamless transition between projects 1 and 2. The second project builds upon the work of its predecessor project, under which IFAD financed smallholder oil palm development and extension for smallholder oil seed farmers.

This project has now recorded six visits from parliamentary committees. When some of us visited at the inception, it was at the planting season but now they are on production.

The Project Objective

The overall goal is to contribute to sustainable poverty reduction in the project areas of Kalangala, Buvuma Island, Mukono, Buikwe, Lira, Apac, Dokolo, Katakwi, Oyam, Masindi, Serere, Soroti, Kaberamaido, Amuria, Amolatar, Mbale, Bududa, Budaka, Bukedea, Bukwo, Kapchorwa, Kamuli, Kumi, Manafwa, Pallisa, Sironko, Bugiri, Busia, Tororo, Butaleja, Iganga, Jinja, Namutumba, Kaliro, Gulu, Kitgum, Amuru, Adjumani, Pader, Arua, Koboko, Maracha, Moyo, Nebbi, Nyadri, Terego and Yumbe.

The Vegetable Oil project is bigger than just the Palm Oil project.

Project Components

The Vegetable Oil Development Project Phase II will have three components, namely:

1. 	Oil palm development component of SDR 16.817 million, equivalent to US$26.1 million. It is planned to benefit about 3,000 smallholder households and will comprise the following sub-components:

a) 	Consolidation and expansion of oil palm in Kalangala District on Bugala Island and nearby or outlying islands of Bunyama, Bubembe, Funje and Bukasa. This will be through:
i) 	Development of an additional 2,000 hectares of smallholder plantations thus bringing the smallholder total to 4,700 hectares;
ii) 	Extension of ferry transport to Bunyama, Bubembe, Funje and Bukasa;
iii) 	Measures to ensure the sustainability of Kalangala Oil Palm Growers Trust – which actually I must report is now taking shape; and
	iv) 	Environmental mitigation and monitoring including gender and HIV/AIDS mainstreaming.

b) 	Oil palm development on Buvuma Island in Mukono District and around lake areas on the mainland. This will:

i) 	Replicate the Bugala Island nucleus estate small-holder model of 10,000 hectares, that is 3,500 hectares for smallholder farmers and 6500 hectares for nucleus estate.
ii) 	To upgrade ferry services to Buvuma Island to facilitate project activities.
iii)	Set up and operationalise Buvuma Oil Palm Growers Trust.
iv) 	Environmental assessment and mitigation measures to protect the environment.

The private sector, I must add, will contribute US $70 million for establishing the palm oil nucleus estate in Buvuma. This is because this money is intended to go to our farmers and not the investor; the investor has his own money. I am saying this because some of us have got impression that some of us had before we went to the field. I would like to emphasize the fact that we are only adding capacity to our farmers to be able to run the smallholder and out growers’ scheme.

Identification of New Areas for Oil Palm Development

There is going to be continued monitoring and assessing of the performance of oil palm trials in the different areas with a view of determining other areas that are suitable for palm oil development in the country in an effort to fulfil the Government of Uganda BIDCO agreement. Trials have been set up in the districts of Buvuma, Kibaale, Kabarole, Hoima, Masindi, Bundibugyo, Bugiri, Jinja, Iganga, and Masaka. These are the districts that have a suitable climate for this project.

2. 	The second component is the Oil Seed Development component, which will consume SDR 21.1778 million, which is equivalent to US $18.9 million.

The oil seed development will involve commercialising oil seed production and will centre around four upcoming oil seed hubs. The hub approach is to deepen the commercialisation approach to oil seed development. Crops of emphasis will be sunflower, soya beans, groundnuts and simsim.

The oil seed component plans to benefit a total of about 137,000 households. This component will have a sub component of seed production, extension for farmers’ groups and other value chain activities –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Chairman, are you intending to read this report in full? I am asking this because what we expected was for you to tell us whether the terms are reasonable or not. That is what we want.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. With that I straightaway go to – I hope members can read for themselves the project costs and financing, as indicated at page 10. Otherwise, as you have seen, the most important thing is that most of this money is intended to help farmers. There is a table at page 11 summarising the cost component.

The loan terms, as per the financing agreement, are indicated at page 11 and we already have the figure as US $52 million. The loan maturity period is 40 years including 10 years of grace. The service charge, as usual for concessional facilities, is 0.75 percent on disbursed and outstanding amounts. Clearly, this is a concessional facility from IFAD. The conditions are indicated at pages 11 and 12.

On sustainability, at the end of the project farmers will have learnt modern production technologies and improved their business skills. They will also have established direct linkages with the processors and financial institutions. The sustainability will be based on the knowledge that the farmers will have gained and the network of commercial relations which will have been established.

Observations and Recommendations

a) 	The committee observed that the long term benefits to the economy of Uganda as a result of this project will be massive. The economy will save in excess of US$ 60 million, which is approximately Shs 120 billion, annually. This is the money that is now used to import crude edible oil from abroad. Uganda is still importing 60 to 70 percent of its requirements. 

	Uganda may also become a net exporter of refined palm oil. The economy will also benefit from the transfer of technology and skills. The government is also earning substantial tax revenue from the oil sub-sector; BIDCO (U) Ltd is now among the top tax revenue contributors to the country’s revenue. In the financial year 2009/2010, it contributed close to Shs 28 billion.

	I would like to add that if such nucleus projects could be replicated in other parts of the country, it would be a very big attempt for prosperity for all in the fight against poverty.

b) 	The committee observed that the Vegetable Oil Development Project 2 will benefit a total of 139,000 households, representing close to one million people directly from the project, of which about 3000 households will benefit from investments in oil palm and about 136,000 households will benefit from growing oil seed crops. The consumers are also expected to benefit from increased access to edible oil and fats and soap products at affordable prices.

c) 	The committee also observed that the Vegetable Oil Development Project is a good project designed to provide immense social benefits to the residents of Kalangala. Positive effects of stimulating the local economy are already emerging. The nucleus estate is already providing employment to more than 2000 workers while BIDCO Oil Palm Refinery is providing employment to over 7000 workers.

	The development plan of this project is tailored toward providing a wide range of social benefits - schools, medical centres, electricity and so on - to the local community, some of which are already being implemented; for example, the construction and maintenance of roads, the set up of a clinic and housing for employees.

d) 	Benefits of the private sector partnership: The committee observed that the Vegetable Oil Development Project has demonstrated that this approach can bring together a large corporate operator and smallholders, if clear mechanisms to ensure equity have been put in place.

	The committee, therefore, recommends the establishment of a regulatory framework for public-private partnership by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This would be cost effective in spearheading their formation in other sectors in order to promote more equitable private sector economic led growth in the country.

e) 	The Government of Uganda BIDCO agreement developed land of which 26,500 hectares will be for nucleus estate and 13,500 for the smallholders. However, the project is being affected by the Government’s slow pace in initiating land purchases for providing plantable land under leasehold for the development of the palm oil nucleus estate. As a result, the acquired land for palm oil development for nucleus estate has remained below target. More so the smallholders and out growers schemes are affected by the land tenure system where the majority households are squatters.

The committee recommends that Government accelerates the process of land identification and holds detailed discussions with the private investor about how and where the remaining land for development can be achieved. Moreso, avenues of bringing more smallholders on board in the oil palm project areas, and application for the utilisation of grasslands on the island for oil palm growing should be explored by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in order to relieve the pressure on Government.

We would like to report to Parliament that the project is increasingly becoming popular to the population and I do not think all the pressure should remain on Government. Using persuasion, many neighbours within this area, both on the mainland and island, could actually participate by joining the smallholders in the out-grower arrangement.

(f) 	There was poor marketing of the Vegetable Oil Development Project that resulted into earlier negative publicity about the project, especially by the environmentalists, and if I can add, those who had not been informed on the media side.

The committee recommends that Government ensures that it collaborates with key players in order to lay fertile ground for successful implementation of the project, as this enhances the acceptance of the project at the community level, and the use of targeted communications materials on how project implementation and various community protection measures should be explored.

In conclusion, the committee has noted Government’s effort to increase domestic vegetable oil production, the intention is to address rural poverty through involvement of smallholder farmers in oil crop production and cottage processing; improve the health of the population through increased vegetable oil intake as per the World Health Organisation requirements in the villages, and address food security through the provision of alternative crops for income generation. 

The project will expand production of oil bearing crops in Uganda, thus diversifying the economy with particular emphasis on the participation of smallholder farmers in partnership with organised private processors.

Furthermore, the committee noted that the project is consistent with the National Development Plan, which is now the guiding economic and social development framework for the whole country.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends that this House approves the government request to borrow SDR 33.3 million equivalent to US$ 52 million equivalent to Shs 108 billion as per today’s exchange rate from the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) for financing Phase II of the Vegetable Oil Development Project. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.
 
3.27
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report and I am now standing here to support borrowing of this money for the second phase. But before I do so, I want to thank the Ministry of Agriculture and the managers of the project for the way they have handled the first phase. They have been very participatory and have involved the farmers at all stages unlike many other projects in this country. That is why people in Kalangala have received this project with goodwill and that is why it has really succeeded.

I would like to request you to support this motion to borrow this money for Phase II because there are still many out-growers and small-scale farmers who are still planting, but as you are all aware, palm oil is a very difficult crop to grow. It requires a lot of operational costs, which an ordinary farmer cannot afford on his own. So, it is necessary for these farmers to be given loans. Therefore, this loan will be extended to the farmers to enable them grow more crops and extend the acreage.

It is also important to ensure that the number of mills and factories that have been put in place are able to process to their full capacity because right now, the factory in Masese and the mill in Kalangala are processing below their capacity. So, we must exploit the potential of these mills and factories and this loan will go a long way in achieving this.

However, I would like to give some caution to the people who are going to implement this phase because we have experienced some hindrances in putting up plantations in Kalangala. One, I request that as Phase II is being implemented, the managers should ensure that the inputs that are supposed to be given to farmers are provided timely. This is because a plant has life, like a human being. If inputs like fertilisers and other things are provided late, it will lead to failure of crops and if this happens, then the farmer will lose. Also, remember that every individual farmer is supposed to pay back this loan and if the farmer has lost the produce, he or she will be affected.

Secondly, I want to also request the Ministry of Labour to continuously monitor, supervise and visit these labourers, about 2000 people who are employed by BIDCO, so that their welfare is improved. This is because one of the main intentions of this project is to provide employment, but if people are provided employment and they are working in an unfriendly environment, it is not good. I request an improvement in that area.

Lastly, there were a number of environmental mitigation measures that were put in place and one of them was to ensure that in all palm oil plantations, there should be a cover crop. As I speak, individual farmers have bare plantations, they do not have a cover crop and yet this cover crop is very important to ensure that the run off and erosion into the lakes is stopped. So, I want the ministry to ensure that they put right these three cautions that I have mentioned.

In conclusion, I want to request honourable members to support borrowing of this money, I thank you.

3.33
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With your permission, I would like to register my reservation about this request. I want to draw the attention of this House to the observations of the committee on page 13 paragraph (d) which is a standard observation in all the reports of the committee on loan requests. “Benefit of private sector partnerships: The committee observed that the Vegetable Oil Development Project has demonstrated that the public-private partnership approach can bring together a large corporate operator and smallholders if clear mechanisms to ensure equity have been put in place.” And they follow it with a recommendation on page 14. 

Mr Speaker, the rider put here by the committee is quite instrumental and we need to look at it. Actually, they are saying, “Unless we have the mechanisms in place, we cannot guarantee equity in the disbursement of this money.” And this is a fact. Up to now, we are approving loans without putting this mechanism in place. If I ask you hon. Members, what are the particulars of this PPP? What is this policy all about? What are the criteria? 

On page 2, the committee is saying, “About 90,000 rural households have seen their cash incomes increase due to sunflower production.” Hon. Members, particularly from the areas which are mentioned here, how many of those rural households have benefited from this and you are aware of them? How were they selected?  So, look at the component which is going to BIDCO; let us be honest, look at page 3 in the second paragraph, they are saying, “The oil palm component which was launched in December, 2000 has achieved 87 percent of the initial 10,000 hectares objective…” and they continue, “...and 40,000 hectares specifically for BIDCO, and BIDCO has constructed a plant in Jinja...” They continue to make a provision. On page 6, you will see that they are talking about oil palm development and so on and so forth, for Bugala Islands. Here we are basically talking about a policy, which is not known to us. 

So, the policy of Public Private Partnership must be brought to Parliament and we adopt it. We have never adopted this policy. How can a policy be initiated by the Cabinet and implemented when we do not know? So, what is this animal called Public Private Partnership Policy? What are the components? 

It is my considered view that unless we get a clear explanation on what constitutes this policy of Public Private Partnership, we cannot pass this request because the criteria is not known to us and, therefore, even the disbursement of the first phase is not clear.  It is just a lump sum which is given to us.

Finally, on page 6, (ii) “Upgrade ferry service to Buvuma Island to facilitate project activities.” I think here the ministry is going beyond the boundary because if you are talking about a ferry from the coastline to Buvuma Island, that is a different area and different project.

On page 5, (ii) “Extension of ferry transport to Bunyama, Bubembe, Funje and Bukasa.” The issue of the ferry is already a subject of contention. And I am surprised that hon. Badda is not talking about this issue.  If the ferry from Nakiwogo to Kalangala has already collapsed and you are again talking of extension of a totally different ferry in a different project -(Interruption)

MR JOHN NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable member for giving way. The Nakiwogo-Kalangala ferry has not collapsed. Anybody who knows something called maintenance will know that even factories close for maintenance in order to operate again and ferries and ships operate in the same way; there is a period for maintenance. There was adequate notice given to the public; I do not think when you get indisposed for a day, you are declared collapsed.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

MR BADDA: Hon. Lukwago is referring to the ferry and saying that I should have objected to this. However, on the contrary, we are requesting the ministry and Government to provide a second ship because this alone is not enough and that is the reason it is breaking down very often; it is overworked because there are 84 islands. This ship is only plying between the main land and one island out of the 84. We need to interconnect the other 83 islands with another ship.  So, even this one, which is being suggested is not enough. We really require other ferries. Thank you.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, it would appear that my colleague here did not appreciate the issue I was raising. The point is that we are talking about a totally different project. This is the Vegetable Oil Development Project, which is intended to benefit those farmers and now you are talking about extension of a ferry. 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Lukwago, the problem is that you are the one who raised the issue of the ferry while talking about this loan and which is a transportation policy. You are mixing the two; you are talking about transportation policy and farming. (Laughter) 

3.41
THE OPPOSITION CHIEFWHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend the committee for its very elaborate report. I stand here to support this loan. (Applause) It is not just for the sake of supporting this loan, but it is because as a member of the Committee on Agriculture, I have been closely associated with the Vegetable Oil Development Project.

We know for a fact that attempts to establish the palm oil development endeavour in this country started way back in the 1970s. (Interjections) Yes, the late Dr Kibirige Ssebunya was very instrumental during Amin’s regime in conducting a pilot study in Kalangala Islands to undertake this endeavour, which we are enjoying today. 

Today, if you went to Kalangala and probably if you had been there 10 years back, you would not know whether you are on the island, because people commonly used to refer to those from the mainland as “Ekidyeri kyaleeta” meaning people brought by the ship. (Laughter)

It is now completely different because BIDCO has totally changed the face of this island -(Interjections)- Secretary-General, do not put words in my mouth. I also went to school and I know what to say. [Hon. Members: “Which ones?”] I went to many- (Laughter)- I went to Pokel Seminary, I went to Lacor Seminary, I went to Katigondo, I went to Koboko, I went to Makerere and I went to Nkozi, if you want to know where I went. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, one of the reasons this project is a success, in my own understanding, is because of the Public Private Partnership venture.

We have never been clean as a Government when it comes to utilisation of monies that are borrowed. This firm is purely managed by foreigners; they are Indians all over the place. You find them in the plantation and the factory. They have used the first loan that was given to them very well. There is value for money on the ground and that is the reason why I am giving my support to this loan request because I know that it is going to be utilised by people who mean well in as a far as the economy of this country is concerned.

In the first phase of this project, there was an understanding that Kalangala would be a pilot project. We thought that the project would be moved to the mainland.
 
I want to see this project coming to the neighbouring districts of Mukono and Masaka because all these areas have got the same environmental belt. This project has given a facelift to Kalangala because BDICO has gone a long way in generating electricity using biomass. I think that is a good innovation on an island where seeing electricity was like seeing God.

This is why we think the motion to borrow this money should be supported. I will disagree with my shadow Attorney-General on the issue of transport. The project has brought people from all over Uganda to the island. It produces raw materials for the refinery in Jinja and these can only be transported on the lake thus helping people to access transport. I give my support to this motion because I know the Indians emphasise accountability. 

3.37
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chwa County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, as a matter of principle, I no longer oppose the borrowing of any amount of money. I know that at one time we shall not be able to pay and the lenders will have no choice but to cancel like they did in the past. I think our concern should now be whether or not this money will be put to proper use.
 
I was impressed by paragraph 4 on page 4, it says that this loan will benefit almost a half of the country including my Kitgum. I would like to know from the minister or the chairperson of the committee how this benefit will spread and when it is arriving there.

On page 11, US$ 15 million is being put aside to purchase the land. How much land is this? The committee should tell us how big the land is, who owns it, and where it is? This would help us to crosscheck the price of land in the area. I want this Parliament to continue borrowing and borrowing.

3.50
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Gulu): I rise to support the motion to borrow this money. I have a few reservations about the conditions of IFAD loan financing, which talk about the Government contribution towards the NSSF and tax. In a situation where we are going to engage a private company to implement this loan, I think that it is not fair for the Government to contribute NSSF money towards a privately owned company.

I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Finance to hurry and come up with the Private Public Partnership laws to govern how these funds and loans are managed. Without the partnership laws in place, it will become very difficult to entrust a privately owned company with money borrowed and paid by Ugandans. We are already in phase two of this project; I would have loved to see the committee coming up with recommendations that palm trees can be grown elsewhere, say Karamoja. Maybe, the problem can come from the rainfall patterns, but I think the ministry should carry out more studies in that line for us to have uniform development in this country. This loan will be paid by everybody regardless of your location.

3.53
MR SIMON EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): This motion is worth supporting but I have some observations that need clarifications. The first one is what hon. Okello-Okello has just said. This is on page 4. I would like to extend this further on how these districts that have been named under project objectives. I would like to request the chairperson and the ministry to give us a schedule on how Kaberamaido District is going to benefit from this money; on how Soroti is going to benefit; so that we know that this money is going to a particular place.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, don’t you think you can only plan if the loan is secured and the money is here? Suppose we refuse it, will they be able to implement?

MR EUKU: I agree with what you say, but to ease the role of the Members of Parliament to monitor these funds, it would have been proper if a schedule is given so that our monitoring becomes easy. 

On page 10 of the report where they mention project costs and financing, there is nothing which is mentioned of these other districts. Everything is Kalangala – Kalangala –(Laughter)– and they are talking about – everything. There is no Soroti, no Kaberamaido. So, now it gives me a very big problem, Mr Speaker.

In addition to that, I have an issue on page 12. I would like to get clarification from the minister and the chairperson. Part (d) says, “...establishment by Government of the project management unit to be staffed through a competitive process.” But this is phase II of the loan we are borrowing. What happened in phase I? Do we mean to say that there was no project management unit and if it was not there, how was the project implemented? 

The third point is on page 12(9), about sustainability. The statement written here is, “Farmers will have learnt modern production technologies and improved their business skills.” But it is a common problem in this country that when monies are allocated, much of the money goes to training and very little money goes to implementation. Some money goes to procuring very big vehicles and very little money is given to the real implementation of the activities. 

I would also like to ask the minister and the chairperson to tell us how much money has been planned or allocated for capacity building for farmers so that it can help us in monitoring how much money has gone into activities and how much money has gone into capacity building for farmers.

Last but not least, my observation is still on page 12(10), under observations and recommendations; “The economy will save in excess of US$ 60 million, which is approximately Shs 120 billion.” I would like to find out how the committee reached such a conclusion and yet in most scenarios, most of the products that are manufactured in Uganda are more expensive than the products that are manufactured from outside and yet within the same region. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Can we now revert to the Bills in connection with the budget? Hon. Members, on item No.4, you will remember we had a motion by the Minister of Local Government on the extension. We exhausted the debate and it is now time to vote on it. I now put the question.
(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE FINANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

4.01
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, our report on the Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2010 is brief and so is the Bill. The Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was read for the first time on 23 August 2010 by the Minister of Finance in accordance with Rule 112 of the Rules of Procedure. It was committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for consideration and to subsequently report back to the House. 

Object of the Bill

The objective of this Bill is to amend the Finance Act, 2006 to provide for the reduction of registration fees on motorcycles, and to amend the Finance Act, 2009 to empower the minister through regulations made under the Act to prescribe penalties and other matters for the purpose of the regulation. 

Provisions of the Bill

The Bill has two parts:

Part I: Preliminary

Part I has one clause which deals with commencement, to the effect that the Act shall come into force on 1 July, 2010.

Part II: Amendment of the Finance Act, 2007.  

Part II of the Bill has two clauses; (ii) and (iii), which provide for amendment of the Finance Act, 2006 and 2009 respectively. 

Observations 

Under clause 2, the committee was concerned that although the objective of the Bill is intended to reduce the registration fee charged on motorbikes commonly known as “boda boda”, in the countryside and perhaps in town, by introducing a new registration fee of Shs 130,000, the Finance Act of 2006 is mistakenly being referred to. This is because the Finance Act, 2006 provides for registration fees of Shs 95,000 on motorbikes. 

The committee is of the view that the right Act to be amended is the Finance Act, 2009 which will then be in the spirit of reducing the registration fees right from Shs 210,000 to Shs 130,000. 

The committee appreciates the motive behind the reduction of the registration fees on motorcycles, which is a key factor in boosting business and employment in the “boda boda” or motorbike and the public transport sector, especially among the youth and the unemployed.

Under clause 3, the committee observed that the Finance Act, 2009 prohibits the importation, local manufacture, sale or use of sacks and bags of polymers of ethane and polythene as well as the importation of used refrigerators, freezers, computers and television sets in a bid to protect the environment. 

The Finance Bill, 2010 seeks to provide penalties for contravention of the law prohibiting importation,  local manufacture, sale or use of sacks and bags of polymers of ethane and polythene, but does not provide for penalties where the prohibition of importation of used computers, refrigerators, freezers and television sets, although Government is putting a safeguard. 

A technical team from the Ministry of Finance informed the committee that used freezers and computers are managed under the East African Customs Management Act. But the committee is of the view that when the system under the East African Customs Management Act fails to stop such implications, then there should be a penalty at the domestic level according to the prohibition under the Finance Act. 

The committee further observed that under the Finance Act, 2009, the minister is under obligation to make regulations which have to be laid before Parliament and to establish a list of sacks and bags of polymers, Ethylene, Propylene and other plastics necessary for use in exceptional cases. 

The committee finds the minister not to have done that and I will come in later with suggested amendments; they are two. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Well, thank you. You have heard the report; any observations or comments? 

4.05
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to support the idea of reducing the fees for the registration of motorcycles. Definitely, Shs 210,000 has been very high, bearing in mind that the people who are buying the motorcycles are those who have very little income. This reduction will enable them to buy more motorcycles. 

At the beginning of 2005, my youths were mainly using bicycles and I advised them against using them as they could develop Hernia. I advised them to save money and buy motorcycles. I am happy to inform you that now all the youth of Koboko are using Boda bodas to raise money; so this reduction will help them. 

Registration of motorcycles has become a menace in Koboko. First, they need Shs 210,000 but in reality they pay Shs 700,000 – that is what happens. Where is that money going? You may buy a motorcycle at around Shs 500,000 from across the border; when you bring it, the cost for registration is more than the cost for buying it. Where is this money going? We want this to be investigated. I also bought one, and I had to spend over Shs 500,000 before it could be registered. We should stop this corruption in revenue otherwise the Shs 130,000 will remain on paper and not in reality.

Secondly, the registration of motorcycles takes years in Koboko. You may buy a motorcycle and pay some money and they give you a small note showing that the licence will be brought within 21 days. But alas, it continues for months or even a year. In the process, they get tired and begin riding around and they are arrested. Why does it take that long to register a motorcycle? For a vehicle you can register within two to three days; but that is not the case for a motorcycle. 

I propose that the registration of motorcycles be decentralised; we should not come to Kampala to register our motorcycles, we should be able to register at least regionally so that the work is made easier rather than bothering our young men with this long process of registration. I support the motion, thank you very much. 

4.09
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Government for bringing this amendment. I too would like to support the amendment but with some reservations. As hon. Baba Diri said, we need decentralisation of Boda bodas because they are suffering a lot. And this is not my first time to stand here and beg this Government to decentralise Boda boda registration. 

Most of the cyclists are people who have never come to Kampala; the majority of them are young boys who have just left school and do not even know where Kampala is. But now you have to bring them to Kampala and you have to show them where the licensing office is; it is such a big problem. And as hon. Baba Diri said, the reduction is nothing, they are giving with one hand and taking away with the other. Because this reduction is about Shs 80,000; that would be just for transport for one to board a taxi from Masaka to Kampala and back. So this reduction is nothing. 

So, I beg Government to decentralise the services of registering and giving permits to Boda boda cyclists; they suffer a lot. Government should appreciate their work and give them what they deserve. I want to support this motion but with an appeal to Government to ensure that this service is decentralised.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank the Members who have raised the issue of decentralisation of permits. Permits are not centralised; we have centres in all corners of this country. You can get a driving permit from Mbale, Gulu, Mbarara and from Kampala. Unless the hon. Members –(Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Minister of Transport to believe that somebody from Masaka can easily move to Mbarara or Kampala – is it in order for this Government to believe that we cannot decentralise the services of these permits further than Mbarara?

THE SPEAKER: As I see, you raised the issue of decentralisation and you based your observation on people coming to Kampala; you never mentioned people going to Mbarara or to Mbale. So the minister was giving you details on how far they have gone with decentralising this issue, by mentioning various towns where this can be done. Maybe he would have mentioned Masaka since he was still going on with his list. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that ruling and the order was to the Government actually, not to the minister. But this exercise is a very expensive one, whereby we have to move cautiously so that the permits do not become very expensive by forcing the provider to open centres even in small towns. As soon as they open even in small towns, it is automatic that there won’t be sufficient business and what he is going to do is to increase the charges. Therefore, we targeted the big towns first. After these big towns, as the volume of vehicles and motorcycles grows, we are going to decentralise up to those small towns, but that will depend on the volume of vehicles in those towns. But it is not true that it is centralised in Kampala; it is already decentralised with centres in those big towns. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, the hon. Member from Masaka was saying they should have included Masaka because it would cater for Mutukula people, Kalangala, Sembabule. I think that is what she was saying. You may consider it.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am very happy with that and I oblige. I will make sure I consider it.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Okay.

4.15
MR SIMON EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the work they have done and presented before this Parliament. I have made an observation on page 4 of the committee report where there is an insertion of a new clause, that is clause 2 with a proposal that, “A person who imports used refrigerators, freezers, computers and television sets in contravention of sub-section (1) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to imprisonment for a term of not less than eight years or a fine not less than 700 currency points or both.”

I would like to get clarification on what Government will do with some of the imported freezers. Some of them may be lying here awaiting clearance. What will happen to them? There are also some other products of such a nature that may be in transit. What will Government do about that? 

The other thing I would have expected is; maybe the committee could have said that we also advise Government to reduce taxes on new fridges or freezers so that they are affordable by the community.

My third point is about the term of imprisonment versus the fine, which is 700 currency points. I would like to find out the standard rate that was used because when I look at the standard rate that was used here, eight years should have been equivalent to 192 currency points. The chairman should have corrected this or if I have gone wrong, try to review it because 700 currency points is not equivalent to eight years. Seven hundred currency points should be only 192 currency points. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion is that the Bill entitled The Financial (Amendment) Bill, 2010 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FINANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose –

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I am sorry for taking long to realise this. We are amending the title of clause 1. The long title is amended by substituting for 2006 the year 2009; and clause 2 -(Interjections)- one at a time. Okay.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR TUMWEBAZE: Clause 2 is amended by substituting for the year 2006 the year 2009 both in the head note and paragraph one.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, hon. Minister.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, it has been a norm or in our laws, we usually say, “on conviction to imprisonment for a term not more than,” rather than saying, “… not less than eight years.” That is clause 2 -(Interjections)- I am sorry. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, I put the question on amending the year.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 (Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 3

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we are proposing an amendment to insert a new clause to read as follows. “The Finance Act, 2009 is amended in section 2 by inserting immediately after sub-section (1) the following:
(1)	(a)A person who imports used refrigerators, freezers, computers and television sets in contravention of sub-section (1) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to imprisonment for a term not less than eight years or a fine not less than 700 currency points or both.”

The justification is to impose a heavy penalty; to discourage importation of used refrigerators, freezers and television sets just like we are imposing a penalty on buveera. Thank you so much. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But why don’t you leave it to the discretion of the court? You can set the years, eight years and leave it to the court to consider the circumstances under which this has come and then impose the right sentence rather than restricting the court. In most cases, this is what happens.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Hon. Chairman, I respect your guidance but the same clause on polythene had a prescription for the penalty. Maybe if the same guidance can go to the previous clause.

MR RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to get clarification from my colleague. You know you may import a new refrigerator of old technology that is harmful to the environment. So, why is it not captured rather than simply capturing used refrigerators? You may import something that is new but also very harmful to the environment.

MR MAWIYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In the first place, it is this very Government that allowed importation of the old fridges, computers, freezers and we all know how far we have gone using these old things. We cannot come up immediately and say eight years imprisonment or 700 currency points. This is the greatest penalty we have ever made here. So, I take your advice that we leave it to the discretion of the courts and this is how we have been doing it. So, the chairman had better concede to this so that we do not waste too much time.  
  
MR BALIDDAWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to get clarification from the chairperson of the committee. In as much as I agree with you on the limitations on the importation of used computers and freezers, why are you exempting mobile phones? They are more harmful to the environment and to health than any of these components that you are trying to limit. I can tell you that authoritatively.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The committee was not limiting itself to refusing mobile phones but we were considering refrigerators and freezers. Computers were already an issue in the previous law and this amendment was only emphasising buveera, the common term, and leaving out these. We are not opposed in any way to either bringing another law or perhaps another amendment that limits the importation, or discourages the importation of used material that is hazardous to the environment. And I do not think the spirit portrayed in our amendment actually encourages such. 

I concede on leaving the sentence or the penalty to the court but maybe we need to expressly state that importation is an offence although the prescription of punishments can be for the courts because you go to court to seek a remedy on some suspected violation of an existing law. That is my understanding. 

THE CHAIRMAN: The only problem was about you -

MR TUMWEBAZE: Prescribing?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Okay. We continue.

THE CHAIRMAN: By saying, “… not less than …” you remove the discretion of the court. You can say, “… up to eight years.” It can be eight years or it can be seven years depending on the circumstances. Even the fine can be the maximum but it can be less. That is what we wanted.

MR TUMWEBAZE: I concede on that, Mr Chairman. It can be up to a maximum of eight years to protect the discretion of the courts. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I think the maximum of eight years is okay but also if our colleague can introduce the amendment for the mobile phones and also what hon. Bright Rwamirama said - there are some companies in Eastern Europe that still use gas that is hazardous to the Ozone layer. So we need to introduce it here. They bring clones. You think it is new but it is cloned. So we need to add, “… any material that has a gas or substance that has been prohibited or banned internationally.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Are you dealing with companies importing? Suppose an individual, Ssekandi, goes to Dubai or London and he finds a fridge and he buys it? It is a new one. Do you expect me to inspect whether this gadget is this and the other? Are you dealing with companies or - suppose I import that fridge? I think we need to consider that one. You buy it new and then you say, “Why didn’t you check on this and the other?” Is it really fair especially to an individual?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just -

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us exhaust this.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, I want also to agree with -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, why don’t we exhaust what hon. Rwamirama was talking about? You import something new but faulty. Should you be punished?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I think to cure the concern of hon. Rwamirama may not necessarily be an issue of legislation. But it is an issue of building the capacity of the tax agency or the quality control agency to be able to first of all define the material that is toxic irrespective of its year of manufacture. Now, unless you have defined that then I will not know how you will make a law to cater for it when you say “new”. URA for example imposes an environmental tax on motor vehicles made before the year 2000. That is a deterrent measure. So, how are you going to detect that something new, manufactured in 2010, is hazardous unless the tax body or UNBS has been given capacity to detect that? The moment they detect that then a law or a provision for us to pass must be able to define that -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, I remember we passed legislation here whereby we listed all the prohibited substances including Fluoride 12, which is being used in most of these refrigerators. And I think if somebody is importing a gadget and it happens to contain gas, which is prohibited and which is on our list of the substances which are prohibited, I think then whether new or old, the Government or the tax collector or whoever has a right to say, “This is not supposed to come into the country”. I think it is already catered for.

MR MAWIYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think we should not be too strict on this because we have quite many products that have passed through our quality agencies undetected. So what you are bringing in - what if somebody has actually imported something without knowledge that it contains something, which is on the list? I would suggest that we put some minimum. We say, “… not exceeding two years or 200 currency points,” other than putting it to eight years or 700 currency points. Even if we left it to the discretion of the court, what if the courts say, “You go for 700 or for eight years?” So, we better lower it to two years or 200 currency points. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, when we talk about somebody buying something new only to discover that it is fake, it reminds me of the vigilance of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards who have been confiscating items, which are fake. What I mean is that I think we can increase the vigilance and use the Uganda National Bureau of Standards to take care of this.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think let us dispose of the amendment. What is your amendment? Read it as you want it. 

MR RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is good to make a law that is sustainable. It is very good to make a law that is non-discriminatory. You may have something new manufactured today but using wrong and harmful substances. I think it is better to capture these variables. Hon. Byabagambi has already mentioned some of those items that we passed in the past and I think we need to package this law properly so that it protects the intentions we want to put across. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, with your guidance, our amendment reads as follows: “A person who imports used refrigerators, freezers, computers and television sets in contravention of sub-section (1) commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding eight years or a fine not exceeding 700 currency points or both.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

MR TUMWEBAZE: The long title is amended by substituting 2009 for 2006. Now it reads: “The Finance Act 2009”. What we are amending is 2009. It had been mistaken to be 2006.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are to amend “The Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2010”. That is the short title. Then you amend an Act to amend the Finance Act, 2009.

MR TUMWEBAZE: That is what we are saying. We are amending the Finance Act, 2009 by replacing 2006. So it reads “The Finance Act, 2009”, which we are amending. And the short title -

THE CHAIRMAN: There should be a term “Amendment” between “Finance” and “Bill”.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Yes. So, the long title is -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it is clear. We have known that. He was amending two positions; (Laughter) the Finance (Amendment) Bill – there was no “Amendment”, which was later inserted there. And in the title he is putting 2009 instead of 2006. I think it is clear. I put the question to the title as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and passed the amendments that had been proposed. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE FINANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that “The Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE FINANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010”

THE SPEAKER: Bill passed.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX  (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the second time.

Mr Speaker, we have a very small provision that we want to include, which made us to move this amendment of the Value Added Tax. I just want to add “the supply of software licence and the supply of biodegradable packaging materials” to the list of the exempt supplies under the second schedule of the VAT Act.

The computers and others were catered for but the software and the biodegradable packaging materials were omitted. So we want to include that.

4.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, “The Value Added (Amendment) Bill, 2010” was read the first time on 23 August 2010 by the Minister of Finance and was committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The committee was required to scrutinise the Bill under Rule 113 and 61 (c) and subsequently report back to the House.

In accordance with Article 9 of the Constitution and rules 133 and 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, the committee has considered the Bill and now wishes to report back as follows:

Method of Work

The committee:
1.	Held meetings with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the technical team.
2.	 Made reference to the principal Act, Cap 340; the background to the Budget 2010, the Budget Speech and related literature.

Object of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to amend the Value Added Tax Cap. 349 to add, “the supply of computers and software licence and the supply of biodegradable packaging materials” to the list of the exempt supplies.

Brief on the Clauses

Clause 1 provides for the commencement of the Act on 1 July 2010

Observations

The committee noted that the amendment is meant to encourage the use of computer software and software licence and the supply of biodegradable packaging materials. The committee was informed that computer software licences are provided by the suppliers of the software and they continue to control it for the purpose of maintenance and upgrading.

The committee observed that computers are already VAT exempt and that the exemption of their software would be in line with the principle of supporting IT in the East African region.

The committee recommends that all government departments and institutions must review agreements made with software suppliers to conform to the law. Here, we mean that this exemption should, in a way, translate into benefits to the consumers of both the software and licence since VAT is finally borne by the consumer. It should bring some relief.

The committee is further concerned that there is no standard list of where biodegradable packaging materials are defined. A definition is necessary for clarity and we should include this in the coming amendment. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. However, Mr Speaker, I have a few concerns. The object of this Bill is to encourage manufacturers of these biodegradable packing materials to start production, after polythene bags were banned. So, instead of making them exempt, we should make them zero-rated because if one opens up a factory manufacturing these biodegradable packing materials and they are zero-rated, it means that such a manufacturer will even benefit from the input tax paid in the course of producing them. This will go a long way into making them cheaper and affordable.

The second issue is about computer software. Though the computers are exempted, we should be moving towards making them zero-rated because this will imply that the end-user will actually pay less. But with the exemption, there is almost no change – the supplier does not benefit from it. Take an example; if you are having a factory and you use power upon which you pay VAT - there is a lot of VAT that people pay in form of input tax which cannot be recovered! 

I would urge the minister to be straightforward with what we are intending to achieve rather than giving lip services. If we want to safeguard the environment, we should ensure that the packing materials that are biodegradable are cheap rather than making them expensive in disguise. I support the Bill.

MR EKANYA: Hon. William Nsubuga, whereas I have no problem with your idea, we have to move systematically: “Rome was not built in one day,” as the saying goes.

In other countries, the taxes vary, and now that we are under so many partnerships - East African Community, COMESA – I would like you to clarify to me: If we make the biodegradable packaging material used in Uganda zero-rated, would you agree that for the exports to other countries that are not member states to the regional block, we impose a tax? I say this because I can see that we are creating exemption, but some of the factories that are here are basically assembling plants for the region. So, how shall we handle this scenario to take care of the interests of Ugandans and to ensure we earn revenue from the exports or whatever?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I just want to inform my colleague that all exports are zero-rated regardless of whether they are computers or biodegradable materials or even cars. The essence is to make them cheaper to the outside market. We benefit by creating –

THE SPEAKER: What do you want us to do? What you are saying is not clear to me. What do you want to be done?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, if we make them zero-rated, they will be cheap. When we exempt them, there will be no change because when you talk of producing biodegradable materials – 

THE SPEAKER: What do you want us to do?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Let them be zero-rated, Mr Speaker.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague. I think there is confusion between an item being zero-rated and being exempt. If an item is exempt, it means you are not in the brackets of VAT. This means the cost is going to be cheaper, when you export it. But when you say, “It is zero-rated”, it means you are in the brackets of VAT; you have to pay taxes. What the committee is proposing is that the biodegradable materials be exempted, so as to be cheaper for other people to use, and we encourage them.

THE SPEAKER: Yes! So, I put the question that a Bill entitled: “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read the second time. 

 (Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

4.49
Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, under Clause 2, we are seeking to amend sub-clause (1) by inserting, immediately after paragraph (a), a new paragraph (a) and it is to define biodegradable packaging material. The definition was agreed upon after consultations with NEMA and the line ministry. 

This definition reads: “Biodegradable packaging material means packaging material which can undergo a breakdown of its entire composition by naturally existing micro organisms in the presence of air and water at specific temperatures, into smaller constituent components within a given time of usually not more than six months.” 

The justification is for clarity and avoidance of any ambiguities in terms of classifications. I beg to report.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, I do not have a big problem with the amendment, except its last part, which talks of “a given time of usually not more than six months.”

These are more or less like chemical reactions which are assisted by micro organisms within the soil. The rate of reaction depends on certain factors or parameters including the quantity of the micro organism within that specific area or within the soil where you dump that material. Therefore, we should delete the words, “not more than six months” we cannot achieve that. Even if you took a piece that is biodegradable and you throw it in the soil, it cannot degrade within six months.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, where do you want us to stop?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Let us stop at the words, “specific temperature into its smaller constituent components.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, is that agreed upon?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, let me make this clear. This matter came up in the committee; we invited officials from NEMA and Ministry of Finance to give us their views over it. In their opinion it was apparent that if we do not put a timeframe, the essence of the entire Bill will be lost. This was based on the fact that even the polythene can take ten years to decompose if it is put under certain conditions. That is why Government is focusing on biodegradable material that can decompose within six months.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, it is a technical –

MR BYABAGAMBI: I want us to look at the example of a log of wood – these papers are actually manufactured from wood punks. Even if you took a bag that you use to buy sugar and buried it in soil, it cannot degrade within six months. I think we need to be realistic when making such laws because I can challenge you by going to court and saying, “this is biodegradable material” knowing very well that it will not degrade within six months and you are telling me within six months, which I cannot achieve.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, I think the idea here or what is dealt with here is that which can be within six months. If it is not then it doesn’t benefit. I think that is what they are saying. So, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECON. DEV’T (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC  DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and passed it with only one amendment.

MOTION FOR ADOPTTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that we adopt the report of the Committee of the Whole House on the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2010.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
 THIRD READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2010 be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2010”

THE SPEAKER: Bill passed.

BILLS
 SECOND READING

THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that, The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2010 be read for the second time.

4.57
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was given the first reading on the 23 August 2010 by hon. Minister of Finance in accordance with Rule 112 of the Rules of Procedure. It was committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development under Rule 113 and 161(c) for consideration, and to subsequently report back to the House.

In accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution and Rules 133 and 161 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the committee has considered the Bill and now reports back as follows.

Methodology

The committee held consultative meetings with the Minister of Finance and her technical team and made reference to the Principal Stamps Act cap 342, the background to the Budget 2010, and the Budget Speech, 2010.

The object of the Bill is to amend the schedule to the Stamps Act cap 342 relating to the rates of stamp duty.

Mr Speaker, a brief on clauses. 

Clause 1 provided for the commencement of the Act on the 1 July 2010.

Clause 2 provides for amendment of the schedule to the Stamps Act cap 342 by subscribing rates of stamp duty in several cases.

Observations

The committee was informed that the amendment is meant to reduce the cost of borrowing in order to bring about reduction of interest rates. The amendment will, therefore, introduce a relief to the banks by introducing a new Clause 8(b) that provides for a flat figure of Shs 100,000 to be charged as the cost of borrowing from banks.

By introducing this amendment, it is hoped it will ease the cost of borrowing with the hope that banks will be receptive and reciprocate to their customers.

The amendment also seeks to delete tax on the Bill of Lading meant to ease costs of doing business in Uganda. The committee appreciates the motive behind these amendments, but recommends that the Ministry of Finance puts in place mechanisms to supervise its provision so that the anticipated benefit can be transferred to the end-users.

Recommendations

The committee has thoroughly scrutinized the Bill and requests the House to adopt it. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
 COMMITTEE STAGE

THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

5.00
Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose that Clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and passed it without amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

BILLS
 THIRD READING

THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

5.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2010”

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is passed, thank you very much!

Now, there are two other Bills in respect of the Budget: The Appropriation Bill and the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. Once we finish these, then we shall have finished the budget process. I don’t know the position from the committee - how far have you gone?

MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, the committee sat today to finalise the Appropriation Bill and I think the final stage is not yet set. A few things are remaining in order to finish the report. 

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, the Appropriation Bill is just to add up what you have agreed during the Committee of Supply and agree. There isn’t much literature to write; it is just to say that the thing agrees with what we did. And it is necessary because it is the final instrument to tie up the budget. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, as we were meeting today, we discovered some gaps because of the way we handled the appropriation the other day. So, we have fixed a date to have a meeting with the Minister of Finance so that we can reconcile the figures based on the committee reports, the appropriation and what was passed here.  

THE SPEAKER: It is what we passed here that we expect to find in the Appropriation Bill.

MR EKANYA: Supposing there are some errors?
 
THE SPEAKER: There should not be errors. What we do is to check with the figures you have, which we passed against the figures standing against a vote. It is not a question of negotiations; you are just bringing the figures we agreed upon in the Bill. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: The report will be ready tomorrow. I am liaising with my colleague, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Bakwega was here reading the figures and he has the record, okay? Right, now we move to the next item.  

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE ELECTRONIC TRANSACTIONS BILL, 2008

THE SPEAKER: The minister has gone. Okay, bring that very scientific Bill. I think we had completed the debate. Now, I put the question that the Electronic Transactions Bill, 2008 be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)
 
THE SPEAKER: Can we go to the committee stage? 

MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: You see, this seems to be a technical thing; you saw that Members could not debate because it was so technical. So, why don’t we deal with the committee stage another day so that we deal with the loan today? 

But before the chairperson comes, hon. Members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Soroti Demonstration Primary school, Soroti Municipality. They have come to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are most welcome!  (Applause)   

REQUEST FOR GOVERNEMENT TO BORROW SDR 19 MILLION (EQUIVALENT US$ 30 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING OF EASTERN AFRICA AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY PROGRAMME (EAAPP)

5.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Committee of National Economy, I now present the committee report on the government’s request to borrow SDR 19 million (equivalent to US$ 30 million) from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for financing the East African Agricultural Productivity Programme (EAAPP). 

This is a programme where, in the region, Uganda has been chosen as a cassava centre for excellence and other regions like Tanzania for rice and others as you will get to know. 

This loan request as per our Constitution and Rules, was brought to the committee and we have since met the Ministry of Finance.

Background 

Agriculture accounts for 15 - 23 percent of GDP and is the main source of income for the majority. I think this one we know.  Let me straight away go to the rationale on page 3. 

The International Development Association (IDA) is the most important supporter of agricultural technology which represents pillar IV of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) at the national and sub-regional levels. In recent years, IDA has provided leadership in donor coordination and harmonisation and has contributed to strengthening African capacity in the area of agriculture innovation.  

IDA is currently supporting the agriculture productivity agenda in Uganda and within each of the three other participating countries, that is, Ethiopia, Kenya and Tanzania.  All the four countries: Uganda, Ethiopia, Kenya and Tanzania have consistently sought IDA support for long-term programmes to strengthen agricultural technology at the national level.    
 
Support in the past has centred on agricultural research and extension or advisory services. Requests by the three participating countries, that is, Ethiopia, Kenya and Tanzania, were approved by the IDA Board on June 11, 2009 under the East African Agriculture Productivity Programme (EAAPP-APLIA I).   

The proposed project for Uganda focuses on cassava and meets IDA regional eligibility criteria because,

i)	It supports activities that will be coordinated across three or more countries;

ii)	It generates benefits that spill over country boundaries;

iii)	It has support for the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA);

iv)	It provides a platform for policy harmonisation; and

v)	It is part of the regional agricultural strategy.

I think I can leave the overview? We can go straight to page 6.

Opportunities for industrialisation that exist in: 

Animal feed industry, especially with escalating - this is among others how cassava is increasingly becoming important beyond the traditional use.  An initiative with Ugachick is ongoing to shift from cereal to cassava-based poultry feed industry, especially given the escalating grain prices. Poultry-keeping is a priority enterprise in support of Prosperity-For-All targets.
 
Wheat substitute in the bakery industry. I think you have now seen some bread from cassava. NARO has developed formulae for cassava in bakery products. Three bakeries are piloting the uses in a number of bakery products. To date, technologies exist that substitute 15 percent of wheat for cassava in a bakery and confectionery products. 

In addition to addressing the constraints in cassava production, Uganda will take advantage from technologies from other regional centres of excellence to alleviate the following constraints plaguing productivity of dairy, rice and wheat enterprises in Uganda. 

As I mentioned earlier, the other countries in the region will benefit from our centre of excellence as we also benefit from rice in Tanzania, dairy in Kenya and wheat in Ethiopia. 

Dairy: Poor feeding system, diseases, poor breeds and unavailability of stocking materials and livestock scientists.

Rice: Biotic stress, soil management or different rice production systems, poor methods of post-harvest handling and lack of value addition, drudgery and labour intensity.

Wheat: Limited germ plasma, lack of technologies for enhancing rain-fed wheat production, lack of investment in irrigated wheat production, limited seed availability and disease, especially the UG99. 

So, that continues the justification.

The project overview

The overall goal of the East African Agricultural Productivity Programme (EAAPP) is to contribute to increased agricultural productivity and growth.

The programme objective is to strengthen and scale-up regional cooperation in generation of technology, training and dissemination programmes for regional priority commodities. The EAAPP will support efforts to scale-up and develop national research programmes in Regional Centres of Excellence (RCoE). EAAPP will support these RCoE in taking a lead role in technology generation, dissemination and training on a regional basis. 

The project objective will be pursued by addressing:

1.	Development and dissemination of improved cassava varieties that are resistant to Cassava Brown Stick diseases and Cassava Mosaic disease, with desired storage root qualities within the East and Central Africa. We did observe in the field at Namulonge that there is a threat of the Brown Stick disease to cassava. This was previously known as a coastal disease.

2.	Promotion of wide use of quality planting materials of improved cassava variety by end-users in the sub-region.

3.	Development and promotion of relevant approaches for scaling-up improved cassava technologies and marketing of improved cassava technologies in the sub-region.

4.	Promotion and wide utilisation of cassava product diversification technologies to enhance commercialisation within the region.

5.	Building capacity for enhancement, promotion and utilisation of cassava and its products within the sub-region.


6.	Development and promotion of the formulation and implementation of policies and standards for cassava within the sub-region. 

The above objective will be achieved through four components of the projects namely: 
i.	Strengthening the regional centre of excellence;
ii.	Support to technology generation, training and dissemination;
iii.	Improve availability of planting materials, seeds and livestock breeding materials; and
iv.	Project management and coordination.
 
So, the component costs are given there on page 9 where US$ 6.7 million goes to strengthening the regional centre of excellence, US$ 12.4 million goes to support technology generation, training and dissemination, and improved availability of planting materials takes US$ 8.6 million. While co-ordination and management of the project takes US$ 2.3 million.

There will be shared responsibility between the departments of Government during implementation. This will be between NARO, the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF), and the National Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank (NAGRC and DB), together with the Dairy Development Centre (DDA).

More specifically, MAAIF will be responsible for the following components: Activities under the third component related to technical assistance and business development for seed/breed producers, seed sector development, policy harmonisations, support for seed certification and plant variety partnership (PVO). 

NARO directorate will be strengthened with new personnel and resources to carry out this function.

NAADS will be specifically responsible for training and dissemination activities under the second component and then technology up scaling under the third component.

The NAADS implementation unit will be responsible and will submit an implication progress report to MAAIF and NARO, as well as independent financial and audit reports for submission to both MAAIF and NARO.  NARO will submit an implementation progress report to MAAIF. 

We request the Committee of Agriculture to follow this project closely as there is going to be a lot of need for coordination between the different sectors.

THE SPEAKER: I just ask the Members to take the report and study it.

MR EKANYA: I want to request the chairperson of the committee to note that our people are going to benefit by getting only US$ 13.5 million. The bigger percentage of the money that we are going to borrow is to go for training and infrastructure. The policy here is that infrastructure and training should only take 13%. Can you go and make adjustments?

THE SPEAKER: You take the report and study it such that tomorrow we can take as little time as possible. I must tell you that the African Leadership Institute has written to me asking for some documents.

(House rose at 5.22 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 29 September at 2.00 p.m.) 


