PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - FIRST MEETINGWEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA5873Wednesday, 28 September 20222.25THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the special dispensation accorded to me; not in any way intended to impeach your guidance to Members but because I sought your indulgence to raise, once again, a red flag to the House and to the country on a very critical matter that I thought should not go without being on record in a few minutes.Mr Speaker, for the bulk of the First Session and Second Session of the 11th Parliament, the most critical matter from our side - not that others are any less important - has been human rights abuses, in particular, enforced disappearances and torture.As we speak now, despite the commitment from Government; namely, that the abductions and enforced disappearances are under control, the devil is back. We have reports from families of a number of people abducted either from places of work or waylaid by people in uniform and non-uniformed in the infamous “drones.” Around May this year, this House instructed the ministers of Security and Internal Affairs to account for the citizens whose names I tabled here as “disappeared”. I did not only table their names but included contacts of their families for Government to follow up and account.To-date, no accountability has ever been given but instead, more people are being abducted and kept incommunicado. Those who have resurfaced - in one way or another – resurface IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 35TH SITTING - FIRST MEETINGParliament met at 2.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleagues. Welcome to today’s sitting, where we have a very tight Order Paper. I want us to focus and ensure that we finish it.  However, I will be allowing matters of national importance after I have finished the Bills because I have noted most of you come, raise matters of national importance, get media attention and run away. (Laughter) I will allow matters of national importance after I have finished critical business of this House. With that, I want, straightaway, to go to the Order Paper.Yes, the Leader of the Opposition –(Hon. Macho rose_) No, Hon. Macho, I am only allowing the LOP. I will only go to your issues – whether procedure or what – later, because there are shortcuts. I will handle matters of national importance after we have finished Bills. Your major work is to process Bills. You usually bring matters of national importance, move out with the media and leave us here. Let us do business. 5874THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 [Mr Mpuuga]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRtortured and bruised. Others are dumped at police stations. It is a big problem.I would like to tell our friends at the frontbench that the record of this country is that while you are in Government, citizens were being abducted, and you were the ministers. That while you were Prime Minister, you instructed “drones” to go and abduct people and they disappeared; it will go on your record. Mr Speaker, this House pronounced itself. The orders given then were never followed. The Minister of Security did not report back. The minister of Internal Affairs is home comfortable and there is no record of reporting. And we made a very simple request: If they are dead, they should declare them dead and avail bodies for decent burial by their families. (Hon. Macho rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I do not want to open this up. Leader of the Opposition, please, conclude. MR MPUUGA: Yes, Mr Speaker. Early this week, the President of the Republic of Uganda was Chief Guest at the commemoration of the disappearance and eventual murder of the first Chief Justice of Uganda, Benedicto Kiwanuka. He was very serious about murders and disappearances. I am wondering whether he is aware or has since lost control; and that some other people are in charge, and he is not the same President who condemned the killers of Kiwanuka. They are the same killers or their off-springs killing and abducting citizens now, under his watch. Mr Speaker, as I take leave, I am resubmitting the names, for the attention of this House, of those citizens I tabled as “disappeared” and have never been seen again. In fact, for some of them, the security minister conceded that actually, they have them but we have never seen them. So, is it safe to say that the internal affairs minister and by extension, the State is aware of these disappearances and they are not about to account? The decent thing to do is for them to go and inform their families, now that they have the contacts, that these people are dead or probably their bodies were eaten. Short of that, they should present them for decent burial, Mr Speaker.I would like to, once again, resubmit these names for the attention of the House and for the attention of all and sundry, although we will re-follow this House of Parliament and the country in the future that this happened and nothing was done. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Colleagues, we extensively discussed this matter. This was around a month ago - because we handled two critical reports; the report on human rights, which the committee presented and it was very detailed. We also had a report on the state of prisons, which touched on some of these issues. There was a commitment here that, indeed, some of these issues were glaring and were making us look ugly. This report was signed by Members from both sides. We never even had a minority report on this issue. So, we gave –(Hon. Macho rose_)When the Speaker is speaking, you do not stand up. As per Rule 220 of the Rules of Procedure, we gave the minister three months to come back and submit an action-taken report on the recommendations of the House on both reports. However, these new – You know, what I have seen in the Daily Monitor - Government, what is going on? The Leader of the Opposition has raised issues I cannot answer for you.2.32THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORT-FOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, of course, it is absurd. We have seen what has been put before Parliament by the Leader of the Opposition and it is not good. I request that we give the security minister time to come and make a statement because the Leader of the Opposition was giving a statement – (Mr Amos Okot rose_)5875THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which order can you raise on someone saying, “I give a statement?” Please, go on, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.MS NAKADAMA:  - a comprehensive statement on this since there are new abductions that we have seen in the newspapers. I so request.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I know those are issues for which we shall quarrel and become – no, it is important. That is why the Leader of the Opposition has raised it - colleagues, your leader has spoken. If you had this issue, you would have taken it to him. He is your leader; please, respect him.I know how we conduct business in this House. There is nothing we can resolve from here on this matter. What we shall do is to appear in the press saying, “We raised it.” In the end, we may even never help the victims, the way the Leader of the Opposition has done it. He has structured his presentation very well.Please, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, tomorrow is Thursday. On Friday, let us have a meeting comprising of the Prime Minister, Leader of the Opposition, shadow minister for security, Government Chief Whip, the Chief Opposition Whip, Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Security so that we first tackle these issues. What you are doing is trying to challenge my ruling and hope you know the procedure. Colleagues, you cannot pretend to know this issue better than the Leader of the Opposition. I have been in office – Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, let him come - but none of you brought this issue to my office. You have been bringing up other issues but now that the Leader of the Opposition has raised this, you want to jump on it as if you know it better. I will not allow that.  MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO COMMEMORATE ONE HUNDRED YEARS OF THE EXISTENCE OF MAKERERE UNIVERSITYTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us listen to the professor. While some of you go around quoting others, he quotes his own books, so you had better respect him. (Laughter) 2.37PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA  (Indepen-dent, Sheema County South, Sheema): Mr Speaker, I move under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure. This is a motion for a Resolution of Parliament to Commemorate 100 years of the Existence of Makerere University. (Applause)“WHEREAS Makerere University was established on 01 August 1922 as the Uganda Technical College and offered courses in Carpentry, Building Construction, Mechanics, Arts, Education, Agriculture and Medicine;AND WHEREAS in 1923, Uganda Technical College was renamed Makerere College and began offering various programmes in Medical Care, Agriculture, Veterinary Sciences and Teacher Training and by 1935, the College had been expanded to become a Centre for Higher Education in East Africa;AWARE THAT in 1937, Makerere College began offering post-secondary education certificate courses and later became affiliated to the University College of London, allowing it to offer programmes leading to the award of degrees of the University College of London;RECALLING THAT in 1949, the British Protectorate Government granted Makerere College a university status and later, in 1963, the College was renamed Makerere College University of East Africa, following the establishment of the East African Community;NOTING THAT on 01 July 1970, Makerere College University of East Africa became a national university under the name, Makerere University, offering undergraduate and 5876THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 [Prof. Mushemeza]postgraduate programmes leading to the award of degrees on its own accord;RECOGNISING THAT Makerere University has over the years developed into a collegiate-based university with 10 constituent colleges, all operating as semi-autonomous units of the University and an ever increasing student population, which currently stands at about 35,000 undergraduates and 3,000 postgraduates, both Ugandan and foreigners, with over 300,000 alumni spread across the world;APPRECIATING THAT Makerere University has actively participated in the political transformation of Uganda and other African countries through imparting students with knowledge, which encouraged self-awareness and self-determination and the rise of nationalism, which students, upon graduating, provided national leadership during the pre and post-colonial political struggles of Uganda and other African nations;   FURTHER APPRECIATING THAT Makerere University has also been instrumental in the social and economic transformation of Uganda through innovating and creating programmes, which have increased the employability of Ugandan citizens and provided the necessary workforce for a developing Uganda and has conducted research, which focuses on urgent and contemporary problems faced by the country; COGNISANT THAT Makerere University has been continuously recognised among the best universities in the world and is currently ranked by the US News & World Report, 2022, as the 15th best University in Africa, the 712th best university worldwide, the third best university in Sub-Saharan Africa outside South Africa and the best University in East Africa;FURTHER COGNISANT THAT this year, 2022, marks 100 years of the existence of Makerere University, making it Uganda’ s largest and oldest institution of higher learning;NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament –1. Collectively honours Makerere University for its contribution to the social-economic development and transformation of Uganda;2. Collectively appreciates the various Chancellors, Vice-Chancellors, heads of Colleges and other employees of Makerere University for their excellent stewardship, service and immense contribution to the development of Makerere University;3. Collectively appreciates all persons of goodwill, who have over the years, donated financial and other resources to Makerere University for their contribution to the development of Makerere University;4. Congratulate the students’ body of Makerere University and Makerere University alumni on this auspicious occasion.” I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by Hon. Bahati, Hon. Afidra, Member for Arua and many other Members. Hon. Mushemeza, before you speak to your motion, in the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Makerere University comprising members of the University Council and top management. They include the following:1. Ms Lorna Magara- Chairperson of Council; Women are at the helm again (Applause)2. Rt Hon. Dan Kidega -  Vice Chairperson of Council;3. Prof. Barnabas Nawangwe – Vice-Chancellor;4. Prof. Umar Kakumba - Deputy Vice-Chancellor, Academic Affairs;5. Prof. Henry Alinaitwe - Ag. Deputy Vice Chancellor, Finance6. Dr Eng. Charles Wana-Etyem - Former Chairperson of Council;7. Hon. Prof. Tickodri -Togboa - CEO Kira Motors and Former Deputy Vice-Chancellor, Makerere University;8. Prof. Helen Nkabala - Chairperson RESOLUTION TO COMMEMORATE 100 YEARS OF THE EXISTENCE OF MAKERERE UNIVERSITY5877THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022Students’ Affairs;9. Mr Innocent Kihika - Chairperson Appointments Board;10. Dr Fredrick Kitoogo - Chairperson ICT Committee;11. Mrs Jolly Uzamukunda - Chairperson, Staff Development;12. Eng. Kagoda - Former Permanent Secretary of the  Ministry of Internal Affairs and Chairperson Estates and Works Committee;13. Mr Yusuf Kiranda - Former Guild President Makerere University and University Secretary;14. Dr Tanga Odoi - Chairperson Makerere University Convocation;15. Prof. Muhwezi - Deputy Principal, Makerere University Business School (MUBS); 16. Prof. Winston Ireeta - Chairperson Committee on Legal and Rules;17. 17. Mr Chris Ninsiima - the representative of National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda (NUDIPU) on Makerere University Council; There are several members of staff of Makerere University who have accompanied the team. Please, join me in welcoming them. Thank you.Colleagues, also in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have members of Obongi Students’ Association. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. They are represented by Hon. Bhoka George Didi and Hon. Maneno Zumura. (Applause) Join me in welcoming them. Thank you.Honourable member, would you like to speak to your motion? You have three minutes. Is that a procedural matter? MR ACON: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I would like to raise is that we are aware that some of our colleagues went to Makerere University. Therefore, would it be procedurally right that we also recognise them so that if there is a trophy, in form of a gold medal, we also give them. (Laughter) Otherwise, we would like to see them.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I request all Members of Parliament that have gone through Makerere University to stand up for recognition? (Several Members rose_) Thank you. Hon. Acon, that was a good one. Prof. Mushemeza, please, speak to your motion. Before that, can I request Members of Parliament who have been guild presidents at Makerere University to stand up for recognition; Hon. Kibalya, Hon. Adeke and Hon. Basalirwa. (Applause)Can I also request Members of Parliament, who have been lecturers and staff of Makerere to stand up, led by my senior lecturer, Dr Nsibambi, Prof. Mushemeza, Maj. Gen. Masiko and Dr Florence Akiiki? (Applause) I have seen some people appointing themselves as lectures from nowhere. (Laughter) Colleagues, that is when you know the value of lecturing at Makerere. I have seen Hon. Kayemba leading the team of lecturers. Prof. Mushemeza, speak to your motion. MR KIBLAYA: Mr Speaker, since we are celebrating 100 years and 95 per cent of the Members of Parliament here went through Makerere University, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to just sing one stanza of the anthem of Makerere University so that we recognise and-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I will allow you to do that in the corridor after the session - (Laughter) – Or you can cross to the canteen, do it and then come back here. (Laughter) Prof. Mushemeza, speak to your motion.PROF. MUSHEMEZA: Mr Speaker, Makere-re University is celebrating 100 years but what are we celebrating? In which context did Mak-erere University emerge? And what should we be looking forward to in the next decades? Worldwide, institutions of higher learning trace their roots as early as the third century AD, with some of the features of the time, surviving up to the present day. 5878THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 Until recently, Eurocentric History professors thought that it was the Europeans who brought higher education to the African continent. While the Europeans have, indeed, influenced African education for quite some time, there is vital information that most history books leave out. For centuries, before the arrival of Europeans, the vast and advanced native African civilisations already had sophisticated universities and other institutions of higher learning to boast about. Mr Speaker, indeed, Africa has had institutions of higher learning for centuries, including those of indigenous, Islamic and later, Western origins. The earliest recorded universities appear in the northern part of the continent, most notably in Egypt and Morocco. The University of Al-Karaouine was established in Fez-Morocco in AD 859, and considered one of the oldest continuously operating universities in the world. It played a leading role in relations between the Islamic world and Europe in the middle ages. Mr Speaker, when the colonial era set in, more universities were established on the African continent, although these were not independent. They were semi-autonomous affiliated to other universities found in the mother countries of the colonial masters. It was through linkages with universities in Europe that issues of quality assurance, quality staff development and funding were boosted. Mr Speaker, in the period that followed independence, that is 1960s and 1970s, higher education was limited with one university per country in most cases. Although the quality of graduates and research output was high, higher education was, indeed, a privilege of the few. The situation, however, changed in the 1980s and 1990s. African states realised the need to have an educated mass in various fields – Engineering, Medicine, Agriculture, Economics, Pubic Administration and Management, Development Studies – for a multi-disciplinary approach to support economic growth and development. This was a time of increased population growth. More secondary schools were built and they produced large numbers that yearned for university education. As a result, governments established more public universities, institutes and colleges in their respective societies, but with the majority of institutions located in cities and urban centres. Mr Speaker, this is the context that produced Makerere University. Although, in broader terms, globalisation has created new challenges to the university and the delivery of higher education in general, Makerere University has stood the test of time. World over, universities agree that the core function centres around four areas; teaching, research, publishing and outreach. This is possible when universities recruit, train and retain quality academic staff. Makerere University has been able to recruit, train and retain quality staff, although with some challenges. This is observed in terms of the ability of staff in designing relevant programmes and courses, teaching, examination and supervision of students’ research. There is evidence of published books and articles in recognised academic journals, monographs, working papers and policy papers. This is important for dissemination to the wider society for utilisation.Mr Speaker, the other important core function of a university, where Makerere University has excelled, is the academic staff contribution in community outreach. Modern universities are supposed to be leaders in the social and economic development of their communities and nations; and this raises the question of the relevance of their programmes and research. The academic staff at Makerere University has been able to design programmes and projects that focus on the community needs and aspirations, the market and general society. Mr Speaker, Makerere University is known for academic productivity and initiating processes towards the development of a strong university in Africa. We all know that the African university has been undergoing rapid changes, some being negative. However, we [Prof. Mushemeza]RESOLUTION TO COMMEMORATE 100 YEARS OF THE EXISTENCE OF MAKERERE UNIVERSITY5879THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022see Makerere University making strides to study the challenges and prepare appropriate responses in time for both the present and the future. We also see admission of quality students and academic staff and providing an enabling environment for academic productivity. Mr Speaker, we should celebrate the leadership of Makerere University over the decades. One scholar, Hsiu-Hsia, observes, and correctly so, that the intellectual depth, elegancy, vision and most of all courage of the president – in our case, the Vice-Chancellor – are direct reflections of the heart, soul and quality of the university. He further observes that the quality of any university’s leadership reflects that of the university. If one excels, so would the other; if one falters, so will the other. A Vice-Chancellor, for instance, or any other senior administrator in higher institutions of learning, must be aware and cognisant of the optimisation principle articulated in the field of economics. Such an administrator needs to be aware of the dichotomy that often arises between the interests of the proprietors or the institution (such as its survival, growth and development) on one hand and the interests, needs and demands of staff and students on the other. He or she needs to be constantly aware of the possible implications and consequences of his or her decisions and actions as some of these will be positive and others negative. Makerere University leaders, over the years, have been good optimisers. Mr Speaker, I am aware that at the centre of the institutional planning for the future, the leadership is shaping Makerere to be a research-led university by 2030. This is possible with a focus on reinforcement of an enabling environment that fosters innovative teaching and learning that responds to the changing national needs and environment. I am also aware that Makerere University has a vision with a package that entails establishing a fully-fledged science and technology centre; increased number of research publications; research output translated into commercial products; enhancing partnerships with industry, community and national institutions; engender an engaged, motivated and highly productive workforce. We should, however, be cognisant of the challenges that face universities in the 21st century and the strategic interventions necessary to build a strong and well-functioning university in Africa.Mr Speaker, one of the outstanding challenges is the factor of funding higher education. There is a debate on whether the State should meet the bulk of financing higher education in Africa. There is also the view of encouraging Private-Public Partnerships in financing higher education. While supporting Private-Public Partnerships, Prof. Mamdani warns us of the danger or tendency to change the academic curriculum in response to market demands, uncritically and across the board, thus failing to distinguish between privatisation and commercialisation. He argues, and correctly so, that commercialisation of higher education undermines the efforts of building a research university, the only entity that can provide the institutional framework for sustaining intellectual thought. The issue of funding and, particularly the welfare of staff at various universities in Africa, has been at the centre of a series of strikes since 1990s. Inadequate remuneration in form of salaries has resulted into several unfortunate consequences, particularly; a) Low morale and self-esteem; b) Resignation to join better-paying institutions after being sponsored for advanced degrees;c) Low productivity and poor outputs, especially in research and innovations;d) Limited time allocation to research and publication, resulting into stagnation of staff in posts; and e) Inability to pay household utility, food, school fees and health care bills regularly.Mr Speaker, as we celebrate the achievements of Makerere University in academic growth, 5880THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 infrastructural developments, organisation of public lecture series named after significant members of society, who made considerable contributions to the university, let me point out two strategic interventions that Makerere University needs to ponder over. Over the years, I have observed, at Makerere University, the issue of high enrolment of students with few academic staff in some departments. As a result, most academic staff are engaged in teaching undergraduates with little time to engage in research and professional development. There is evidence that universities in Africa contribute less than one per cent in international referred journals. The contribution of African universities to world’s scientific publications is only 1.4 per cent, with more than half of these coming from Egypt and South Africa. Yet, for a university to be relevant, its academic intellectuals must engage in quality teaching and research that reflect the scientific and technological needs of the society. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, conclude. MR MUSHEMEZA: It is prudent for universities to insist on optimum level of student intake under current circumstances and to address workload problems and release some energy to both basic and applied research. Universities should provide support for mentoring programmes, institute starter grants and innovation grants for junior scholars, et cetera.Lastly, the second strategic intervention, which I propose Makerere University to consider is the triangular partnership. This is the role of Government, the private sector and international partners. In a globalised world, the private sector and international development partners like the African Development Bank, Infectious Diseases Research Collaboration and Sida-SAREC, are increasingly becoming important in financing and supporting higher education programmes. Although African governments are urged to increase financial support to universities, it is those institutions with private-sourced components that are likely to achieve the dream of a strong and well-functioning university and be among the top ones in the continent. In conclusion, in this regard, international and private sector efforts at strengthening material resources and institutional capacity, ICT skills, training and research capacities in leadership and governance in African countries, should be mobilised. Networking among African universities, including mobilisation of African scholars in the diaspora, to support the rebuilding of the African university is urgent. Such support would be but not limited to areas of programme and course designing, quality assurance and quality enhancement, publications, sandwich doctoral training, website designing and development, library acquisitions, information sharing on scholarships and research. Mr Speaker, with these few intellectual doses –(Laughter)- I beg the House to wholeheartedly support this motion. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, let us appreciate the professor for the intellectual dose. (Laughter) Hon. Florence Akiiki - Now, because Hon. Mushemeza has really broadly spoken, I will allow the seconders only three minutes each. 3.04DR FLORENCE ASIIMWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion for the resolution of Parliament to commemorate 100 years of the existence of Makerere University. The role of Parliament in the Makerere University journey Through the transition of Makerere University, Parliament has been part and parcel of its journey, especially in the formulation of policies and laws. For example, Parliament [Prof. Mushemeza]RESOLUTION TO COMMEMORATE 100 YEARS OF THE EXISTENCE OF MAKERERE UNIVERSITY5881THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022passed the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001; The Higher Education Students Financing Act, 2015 and; the National Curriculum Development Centre Act, 1973. We also have laws that govern gender relations. There is Gender in Education Policy, the Education Sector HIV/AIDS Workplace Policy, and in all these, Parliament has been part and parcel of Makerere University.AchievementsMr Speaker, Makerere University has made strides. Makerere University has registered the following achievements especially in human resource development: The university boasts of prominent alumni that include former heads of Government, former Speakers of this Parliament and current, including our Deputy Speaker and heads of international agencies -  (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the Speaker. (Applause)DR FLORENCE ASIIMWE: And the Speaker, Cabinet ministers in various governments, Justices of national, regional and international courts of judicature, including those at The Hague, over 90 per cent of Uganda’s current Members of Parliament have gone through the gates of Makerere University –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, switch on the microphone and conclude. DR FLORENCE ASIIMWE: Corporate executives, high-calibre professionals and experts in health, science and technology; the legal fraternity; prominent writers and poets; vice-chancellors and professors in universities across the world as well as key leaders with several portfolios in the public and private sector. Mr Speaker, Makerere University is recognised for the various teaching programmes – I will not go into details about that. Makerere University has also made tremendous contribution to the body of knowledge through research and whose research findings have led to various innovations. Areas of research include areas of infectious diseases, maternal health, crop improvement, climate change, energy conservation, transport technology and others. The university has also been able to attract highly trained teaching personnel with 90 per cent of the academic staff having PhDs. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable colleague. We need time for Members to contribute to the debate. DR FLORENCE ASIIMWE: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, with the above tremendous achievements of Makerere University, I second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to commemorate 100 years of existence of Makerere University. Parliament joins Makerere University in the celebrations to mark a century of excellent service under the theme: “Leverage the 100 Years of Excellence in Building a Transformed Society.” I, therefore, ask Parliament to support the motion. I submit. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will have Hon. Basalirwa, former Guild President of Makerere University. Dr Florence Akiiki, you should have told us your role at Makerere University; let it go on record. DR FLORENCE ASIIMWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was a student at Makerere University from 1982 to 1985. After that, I was taken on as a Teaching Assistant in the Department of Sociology, Makerere University, and I have been a lecturer there since 1993 until 2015 when I applied for early retirement. I then acquired my PhD in Sociology at the University of Cape Town. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can see that she is important, colleagues. 5882THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 3.11MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to second the motion to commemorate 100 years of Makerere University. Unlike Dr Florence Asiimwe, I joined Makerere University in 1998 and I left in 2002. I went back for my Masters degree in Law; I was a resident of Lumumba Hall. On 17 April 2000, I was elected Guild President. My two wives are also alumni of Makerere University. For us, Mr Speaker, the family is Makerere. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is equivalent to a PhD. (Laughter)MR BASALIRWA: Mr Speaker, after the doctors had spoken, I was wondering what I could say to match them. Then I remembered we are three from Makerere University, my two wives and I. As we commemorate 100 years of Makerere University – Prof. Nawangwe, Prof. Kakumba, Prof. Togbowa, Hon. Dan Kidega - what do they expect from us as Parliament? The institution, as it stands, Mr Speaker, needs support, because Makerere University is bleeding. When you go to Makerere University now, the way I go to Mecca every year - I visit Makerere University every year. Look at my former hall, the great Lumumba empire, it is now a shell. As we commemorate 100 years of Makerere University, this Parliament should consider, when it comes to a discussion of the budget, to commit resources to help that institution. The structure of education in this country is such that when things go wrong at Makerere University, higher education is affected. All the lecturers, doctors and professors in other universities, were all educated at Makerere University. We must understand that Makerere University sets the standards and others follow. If things go wrong at Makerere, we are in trouble. I want to propose, Mr Speaker, that as I second this motion, as a takeaway for that delegation in the Gallery, we should consider committing enough resources to help that institution. As I conclude, Makerere University also needs freedom. I recall during our time, I used to invite MPs to come and speak to students. The late Hon. Ekulo Epak, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the late Hon. Aggrey Awori, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the Hon. Nobert Mao and others. I would invite them almost every week for debates and discussions. Prof. Mushemeza knows that when I was Guild President, I used to give him a platform almost every week. He would debate with Prof. Afuna Adula, Prof. Akiiki Mujaju, the late Adonia Tiberondwa and others. That is no longer happening in the university, Mr Speaker. If we are building for the future, we should build an institution that promotes intellectual freedom and intellectual thought. Those days, when we were Guild presidents, we used to set the national agenda. I remember almost every week, I would make headlines. Now, guild presidents cannot talk; the lecturers need freedom.Mr Speaker, where is MUASA? Prof. Mushemeza knows very well that the MUASA of then and the current MUASA are completely different. Our guild and the current guild are completely different. Therefore, as we commemorate 100 years, Makerere University needs intellectual freedom for both the lecturers and the students. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Basalirwa. I think Hon. Basalirwa has gone back to a state of nostalgia, when he used to address people in Makerere. That is the Basalirwa I know. I was happy with the time of Basalirwa as Guild President because during that time we used not to have people dying during guild campaigns. The moment students start killing each other, then they also find that they are limiting themselves. RESOLUTION TO COMMEMORATE 100 YEARS OF THE EXISTENCE OF MAKERERE UNIVERSITY5883THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022If you are a manager of a university, you have to take action. These are things you must do. They might not be popular but you have to take decisions as a leader. Hon. Florence Akiki, someone complained that you forgot to mention party presidents as former students of Makerere University. Someone whispered to me and I said I will put it on record to make people satisfied. The Attorney-General needs to guide us. 3.17THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a proud student of Makerere University, 1993 to 1996, where I was privileged to study Law as a first degree. I was a resident of Nkrumah Hall, unlike my learned friend who was in Lumumba. I was privileged to serve later on as a member of the University Council of Makerere University, and I speak from great experience both as a student and as a leader in Makerere. Mr Speaker, you have said it, there is always going to be a balance. It is very easy when you are on the student side to look at the leadership side and say, “you are wrong.” Like you have said, we need to balance this. Makerere University is transitioning into a research-led university. We will need to support Makerere in every way possible to achieve that dream of finding a home-bred solution to our problems. Makerere must start doing research to find solutions, which are made for us and by us. In order to achieve this, it will be very important for us, Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament, to review the University and other Tertiary Institutions legislation. When it comes here, I pray that you will support its growth. Makerere was the first university in Uganda. Like any firstborn, Makerere has made us proud. We are proud of you and, indeed, we continue to build for the future. I support the motion. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 3.19MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo East County, Namisindwa): Mr Speaker. I thank you for the privilege that I should speak as one of the alumni of Makerere University of the 20th congregation. Mr Speaker, I am a Rasta and the influence is from Makerere University. I want those who have come and who are in the Public Gallery to know that Makerere University has produced a Rasta man in this Parliament. (Laughter) I am overwhelmingly and in full support of this motion as moved by my O.B, Prof. Mushemeza - we were there at the same time. I know he spoke about social, economic transformation - Mr Speaker, I want to add that Makerere University has done political transformation of the region and the whole of Africa. We have produced presidents, two in Kenya, - Jomo Kenyatta and Kibaki, both of them are alumni of Makerere University. In Tanzania, there was Mwalimu Nyerere, and many others. It is now a fashion –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.3.21MS ANNA ADEKE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are no roses coming from my mouth. As Makerere celebrates 100 years, it is a moment of reflection for us in this House as the political elite, and also for Uganda as a country, in light of Article 29 of the Constitution and the freedom of expression.Makerere as a centre of excellence thrives on academic free expression. In my view, this space has been closed. The gunmen came and took over the country; they captured the spaces in Makerere University; it is no longer an area of free expression. We have criminalisation of free expression in the highest institution of learning in our country. For me, that requires all of us here to self-reflect about our need to – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prof. Nsibambi?5884THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 MS ADEKE: Mr Speaker, I was in Makerere –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have not allowed you time. I want to allow other colleagues to speak. Prof. Nsibambi?3.22PROF. YUSUF NSIBAMBI (FDC, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am speaking on a passionate note, as a former staff. I taught at Makerere for 27 years. I am also a student of Makerere University. The mover of this motion, “Field Marshall” Mushemeza was my boss at the Northcote State and I was the chief Kadhi. I taught at Makerere Universality for over 27 years without leave. I did not get leave, which was illegal, irregular and a stupid experience; not because I wanted. At the Faculty of Law, now a college – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable member. Colleagues, since all of you want to speak, I am going to give each of you one minute.MR NSIBAMBI: On another sad note, I got a heart attack and surgery in Makerere because I taught four classes back to back. So, I think it is important to ensure that we provide funds to retain good staff to teach. I had no option because I had to teach. I was passionate but it was a very bad experience. I am actually here because of what happened; I taught back to back. I do not want my colleagues to go through what we went through. This business of harassing staff when they raise issues, as if they are enemies of the State, must be addressed by this House. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Prof. Nsibambi raises the issue of funding, which Hon. Mushemeza talked about. If we gave the university management funds to recruit sufficient staff, they would do it. That is an issue we have to look into. I remember the staff structure still has a lot of gaps. This is not the design of management, but let us give them funding to recruit staff. That is very important to note. 3.25MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not a student of Makerere; I studied at Kyambogo. Kyambogo oyee . (Laughter) I bring a congratulatory message from Kyambogo University, where I am a University Council member because my lecturers were all from Makerere – the likes of Prof. Bazilake and the rest.Mr Speaker, as we commemorate this day, I move that we look at the halls and lecture rooms. They are all dilapidated. I think we should move that next time, in this House, we come here and pass a budget – (Member timed out.)3.26MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a product of Makerere University from Livingstone Hall; the gentlemen. I also used to run for the university in athletics and marathons, 1993 to 1996.During our time, Makerere produced firebrands and I am one of those who benefitted from Makerere Institute of Social Research. I gained research skills, went back to Fort Portal and started the Kabarole Research and Resource Centre, which has contributed greatly to the think tanks of this country. (Applause) The system that used to nurture us to go to the library, make research, engage with the lecturers intellectually and engage with other universities has really gone down.Makerere –(Member timed out.)3.27MR ODRIA ALIONI (NRM, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a product of Makerere University. Above all, throughout, I was a leader in the RESOLUTION TO COMMEMORATE 100 YEARS OF THE EXISTENCE OF MAKERERE UNIVERSITY5885THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022Guild Representative Council (GRC) and a minister also -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We said we do not want GRCs today. (Laughter) he was the chief elder. MR ODRIA: When I was the minister, you were doing your masters degree. We were together; you remember that very well. Last month, I decided to go with two of my daughters. One is in year four and the other one is in year three, in an international school. I decided to take them to the university to have lunch; I got lost. There is no Guild Canteen anymore. The university –(Interjection) – Hon. Kibalya, I was with you in your –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member. (Laughter) Order, colleagues. The country is watching. Yesterday, we had a long debate on mental health and you know the issues. (Laughter) Someone said all of us are potential cases but it depends on the time. (Laughter)Now, we are provoking each other. Why are you provoking Hon. Alioni? All I know is Hon. Alioni and Hon. Kibalya are very good friends. 3.29THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (BUNYORO AFFAIRS) (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I salute the men and women, the lecturers of Makerere University. I was a student in Makerere University for six years doing a Bachelors of Science in Forestry for four years, and a Masters in Forestry for two years. Hon. Mao was the Guild President when I was a fresher. I agree that we need to support Makerere University to rehabilitate the halls of residence. (Applause) I am told that Lumumba Hall is apparently closed. For the next two years, they are going to rehabilitate it and I am happy about that. I am a lady and I know halls like Mary Stuart really need rehabilitation. (Applause)We need to support research so that students that graduate have hands-on –(Member timed out.)3.31MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for my one minute. Since one of our own is the one chairing the commemoration of the 100 years of Makerere University, I suggest that we rename one of the halls “Tayebwa”. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, go on. MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, everyone here is singing “Makerere University.” Most of us have gone through the university but the question arises: what have we done for Makerere University? I submit.3.32MR THEMBO MUJUNGU (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I have been called a fresh kid. I am not an alumnus but a friend of Makerere. It is important that Parliament draws a resolution to commemorate 100 years of the university. Makerere University, as a centre of higher learning, has been a centre of inspiration for many young people in Uganda and beyond. As a young person, I aspired to speak good –(Member timed out.)3.33MS SYLVIA NAYEBALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a proud alumnus of Makerere University and a strong consumer of kikumi-kikumi  - for those who have been there. (Laughter)The world is going into an economic revolution. The fourth industrial revolution should not leave Makerere University behind. I, therefore, implore Makerere lecturers and administrators 5886THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 to engage in the struggle and strategically position themselves in the fourth industrial revolution so that Makerere is not left behind. Thank you.3.34MS CHRISTINE AKELLO (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also a product of Makerere University. I rise to support the motion but the lecturers should take note of missing marks. When I was a student, I also experienced it. Up to now, some of the students have left the university and gone back home without completing their courses.Therefore, as we celebrate, they should take note of the issue of missing marks. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The honourable colleague has raised an important issue. Some of you, honourable members, have never gone back to Makerere to pick your transcripts. Some of you have not even cleared with the university. (Laughter) They still demand money from you, yet you are using documents of the university to become Members of Parliament and CEOs. (Laughter) I think if you continue like this, I am going to ask for the transcripts and certificates so that you can be forced to go back.However, on a serious note, very many people have not gone back to pick their academic documents. You need to do that. The Vice-Chancellor has been emphasising it.3.35MS RUTH LEMATIA  (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am not an alumnus of Makerere but a close associate of the university. I am a nurse by profession. When nurses did not have degrees in this country, I sat down and prepared a proposal to introduce a nursing degree in Uganda. At first, it was proposed to be offered in Mbarara University but because of politics – we had Cubans there, so, the Americans who were to assist me could not go there. Therefore, I went to Makerere asking if they could take over this course. I am very grateful that they took it up but asked me –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, conclude.MS LEMATIA: I am very happy that nurses are now getting degrees and even PhDs here in Uganda. Makerere should be helped to progress further. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kibalya, the former Guild President -3.37MR HENRY KIBALYA  (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was in Mitchel Hall. My issue is one. We left after setting up the whole plan for Makerere Students’ Guild Mall. Everything was in place but up to now, the mall is not there. That is my interest and, since the whole university is here –(Laughter.)(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have constituents of Bufumbira South in Kisoro District. They are represented by Hon. Alex Niyonsaba. They are 30 in number and they are tourist guides from Mgahinga Forest Reserve. Yesterday, they were celebrating International Tourism Day. They are represented by both Hon. Alex Niyonsaba and Hon. Sarah Mateke. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)3.38THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker.First of all, I am a very proud product of Makerere University and I would like to thank all the colleagues who have made a contribution to this motion. Thank you for appreciating and loving Makerere University.As a country, we have very many good reasons to celebrate 100 years of Makerere University. [Ms Nayebale]RESOLUTION TO COMMEMORATE 100 YEARS OF THE EXISTENCE OF MAKERERE UNIVERSITY5887THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022Many of those reasons have been presented here, but I would like to add only three. One, Makerere University has produced seven presidents for our region. I think that is something –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, switch it on.DR MUYINGO: It has produced seven presidents for our region and one Prime Minister for the Caribbean region. It is a university that started in 1922 with only 14 students but it is now over 40,000. I think we need to celebrate that also.Secondly, something that I have not heard, yet it is really great, is that Makerere University produced the first electric car – fully built by Africans. We need to celebrate that. (Applause)Thirdly, Makerere University, at 100 years, is repositioning itself to become a research innovation-led university. Colleagues, we need to support Makerere in this endeavour for the next 100 years. Of course, they need the resources.Government has planned to put in a lot of resources to support Makerere University so that for the next 100 years, it becomes a research-led university – innovation-led university. Of course, Members of Parliament, you have a stake in this. I hope you will do the most needful.We are using these celebrations also to solicit support from Government, Parliament and other stakeholders to support Makerere University in its effort to rehabilitate the dilapidated infrastructure, which you know, some of them have been in existence for over 100 years. We need all your support, Members of Parliament. When we come up with our budget, please, support us for the sake of what you want Makerere to be. We are also using these celebrations to solicit support so that Makerere University comes up with its own hospital; you are aware, Makerere University has been training medical doctors from Mulago. You know what it is. We should support this and very soon, I will be coming here to present a request; I hope you will support me. Otherwise, Mr Speaker and colleagues, I thank you very much for supporting the motion. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Now, honourable minister, whereas we have debated and you have listened to the current challenges, we have the issue of amending the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act so that it conforms to the requirements of today. That amendment process, from what I have read was started in 2007 up to now. I have had private Members bringing proposals for that amendment. Please, work on it with the Attorney-General, bring the amendment so that we can update and modernise our higher education. That is extremely important and I hope this financial year - because I think it was part of the legislative agenda for this financial year. So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that is a Bill we need. Do you want to update us on that? You should go back and ensure that you work on this. Committee on Education and Sports, please, follow up.DR MUYINGO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Number two, colleagues, issues of funding and support to our universities are very important. The issue of research; if we want our universities to be relevant - to not only produce products that will go on the market to look for jobs and all that, we need to give them money for research so that they can design solutions to our problems. If we leave the research agenda to foreigners - last time, we gave Makerere Shs 30 billion, and other public universities, Shs 3 billion each. We need to increase research funding. I am happy we have started but we need to increase research funding for public universities. 5888THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 But also, private universities are playing a critical role. I do not know why we cannot support private universities, because in other parts of the world, they support private universities that are playing a very critical role in higher education. Issues about the image of Makerere in terms of infrastructure; I am happy the Government has taken an initiative. I understand now they have committed to working on the halls of residence but we still have issues of funding. For example, how much do we give each student for food per day? You know, per day, the money we give cannot even buy what they call kikomando on the street. Now, you do not expect Prof. Nawangwe, Madam Lorna Magara and the team to sell their cows to finance students’ welfare; these are our children. In addition, the issue I talked about, - which I assigned to the committee and which we have to start looking at - the issue of Government sponsorship, where most of our children are the ones who benefit because they go to the best schools in this country, and we can afford the tuition; these are issues we need to dialogue on. Otherwise, congratulations Makerere University. We are going to support you. Please, continue contributing to not only the development of Uganda but also the world and Africa. With that, I now put the question that the motion for a Resolution of Parliament to Commemorate 100 years of the Existence of Makerere University be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Congratulations Vice-Chancellor, Chairperson Council, and honourable colleagues. I direct the Clerk to extract a copy of the resolution and a copy of the Hansard and forward them to Makerere University for further management and sharing with the public. Next item.BILLSFIRST READINGTHE NATIONAL LEGAL AID BILL, 20223.47MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill titled, “The National Legal Aid Bill, 2022” be read for the first time.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Aogon. In line with Rule 118 of our Rules of Procedure, I refer the Bill to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Certificate of Financial Implications together with a draft copy of the Bill. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill is referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Chairperson, please, ensure that you process it in time. Next item - MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE BILL, 2021 AS RETURNED BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I want us to first do these Bills quickly and then we go back to item No.5. Honourable minister - if the minister is not around, someone can help him. Prime Minister, you are a minister. Is the agriculture minister around? I had seen him around. 3.48THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021” returned by His Excellency the President be reconsidered.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) Yes, it is seconded by Hon. Tebandeke, Hajji Idd, Hon. Namuyangu, Hon. Okeyoh and Hon. Olanya.  [Prof. Mushemeza]RECONSIDERATION OF THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE BILL, 20215889THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022Honourable minister, this being a Bill, which was returned by the President, is not something for which we would need more justification for you to come and talk about it. When you are talking about such a Bill in the presentation, we usually focus on the principles and objectives of the Bill, which were already covered. The Rt Hon. Speaker presented the President’s letter last time, clearly justifying why the Bill had been returned. Therefore, we do not need fresh justification on why this Bill was returned because it is the President’s right under Article 91. Colleagues, when we are looking at this Bill, we shall be guided by Rule 143 of our Rules of Procedure. I want you to take that seriously so that we have a well-structured handling of the Bill.3.51THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe):   Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table, the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021. I also beg to lay the minutes of the meetings of the committee on Table. And now, I beg to present the report of the committee. Mr Speaker, Parliament of Uganda passed the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bi11, 2021 on 3rd May 2022 with amendments and forwarded it to His Excellency, the President, for assent. However, the President did not assent to the Bill and in a letter dated 18 August 2022, he returned it to Parliament for reconsideration in accordance with Article 91(3)((b). The letter is attached and marked as “B.”The President’s letter was laid on the Table on 7 September 2022, and subsequently, the Rt Hon. Speaker referred it to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for consideration and thereafter, report back to the House. The issues that were raised by His Excellency, the President concerned clause 4 on the definition of “a licensing officer.” The “licensing officer” is defined in the Bill as the “Chief Fisheries Officer or District Fisheries Officer.” The President argued that this would cause confusion and could be a recipe for malpractices. He said that the “licensing officer” should be the “Chief Fisheries Officer;”Secondly, Mr Speaker – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sorry honourable colleague. Government Chief Whip, your Members are at it again. I do not know how we shall continue doing business in this House, when Members come and go to the corridors and start making noise for Members who are here. You know, the other day, Members were the ones who even raised it; it is too much. MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In clause 13(2) and (3)- on the Surveillance Unit, the Bill domiciles the Surveillance Unit Organisation, Command, Control and Training under the Uganda Police Force. The Surveillance Unit Organisation, Command, Control and Training need to be domiciled under the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and the Uganda Police Force (UPF). The rationale is that, given the need for continuous surveillance and sophisticated ways employed by people involved in illegal fishing, the support of both the UPDF and the UPF are required.The committee held an in-house meeting to discuss the matters raised by the President in his letter and also met the state minister for fisheries together with the staff from the Directorate of Fisheries, to consider the President’s position.During the meetings, the committee considered the President’s letter and deliberated on it in accordance with rule 143(4), which states that: “Debate on a motion under this rule shall be 5890THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 confined to consideration of matters referred to it in the message of the President or to any suggestion relevant to the subject matter of the amendment recommended by the President.”Observations and recommendations In clause 4, on the definition of “licensing officer” the President recommended that the definition of the “licensing officer” be reviewed to refer to only the “Chief Fisheries Officer.” The proposal by the committee, which was captured in the assent copy referred to the “licensing officer” to mean the “Chief Fisheries Officer” or a “District Fisheries Officer.” The committee agrees with the President’s guidance. However, the guidance will have effect on the following provisions, which will require amendment to align them to the proposal: (a) The definition of “licensing officer” will be deleted since the “Chief Fisheries Officer” in whom the licensing mandate is fully-vested is defined under clause 4 and clause 7(d), which stipulates the mandate of the directorate in relation to the issuance of licences and permits. Accordingly, the phrase “licensing officer” should be replaced with “Chief Fisheries Officer” wherever it appears. The clauses that are going to be affected are: (a)  Clause 33 (2),(4),(5),(6) and (7); and clause 48(1) and (2); clause 53; clause 54; clause 55; clause 62(3),(4) and(6); c1auses 63 and 64. (b)  Clause 24(1)(c) will have to be deleted to ensure consistency. (c)  The phrase “District Fisheries Officer” under clauses 39(1) and 84(1) should be replaced with the phrase “Chief Fisheries Officer.” (d)  Clause 84(3) should be deleted since it will be covered under clause 56(1).(e)  Clause 62(1) should be amended by inserting, immediately after the word, “issued” the words “by the Chief Fisheries Officer.”(f)  Clause 62(2) should be deleted since it is taken care of by the amendment under clause 62(1). In clause 13 on the establishment of Fisheries Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Unit, the President expressed concern that given the need for continuous surveillance and the sophisticated ways employed by people involved in illegal fishing, the support of both the UPDF and the UPF is required. The committee, however, takes cognisance of the President’s concern and recognises the fact that one of the functions of the UPDF is to preserve and defend the sovereignty and interior integrity of Uganda, including engaging in productive activities for the development of Uganda. The committee also notes that the President as Commander-in-Chief of the UPDF and Fountain of Honour, has the prerogative to deploy the Forces whenever need arises as mandated by the Constitution. The committee appreciates the role played by the UPDF in other sectors in the country like health, disaster and roads. Furthermore, the committee notes that the Uganda Police Act, Cap 303 mandates the Police Force to: protect the life, property and other rights of individuals; to maintain security within Uganda; to enforce the laws of Uganda; to ensure public safety and order; and to prevent and detect crime in the society. The committee is, therefore, of the opinion that the earlier position as passed by Parliament be maintained. (Applause) In the event of any sophisticated ways employed by people involved in illegal fishing as cited by the President, the UPDF may be deployed in accordance with the provisions of the UPDF Act and the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. (Applause)[Ms Okori-Moe]RECONSIDERATION OF THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE BILL, 20215891THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022Mr Speaker, the rest are proposed amendments to the returned Bills. I do not know whether I should read it or it will handled at Committee Stage. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, those are consequential amendments. We shall first handle the two clauses the President returned and then go to consequential amendments as a result of the other amendments that would have been made. Colleagues, this is a short one and as I guided earlier, the debate on any Bill’s report is always on the principles and objectives. I open debate for 10 minutes and then we move. I will allow Hon. Silas, Hon. Teira, the Member for Kioga, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi and Hon. Okeyoh. 3.02MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Indeed, we will observe the rules; we will only dwell on matters to deal with what the President is not in agreement with. I want to applaud the committee on the position they have taken. On the first position, to deal with licensing, I am in agreement with the President’s position and I think the committee agrees. That is a good one and so, we should take that direction. The second one is on the issue of UPDF. We are all aware about what has happened in this country before, in terms of the operations of the UPDF in the waters. This time around, it is very important that UPDF is led by the UPF, if that is the case. The position is very clear. Therefore, the position of the committee is a position we should be able to adopt without wasting time. Let us agree that the committee has done a good job and we adopt this position and move on, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Teira?4.04MR JOHN TEIRA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Looking at the atrocities that the people in the fishing community have suffered at the hands of our brothers and sisters in army uniform, an inclusion of UPDF in the Act will be legitimising the very unfortunate acts that have happened to those people. I stand here to support the position of the committee that we adopt UPF to take the lead in the surveillance of the waters. Thank you. 4.05MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to thank the committee for the report. I represent the fishermen and I am a real fisherman. (Laughter) Therefore, this Bill is the core of my being here. I thank the committee for being bold and stating that the UPDF should be left out of surveillance.Mr Speaker, we have forces like Anti-Stock Theft Unit and the Environment Protection Police Unit. What is unique with the fishermen? I am a fisherman and I do not think I am very hostile to the extent that people should be under the UPDF. Fishermen are very amiable people; friendly and law-abiding. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Member for Kioga -4.05MR MOSES OKOT (FDC, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My constituency is a peninsular in Amolatar; I purely represent the fishing community. I appreciate the committee very much for what they have done to the Bill. There is no better justice that could be done to this Bill than what they have done. Mr Speaker, I am in a “vegetative” state because of the brutality of the UPDF. There is no better empirical evidence that could be brought to the House than bringing myself to show the country the extent of the exigencies of the UPDF in the lake. (Applause)5892THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 In furthering the operation of the UPDF in the House, we would be condoning persons whose natural training – prima facie is to deal with external aggression – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member for Jonam?  4.07MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also support the position of my colleagues that we should exclude our brothers and sisters in the UPDF from supervision of lakes. My point is on why we mistrust the police on this. I want to believe that the police is also able to do what we think the UPDF should do. Moreover, Mr Speaker, we already have some of the commanders of the police who are coming from the army. So, if they think they want to sharpen the police, let those commanders do so, within the police and allow the police to do their work. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Namuyangu? 4.08THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (BUNYORO AFFAIRS) (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had the opportunity to be on a committee that was sent out to investigate allegations against the UPDF. I covered Lake Kioga, the districts of Kayunga, Buyende; I went to Serere, Kaliro, Amolatar and Nakasongola. I also went to Bunyoro, Lake Albert, although the activities had not started. I want to tell you that the fishermen and women who are natives have no problem but the criminals who had moved from other areas had even made plots in the lake –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, conclude. MS NAMUYANGU: They had made plots in the lake and it is only the UPDF that managed to restore order in those areas. (Interjections)  Therefore, for us to forget and say that the UPDF has not done a good job is a disservice and yet all the lakes had been destroyed. I disagree, but I support the idea that both Forces can take care of our lakes. After all, they have taken care of our security.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Nekesa, would you like to say something? Then Hon. Nandala-Mafabi and Hon. Naomi. (Member rose_) There is no one on the Floor so you cannot raise a point of order. This is a Member of Parliament in her own right.  4.10COL VICTOR NEKESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Honourable members, I stand here to give insight; a perspective that we all need to know. We have a national economic enterprise called the waters of Lake Victoria and other water bodies with a lot of fish and other lives in there. This is a national enterprise that helps Uganda achieve some of its economic goals. The UPDF, as a military instrument, can be used to help the Government or a nation achieve its economic enterprises to get the economy higher. I do not understand –(Interjection)-   No, let us look at it this way. We can get our objectives of transforming the country using the marine – the fish and the lake waters – with the UPDF being an instrument and rightly so. In the last three years, we have achieved it. I thank you.4.11MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to ask Members to have time to go to Katosi and Kiyindi. They will discover what is happening there. I can tell you that anybody who is near the lake is supposed to utilise the lake. For me, who is from Bugisu, I will talk about coffee. These [Mr Okot]RECONSIDERATION OF THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE BILL, 20215893THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022people cannot even eat mukene, which is meant for children. These people cannot even touch mputa because if they arrest you with mputa, you are dead meat. We must come here and utilise our resources for the benefit of the people of Uganda. The plots, which Minister Namuyangu is talking about, are owned by the Chinese. Non-Ugandans are the ones who have taken over Lake Victoria in the management of fish. We must fight this. In fact, the UPDF is protecting the non –(Member timed out.)Mr Speaker, just one minute. They are protecting the Chinese, Indians and the mafias. The UPDF is supposed to protect us at the borders from people who are attacking us but not to come and make the people of Uganda suffer. Mr Speaker, the issue of the police is allowed. That is why we have Uganda police for NEMA, Uganda police for fisheries and Uganda police for forests. So, I would say the committee did a good job and they did it under the Constitution of Uganda. The moment you bring the UPDF, you are going against the Constitution of Uganda.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 4.13MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (Independent, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, President Yoweri Museveni, by the time he thought of bringing the army, must have realised that maybe the police - because even the police are his – had failed. I remember most of the factories that were exporting and processing fish had closed. By the time they brought the army in, they were to protect our export of fish. I know that fish is one of the country’s source of income. If we just leave it – it is not actually killing the wananchi not to get fish. Maybe, what they can do is to sit with this army and let even the wananchi –(Member timed out.)4.14MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. My concern is about them saying that they can use the police force but call upon other forces when the police has failed. Whom will you hold accountable when you call the UPDF to join the police, without regulating it in the law? Therefore, if there is a bad apple within UPDF, it can be dealt with. Why should we generalise, debate and come up with a law that is bad because of one bad apple that has tainted the image of the UPDF?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, colleagues, what you are doing is debating amendments. We would rather go to Committee Stage and debate from there. 4.15THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of our duties, as Parliament, is to ensure that institutions of Government do not collapse. By this very amendment, we can collapse the UPF as an institution of Government. There is a reason Article 208 of the Constitution is distinct from Article 211. The roles are very clear. The roles of the UPDF, in the UPDF Act, are very unequivocal.I would like to ask Members of Parliament, sometimes, to have the courage to do the right thing. (Applause) It is very important that sometimes, even when you feel very cowed by the overbearing principal, you should do the right thing for the sake of posterity. The fisheries sector is not just for export. To some communities, it is what they have known as life and livelihood. (Applause) Before even thinking about exporting, that is what they have known for the entirety of their life. Therefore, we as Parliament, in what we do in policy and legislation, owe them a duty of care. We are not going to wake up in a single day and enlist all committees into commercialisation. 5894THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 So, marketisation of legislation, without enabling communities to migrate progressively, is dangerous. I can assure you, honourable members, that the UPF needs support and protection. Already, its territory has been encroached on by the UPDF, by way of deployment and recruitment. We can inform the President, indirectly, that this institution matters by the way we choose to legislate today. Mr Speaker, I would like to invite Members to think beyond what, probably, the President thinks. The President can be advised. Forget his name. (Laughter) He can be advised and the advice can actually be justified. So, can we close in and do the right thing and protect and grow institutions? Mr Speaker, I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues – you see, when we are here, we do not want to make laws that are going to create winners and losers or institutions that we believe in and institutions that we do not believe in. Who brought this clause and what was the purpose? The other day, we passed the Markets Bill. We have riots in the market. Did we create a force to go and quell riots in the markets? Some of these clauses – I do not know why they come. Some of them are redundant and they come to cause us problems. I am really concerned. You have your Executive powers and you bring us clauses that are going to cause us trouble. It means that for every Bill that we pass, we shall create a Force. What kind of precedent are we setting? (Applause)My fear is that if you pass a clause and say we indict the UPDF because they are brutal or we indict the police because they are weak - The argument from one side is saying the police were weak and they could not handle. Then, the argument from the other side is that the UPDF is brutal. You are inviting us to enter into your work. This is not our work. You cannot legislate this way. These are some of the clauses, which are not needed in laws. You already have your powers. Do not make Parliament look bad. Whoever will be reading the law – for every Bill, we need a Force to operationalise it. That would be wrong, colleagues. I am not supposed to engage in the debate, but I am only guiding on this. (Applause) Honourable minister?4.20THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, I thank the committee for taking time to reconsider the Bill, as returned. I have listened to the arguments and I have listened to your very important counsel. I am really struggling to get your attention, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sorry about that.MR TUMWEBAZE: I have listened to your guidance; it is logical and instructive. The argument is that the Executive has powers to deploy - be it the police, the UPDF or a hybrid force. Based on that, I would also recommend that we do not promote a debate that portrays one force against the other. (Applause) So, from your guidance, Mr Speaker, I would concede to the deletion of the entire clause. (Applause) We should not provide for the police and we do not provide for the UPDF either. Let us allow the Commander-in-Chief to deploy as he deems fit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  - Colleagues, listen. Colleagues, first of all, listen. All forces in this country, under the Constitution, are regulated under the laws made by you. They are regulated by laws made by Parliament; no one else makes laws. If there is anyone who is abusing any of those laws or there is a gap, we have power, as Parliament, to come and amend those laws. [Mr Mpuuga]RECONSIDERATION OF THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE BILL, 20215895THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022It will be absurd for this Parliament to be the one to choose to say, “We love this Force against the other Force.” It would be a wrong precedent for us here to sit, when we are supposed to allocate money to all and we say we love this Force against the other. That would be wrong. Colleagues, let us take this debate to the next stage. I now put the question that the motion for reconsideration of the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021 be adopted by this House.(Question put and agreed to.)Motion adopted.BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGE THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE BILL, 2021Clause 4THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Mr Chairperson, the proposal is that on clause 4, we delete the definition of “Licensing Officer” and thereafter, substitute for the words “Licensing Officer” wherever the words appear with the words “Chief Fisheries Officer”.The justification is to ensure that there is only one centralised office mandated to issue licences relating to fisheries activities for proper coordination and regulation. I beg to move.MR OLANYA: Mr Chairperson, I am seeing a problem here. The committee is proposing that we substitute the definition to “Chief Fisheries Officer”. The known position in the district, which is approved by the Ministry of Public Service, is “District Fisheries Officer” and now, we are changing.I would like to find out whether we are going to employ another officer called “Chief Fisheries Officer”, in addition to the District Fisheries Officer. My view is we need to maintain the position of the District Fisheries Officer. The moment we change it, it means we need to employ another officer, in addition to the District Fisheries Officer.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable colleague, when the chairperson was presenting, what I picked was that they want to have only one licensing officer. So, if the district can maybe - I do not know whether you allowed regulations, where the district would now be making recommendations and all that. (Hon. Olanya rose_) Wait a bit. Let the Attorney-General help us.MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Mr Chairperson, what we are trying to achieve here is to hold someone accountable. This person is accountable. He will not be the one in Busia, Jinja and wherever but when it comes to the licensing function, the person who is accountable is an office. It is actually an office – the Chief Licensing Officer. Yes.MR OLANYA: Mr Chairperson, on that point, I see that we are going to render the position of the District Fisheries Officer in that district jobless because we shall be having two people in that particular district.DR BWANIKA: Mr Chairperson, the Licensing Officer is one; it is an office. He can delegate to the District Fisheries Officer. That is how it is done. You cannot fragment licensing to everyone.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does that satisfy you, Hon. Olanya? Let the minister add on. Hon. Silas Aogon? MR AOGON: Mr Chairperson, we do not need to waste time on this. When you look at the rest of the entities, there must be a centre of responsibility. There is no way we can ask for accountability from everybody. Ultimately, Government knows how to institute mechanisms for operation and coordination.5896THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 Therefore, I would like to stand with the position of the President. I think it is very clear. Thank you.MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairperson, the shadow minister put it right. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has officers in the districts who carry on delegated functions – a DVO, a fisheries officer and an agricultural officer. The same applies to the subcounty. They implement policies of Government. Therefore, the role of policy direction comes from the centre. Therefore, it is important that you have a commissioner or director at the centre, who is responsible for policy implementation and the other officers in the districts only help to execute a given position. So, if you create multiple centres of decision-making, then nobody is accountable. I hope that is clear. Thank you.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Col-leagues, remember, we have another Bill.MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Maybe, for the comfort of our colleague, a minister would clarify what the licensing officer will be doing, which is different from what the district fisheries officer does. The concern is that, perhaps, he is coming to take away roles. If that is clarified, I think there will be comfort to some with concerns in that respect.MR KIROOWA: The role is the same as it is set out in clause 24. It is just that the person who holds this role is the Chief Fisheries Officer. Everyone else who carries out that function carries out a delegated function but it is the same.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Colleagues, I now put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Col-leagues, I want to repeat the question because I read clause 24 instead of clause 4. I am sorry about that. I want us to be systematic. I now put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  There are colleagues who might be having the Bill and are saying that it is not amended. The Bill we are handling is the one we passed here and sent to the President. It is the one we are amending. If you are following the Bill, which is on our system or you are having the old copy that is an old Bill. That is why we are amending it instead of saying it should stand part of the Bill. Clause 13MS OKORI-MOE:  Mr Chairperson, the view of the committee is that clauses 13(2) and (3) be maintained as passed by Parliament as follows:1. There is established a Fisheries Monitoring Control and Surveillance Unit within the directorate;2. The surveillance unit shall comprise persons with qualifications in fisheries sciences appointed by the Public Service Commission and trained by the Uganda Police Force;3. The Minister may, in consultation with the minister responsible for internal affairs, by statutory instrument, make regulations for;a. The organisation and deployment of the surveillance unit;b. The functions and duties of officers of the surveillance unit;c. The terms and conditions of service, grades, ranks and appointment and discipline of officers of the surveillance unit;d. The description and issue of arms, ammunition, accoutrements, uniforms, authority cards and other necessary supplies to officers of the surveillance unit; and[Mr Aogon]RECONSIDERATION OF THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE BILL, 20215897THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022e. Matters relating generally to the good order and administration of the surveillance unit. 4. That whereas the terms and conditions of service of an officer of the surveillance unit, authorise him or her to possess firearms in the course of his or her duties, the officer shall, in addition to any other terms and conditions that may be imposed by the standards section, wear a uniform and be governed by regulations made under this section regarding powers of search and arrest, training, discipline and use of firearms. The reasons that were given earlier on when this clause was passed, still stand. I beg to move. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. This is a clause, which we have been debating; and it was causing a lot of commotion. MR ARIKO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to borrow the wisdom of the minister. We are in a state where we know that the President, who is also the Commander-in-Chief, has powers to direct and order all armed forces in the country. In order for us to make a law that does not create clusters of doubt, I want us to go with the proposal that the honourable minister had mentioned here that we simply delete the entire clause. Mr Chairman, that is my view. Thank you. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Col-leagues, I still repeat what I had said at the be-ginning. It will be a wrong precedent for this House to pit one Force against the other. You might trust the police but the next day, you are the ones who will be here castigating the Po-lice. In clause 13(1), there is “Established a fisheries monitoring, control and surveillance unit within the directorate. The surveillance unit shall comprise persons with qualifications of fisheries sciences, appointed by the Public Service Commission and trained by the Uganda Police.” Do you know where Uganda Police trains from? (Laughter) MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. That statement, in my view, “trained by” could be omitted. But to say that we remove the entire clause is dangerous. The fisheries sector should have a monitoring and surveillance unit. The issue of the training and the rest, in my view, is administrative. Also, the clause that empowers the Minister for Internal Affairs, and the Minister for Agriculture, to make regulations is in itself sufficient. We could actually remove the aspect of “trained by Uganda Police Force” but maintain the clause on surveillance and monitoring. That is very important, in my view.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But I am even seeing the people in it. MR MPUUGA: Mr Chairperson, with your indulgence, I would like to encourage my brother the Minister to speak last, to allow him to listen to Members; we can do a good law – I am just inviting you to –THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON : Colleagues, you are having your own tete-a-tete in my time.MR MPUUGA: He is a good sparring friend. Mr Chairperson, I would like to again invite Parliament not to be timid while enacting these laws. First, the intention of establishing a surveillance unit is not for defence, but for enforcing law and order, which is a preserve of the police. Secondly, the rationale by the President to the effect that we need to enforce surveillance, including following the sophisticated people in the lake is different from what the Bill is saying. The Bill is clearly talking about establishing a surveillance unit, which is actually under the marine police; surveillance on the water is a preserve of the marine police. We should not really be timid to know that that is what the law says. That is what Cap. 303 says, Mr Chairperson. 5898THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 I would like to encourage the minister to take this in good faith; we are helping each other to make a good law. Surveillance per se, under the repealed law - because we said the law was weak, but it was a question of facilitation. Mr Speaker, if you facilitate the marine police, they will do the same job you want another group to do. However, facilitate and enable them to do their work. If funds are adequately provided, there is no reason we should run away from a very simple matter. In fact, we should avoid pitting these Forces against each other, as long as we are very clear about the intention. Otherwise, the intention of the Bill is different. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I do not want us to take a lot of time here. Hon. Basalirwa had raised - how can this House go into issues of training? It is as if we know where people are trained from. Do you, actually, know where I was trained? (Laughter) MR BASALIRWA: Mr Chairperson, when you look at the way the clause is phrased, you ask a question: what comes first? He says, “appointed by the Public Service Commission and trained by Uganda Police Force.” So, you ask: “Do I first get trained to be recruited?” Or, are you recruited first, and then you are trained? Otherwise, the phraseology is not very clear. Therefore, I would rather, Mr Chairperson, with your permission, move an amendment to that clause to the effect that we retain clause 13 as follows: Clause 13(1), we establish a Fisheries Monitoring Control and Surveillance Unit within the directorate.Clause 13(2), the surveillance unit shall comprise persons with qualifications in fisheries sciences appointed by the Public Service Commission. The issue of skills now becomes part of the regulations made by the minister for fisheries, in consultation with the Minister of Internal Affairs. I get comfort in the phrase “the Minister of Internal Affairs,” because then, I will know we are dealing with the police. If it were the minister responsible for defence, there would be a problem. Here, it is talking about the Minister of Internal Affairs, which is really the ministry that supervises the police. I think the comfort is that we collapse the idea of the Uganda Police Force to take away this feeling that we are pitting one Force against the other and leave the details to the issue of the regulations to be made by the two ministries. I beg to move.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, would you guide on that? Colleagues, I have the Organ Transplant Bill. We must handle it and go for our function. So, I want to conclude. MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I think what the honourable member has stated is what has been going through my mind. I want to make a further amendment to clause 13(2) to say “The surveillance unit shall comprise persons appointed by the Public Service Commission.” Mr Speaker, it could be different - I keep telling people that when you over-restrict this to fisheries sciences, what if they have to recruit a boat rider who is not a fisheries scientist? You can create a problem. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, colleagues. I now put the question that the clause be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 13(2), as amended, agreed to.Clause 24 THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Col-leagues, as a result of this amendment, we should be having consequential amendments. Chairperson, this is different from what the committee had proposed. Do you have any consequential amendments?[Mr Mpuuga]RECONSIDERATION OF THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE BILL, 20215899THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. In clause 24, it is suggested that it is amended in subclause (1) by deleting paragraph (c). This is a consequential amendment arising from vesting the licensing mandate to only the Directorate of Fisheries Resources headed by the Chief Fisheries Officer. I beg to move.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable colleagues, we are now on consequential amendments as a result of amending clause 4. In clause 13, we do not have any consequential amendment. With consequential amendments, we do not have any debate. I only need your response because consequentially, they are already amended. I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed by the committee.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.Clause 62MS OKORI-MOE:  Mr Chairperson, the proposal is that clause 62 is amended in clause 1, by inserting immediately after the word “issued” the words “by the Chief Fisheries Officer” and by deleting subclause (2), because it is a consequential amendment arising from centralising the licencing mandate. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable colleagues, I put the question that clause 62 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 62, as amended, agreed to.Clause 84MS OKORI-MOE:  Mr Chairperson, the proposal is that clause 84 is amended in subclause (1) by substituting the words “a District Fisheries Officer” with the words “the Chief Fisheries Officer” and by deleting subclause (3). The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising from centralising the licensing mandate. The deletion of subclause (3) is to ensure consistency with clause 56(1) following the centralisation of the licensing mandate. The register of all licenced artisanal processing facilities will be kept by the Chief Fisheries Officer under clause 56(1). I beg to move.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I put the question that clause 84 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 84, as amended, agreed to.MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME4.50THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable colleagues, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. (The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE4.51THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021” and amended clauses 4 and 13. I beg to move.5900THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE4.51THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the whole House. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.BILLSTHIRD READINGTHE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE BILL, 20214.52THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021” be read for the third time and do pass into law.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I put the question that “The Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021” be read for the third time and do pass.(Question put and agreed to.)A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE ACT, 2022”THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for considering this Bill. We have done our noble duty. This is part of ensuring that, indeed, we do conform to the rules. Congratulations honourable minister, honourable chairperson and honourable colleagues. (Applause) I hope we have managed to get a win-win situation so that we do not set a precedent that this House favours Force A against Force B. This is very important if we are to remain a House that is trusted by all.  I direct the Clerk to expeditiously transmit the Bill for Presidential assent in line with Rule 143(8) of our Rules of Procedure. BILLSSECOND READINGTHE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, on this Bill, I want to report that today, we had a meeting where we were reconciling positions. Some of these laws – these are not Bills of politics; this is a human organ. There should not be contention based on A, B, C and D. Those of you who came to see me today, I was very busy because we were in that meeting with the Leader of the Opposition, the shadow minister, the Attorney-General, the committee chairperson and the Minister of Health. We were trying to come up with a position so that we could guide the House very well because human organs are not issues, where you will just stand up to debate and say “I propose that A, B, C and D be amended” – although it is your right as a Member of Parliament. So, I call upon the honourable minister.BILLSSECOND READINGTHE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 20214.54THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Human Organ 5901THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022Donation and Transplant Bill, 2021” be read for the second time.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by Hon. Felix Okot Ogong, Hon. Silas, Hon. Nancy – by the whole House. Colleagues, we uploaded this Bill last week and I urged you to read it. So, the chairperson is going to be given only 15 minutes for presenting the summary. If you wanted to read by listening to the chairperson, you are going to be in trouble. 4.56THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Charles Ayume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to lay the report of the Committee on Health on, “The Uganda Human Organ Donation and Transplant Bill, 2021”. I would also like to lay the minutes of the committee meetings on “The Uganda Human Organ Donation and Transplant Bill, 2021”. I would further like to lay the report of the Committee on Health on a benchmarking visit to Istanbul, Turkey by three members of the committee –  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us legislate for them. Some colleagues prefer shouting in the Chamber and in the corridors. So, let us do work for them. It will be attributed to all of us. (Laughter)DR AYUME: “The Human Organ Donation and Transplant Bill, 2021” was read for the first time on 5 July 2022 and referred to the Committee on Health, in accordance with Rule 129(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The Committee on Health scrutinised the Bill in accordance with rules 129(2), (3) and (4) and now begs to report. The report is being presented in compliance with rule 130(2), which states: “The Chairperson of the Committee to which the Bill is referred or a Member of the Committee designated by the Committee or the Speaker shall, after the Motion for the Second Reading has been moved under sub rule (1) and seconded, present to the House the report of the Committee on the Bill .” The background to the BillTransplantation of human organs, tissues and cells has become a worldwide practice, which has extended and greatly enhanced the quality of hundreds of lives in patients affected by terminal organ failures. In 1954, the kidney was the first human organ to be transplanted successfully from one identical twin to another and then between siblings, who were not twins. In 1967, the first successful liver and human-to-human heart transplant was carried out. In 1968, several important developments took place, including the first successful pancreas transplant. In 1977, the first computer-assisted organ matching system was successfully done.In 1991, at the World Health Assembly in Geneva, World Health Organisation, through Resolution WHA 40.13, adopted guiding principles for human transplant, which have had a great influence on professional codes and legislations. The principles emphasised voluntary donation, non-commercialisation and preference for deceased donors over living donors and for genetically-related donors over non-related donors. In 2004, the World Health Organization’s 57th World Health Assembly adopted another resolution concerning human organ and tissue transplantation, recommending the use of living donors in addition to deceased donors and to take measures to protect the poorest and vulnerable groups from transplant tourism and the sale of tissues and organs, including attention to the wider problem of international trafficking in human tissues and organs. Data on the unmet need for organ transplants in Uganda and the entire African region is scanty. In 2016, a total number of 643 organ transplants were performed in Africa. This is lower compared to other WHO regions. In the United States of America, approximately 120,000 people, including children, need an 5902THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 organ transplant to live. In 2009, they were able to carry out more than 38,000 transplants. Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I propose we go to object of the Bill. I will also, in the interest of time, ask to skip that and go to the justification of the Bill. Worldwide, there is a sharp rise in human -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one was done by the minister. Then when you go to committee observations and recommendations, honourable member, this is what you handle at Committee Stage because you repeat it here, and then when we go to the committee stage, you again will repeat it. Yet we also allow debate at committee stage. DR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Well guided. Bullet No.6, Mr Speaker: Compliance with Gender and Equity Human Rights and Sustainable Development Goals. The Bill speaks to the above. So, I would also recommend that I skip it and go straight to bullet No.7, which is: committee observations and recommendations. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is where I was saying that we are going to be repeating ourselves, which is usually unnecessary. What is important is to capture the whole report because when you go to the committee stage, what you are saying in your observations - since it is clause by clause; on the clauses you are going to amend - then we shall repeat it at committee stage; it is double work although the format of the report is always like that. Just give a summary to Members, and the major salient issues you have picked out as a committee in about three minutes, and then you call your colleague. DR AYUME: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In summary, this is a very important Bill. I had given the statistics globally, then coming to the African region that in organ transplant - we are really about two decades behind. The need is there. There are very many people on dialysis, especially for the kidney, which is the most transplanted solid organ. As a country, we have a backlog of a number of patients who are on dialysis but long-term would benefit from kidney transplant. When we go to the skin; in the Burns Unit, the plastic surgeons are grappling with a lot of mortality - patients we could have saved. Third-degree burns: more than 50 per cent area coverage; we lose them because we do not have an enabling law to allow us to transplant skin, for example, from a mother to a child. In novel areas such as the placenta; science has shown that we could also transplant the placentas onto people with more than 50 degrees burns. Mr Speaker, the point I am trying to allude to here is that this is a very important Bill; we need it as soon as yesterday. However, a very important Bill like this is under a lot of threat. One of our biggest threats is organ trafficking. A lot of safety nets have been captured in this Bill to cater for that - from punitive measures to deterrent fines; these fines do not only go to those involved in trafficking but also to the medical workers who are involved and the health facilities where some of these vices occur. Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson. Clerk, capture the whole report on the Hansard. I understand there is a Minority Report; so Dr Batuwa, use five minutes. Today, we spent about three hours with the Leader of the Opposition; it was a hectic day but we managed at least to come to a consensus on very many aspects. (The report is appended hereto.)5.00DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I present the minority report on “The Uganda Human Organ Donation and Transplant Bill, 2021.” The members that signed this report were Dr Opio, Dr Lulume Bayigga, and myself. We signed it because we ideally agreed with the majority report in certain areas but we had a few areas where we [Dr Ayume]5903THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022dissented and these are the areas I am sharing with you:1. We found a need to establish how consent is arrived at. In the draft, it talked of a close relation. In normal practice, when you are sick in hospital, that person who is by your bedside is normally consulted and takes decisions on your behalf, if you are unconscious. So, we abandoned that position knowing that the people who could be close and the circumstances and the need for consent under donation and we went on for next of kin. 2. Next of kin is not defined in the Bill. We rely on the definitions, which are in other laws of the land and one of the laws is the Administrator-General’s Act where next of kin includes a widower or widow of a deceased person or any other person who by law would be entitled to Letters of Administration in preference to a creditor or legatee.  So, we found the need of defining “next of kin” in this law. If we do not do that, it is very ambiguous and if you go to a hospital and fail to pay the bill, that hospital to which its creditor could be your next of kin and take a decision on whether you should donate an organ or not. 3. We dissented on the powers of the minister -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, in a meeting where you had your Leader of the Opposition, can you also update from the discussion - because people spent around three hours engaging; conceding on some and insisting on some. Can you also update us because you are going to take us back as if we spent the whole morning doing nothing? DR BATUWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The position I got from my LOP – how to proceed is that we present the way we were before such that Members get the mind we had, but when it comes to the Committee of the whole House where we have reached consensus, we shall not deviate. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then what I will do – when we go to the Committee of the Whole House – it would be a repetition to present, then go to the Committee of the whole House, you again repeat the same. So, when he stands up to present, you will be standing up to give your view as a dissenting view and then we guide properly. DR BATUWA: The guidance I need, Mr Speaker - the tradition is, in the Committee of the whole House, you give your view; you do not debate. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will allow you. You will explain. Here we are not doing a debate. A debate on Bills is on principles and objectives, not on clauses. But an explanation can be on a clause. So, you will explain. DR BATUWA: Mr Chairperson, with your assurance that I will be given an opportunity to explain, thereby laying the foundation to which my mind is addressing that point, I am obliged to go by your counsel. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. DR BATUWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Dr Batuwa. Colleagues, I am going to open up the debate. I do not know if you want to debate. Or we can go to the second reading because these are things, which are clear. We can have more time at Committee Stage.DR BATUWA: Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I am rising on is that the essence of the debate is to look at the observations in the majority and then the observations in the minority such that we reach a consensus.In a situation where the minority has not yet been stated, I want to seek your guidance, on whether it would be prudent to do a debate at this stage. Maybe we could do it in the Committee of the Whole House also. Thank you.5904THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I guided on and now you are again misleading the House. A debate on a Bill is on principles and objectives. The observations in a Bill are on clauses; that is the difference. Now, just go into generalities. Colleagues, let us go to the next item.Colleagues, I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Human Organ Donation and Transplant Bill, 2021,” be read the second time. (Question put and agreed to.)BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGETHE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. While I directed that you capture both reports in full, I want us to go clause by clause. I will be giving the mover of the minority report and the chairperson a chance, so that we all submit clause by clause to help us come up to a consensus and we move.Clause 1.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stands part of the Bill.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 1, agreed to.Clause 25.13THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Charles Ayume): In clause 2, we propose that we delete paragraph (c). The justification is that the clause would create an assumption that Mulago is already and has met the standard criteria for accreditation and designation.Secondly, different types of organs can be harvested yet Mulago may not be in position to offer the entire spectrum of transplant services yet the bill under clause 3 provides for over 19 services to be offered and implemented and other centres may be ready to commence operation before Mulago. Further, we propose to insert the word “accreditation” before the word “designation.” The justification is to allow due process for accreditation and designation to take place. c)  Insert a new provision after, paragraph (i), to read: “to provide for a framework for research and development.” The justification is that research is a repository for knowledge and can be used for teaching purposes and for the development of new techniques, prevention and policy development.DR ACENG: I concur.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable colleagues, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.Clause 3DR AYUME: We propose to amend clause 3 by deleting paragraph (c), and deleting reference to blood wherever it appears in the Bill. The justification is that the regulation of blood transfusion, which is already going on in hospitals and other health centres would affect the operations of health centres. The current facilities where blood donation has been going on will fall short of the criteria for accreditation and this will affect the current supply of blood.Therefore, it would be proper for blood to be regulated under a separate legal framework. b)  In paragraph (n), by substituting “cells” with “hair.” c)  By substituting paragraph (s) with the following: “Any other organ cell or tissue 5905THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022for the purpose of transplantation.” The justification is to be all-inclusive and accommodate emerging developments in science.DR ACENG: I concur.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable colleagues, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed – yes, honourable member -DR NOAH MUSA: Thank you. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the Minister. However, I have not seen the reason for deleting subclause (n) on the cells. I think what we would do is to include “hair” on the list. We can do cell transplants independently. If you look at the last clause, which is inserted, they say, “…any other organ cells and tissues,” which means we need to maintain the word “cells” in the least. Thank you. DR AYUME: Mr Speaker, all the organs listed here are made up of cells. Cells constitute tissues, tissues constitute organs. So, mentioning cells, here again, would be a repetition. We decided to delete it and replace (n) with “hair.”THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Dr Musa, is that okay?DR NOAH MUSA: It then says by substituting paragraph (s) with the following: “…any other organ, cell or tissue for the purpose of transplantation.” Now here we are contradicting.DR ACENG: Mr Chairperson, this Act applies to the donation and transplantation of human organs, tissues and cells. We do not need to list cells again, under the organs or tissues or cells that we are donating. It is already implied in clause 3.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Hon. Musa. Do you concede on that? DR NOAH MUSA:  Yes, I concede. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, are you on the same page?DR NOAH MUSA: Thank you, Chairperson. All that has been listed as part of the organs to be recommended in this Bill – “cells” constitute even other parts of the body, which have not been mentioned here. I think leaving the word “cells” does not cause us any harm. The word “cells” will appear even under the word “hair.” It does not contradict anything to make the word “cells” appear there also.DR ACENG: Mr Chairperson, I will be repeating myself if I state this again. Clause 3, the Act is referring to the donation and transplantation of organs, tissues and cells. And paragraph (s) again captures that and says, “…other related organ cells and tissues.”THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable colleagues, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.Clause 4DR AYUME: In clause 4 –a. Substitute the definition of “tissue evaluation” with the following:“Tissue evaluation” means the analysis of tissue for viability, abnormality, contaminants, compatibility and micro-organisms to determine its fitness for purpose.” The justification is the current definition in the Bill is narrow. b. Insert the following new definitions:i) “Autograft” means tissue which is transplanted within the same person;ii) “Allograft” means tissue that is transplanted from one person to the other;5906THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 iii) “Brain dead” means a condition where a person is on an artificial life support machine with irreversible cessation of all functions of the entire brain, including the brainstem, confined by electro-encephalogram and an independent team, and the person has no chance of revival;iv) “Bone marrow” means the soft, spongy, gelatinous tissue that fills the medullary cavities or the centres of bones, which is responsible for the production of red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets; v) “A retrieval team” means an intensive care team that is capable of handling a patient on life support;vi) “Stem cells” mean undifferentiated cells originating from adult or embryonic tissue that can turn into specific cells, as the body may need them;vii) “Stem cell transplant” means a medical procedure performed to replace a bone marrow that has been damaged or destroyed by disease, infection or chemotherapy.The justification is for clarity.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?DR ACENG: Mr Chairperson, I concur. However, I would like to propose an amendment to the definition of “bank” under the same clause. It states: “Bank” means an entity within the designated transplant centre that provides or engages in one or more services involving the storage of organs, tissues or cells from the living or deceased individuals for transplantation and assessing donor suitability, including screening, recovery, processing, evaluation, testing, quarantine, labelling, storage, distribution, tracking, disposition and recall of tissue.”I propose that we delete the last three words “Including blood banks”, as proposed in clause 3. Thank you. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable chairperson?DR AYUME: Mr Chairperson, I concur with the honourable minister.DR NOAH MUSA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I just want the House to look again at the definition of “autograft” and “allograft”. I think it is a bit narrow if you limit it to tissue. We can say:  i) “Autograft” means tissue or organ, which is transplanted within the same person. ii) “Allograft” means tissue or organ that is transplanted from one person to another. Thank you. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. So, do you want us to add the words “tissue or organ”? Honourable minister, what would that imply because he is saying you add the words? Aren’t organs made of tissues because it is cells, tissues and then organs? Wouldn’t that be a repetition?Colleagues, there is what is clear for you and what is clear in the drafting terms. Drafting and legislative language is very clear. That is why we have the draft teams; the First Parliamentary Council and the Attorney-General. After the minister has proposed, they have to go - so that we try to avoid repetitions to ensure our laws do not look dirty. The moment it is captured - yet you just want to say “It has to be clear”; Hon. Musa, wouldn’t that be a repetition? You are the one who asked.DR NOAH MUSA: In my view, it would not be because you can transplant tissue or a whole organ. If you are transplanting an organ from one person to another that becomes “allograft”. MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: I think what the definition is saying is transplantation. As you said, transplantation can mean tissue, [Dr Ayume]5907THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022cell or organ. If we draft it that way, then in every clause where we have the word “transplantation”, we shall need to add tissue, blood or cell. Once you define “transplantation” to mean this, then you start using that word. You do not continue repeating what you defined.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We shall also allow drafters to – Honourable colleague, this is now beyond science; it is legal to some extent.Honourable colleagues, I put the question –(Dr Batuwa rose_) - Dr Batuwa, listen. You are a member of the committee. This is not one of the issues you captured in your minority report. I have your clauses from clause 8 in your minority report. Just use the microphone.DR BATUWA: Mr Chairperson, on page 2 of my minority report, item (a) should be addressed in clause 4. First and foremost, the majority report abandoned the word “close relation” when we were discussing how to derive consent from:1. A dead person;2. A person who is unconscious;3. A child because legally, he or she is below 18. So, how do we derive consent from those people?What came to us is getting consent from close relations. In the meeting, we abandoned this because we had fear, as the committee in the majority report, on who a close relation could be. We had fears of a co-wife giving consent in such a situation or a stepmother giving consent where a mother exists. So, we went for the next of kin.Having gone for the next of kin, it is important, under interpretation, to define in this clause who the next of kin will be in the context of this law, not in the context of any other law of the land. So, let us define “next of kin”. We know there are people here you would expect that the spouse can take decisions on their behalf, yet they trust their own children more than the spouse.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able colleague,  when you had that long debate on close relation versus the next of kin, what did you agree on? Just tell us after you changed it again.DR BATUWA: We agreed to use the words “next of kin” but I am worried about us speeding off and leaving clause 4 before interpreting it. The concern is that –THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. I am not speeding off. I am allowing you. If I was speeding off, I would not have allowed you. DR BATUWA: Mr Chairperson, we agreed to use the words “next of kin”.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: I think we are using the Bill and the report that has been presented by the committee. The committee has not proposed, from what I have, to drop “close relative” and replace it with “next of kin”. So, I do not know which clause we are talking about.DR BATUWA: Mr Chairperson, our worries still subsist. This law is deliberating for Uganda. The Uganda we know has men who have two wives – I do not know whether we also have women who have two husbands. However, in this kind of scenario, the law is not clear on who should take the consenting decision. We wanted the person to be affected by the law; to have an option or a way of deciding who should take these decisions on his or her behalf.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able colleague, make my work easy. I am read-ing your report. You are a member of the com-mittee. Your first amendment is on clause 5(1) – that is your own report. You also know, under rule 134, that you are limited. That is why I emphasised it. 5908THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 Why didn’t you raise this as one of the issues in your report?DR BATUWA: Mr Chairperson, the environment in which this report was done - it was a very hurriedly done report but you can clearly see on page two -THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able member, first, take your seat. You will not work with colleagues – and in your report, you say you have agreed on majority of the issues; and that you have a few issues. You came to the Floor to ask for an extension of time and we even extended it to you, as a committee. You, again, consumed all of it and needed more time. You have sat today, we spent the whole day. One of the things I am concerned about – I do not know why leaders sit; then come and battle it on the Floor. You are bringing up issues, which you did not bring up in your report and I am saying the rules do not allow that. MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Maybe to help my colleague, we should just try to place it in context. Is it his view that he wants “next of kin” to be included in the interpretation clause? If so, let him say so and follow the procedure. I think it would lessen the burden.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If it is you, honourable member, I will allow you. Why? He is a member of the committee. When you are a member and the committee writes a report, you have a chance to write a minority report and you write that minority report, but do not raise an issue as one of the issues in your minority report. You reach here and want to bring - maybe you can take it up for him. I will allow you, but not him.MR BASALIRWA: Mr Chairperson, now that I am seated near him –(Laughter)- and we were together in Mwiri – he is my younger brother - I am going to ask him. With his indulgence, I will move at the appropriate time.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Also, colleagues, if you know that you are bringing any amendment, I will not allow you, reason being that I warned you last week. I said: “We have uploaded this report.” Rule 134 is very clear. You need to give notice to proposed amendments. You went and sat. If you never saw any amendment, I will not be gagged by your failure to comply with the rules. That is why I have emphasised to you that when we give you reports, read them. You do not read on the Floor when they are presenting. Therefore, I will not give you the opportunity and inculcate a culture of impunity of us not reading and then come to cause confusion on the Floor. Where I can allow it, it will be at my discretion. However, since I gave you a whole week, I will not allow that. MR BASALIRWA: Mr Chairperson, I want to support you on that. The rule you cite is very clear on amendments, where amendments are major. Again, the discretion is yours. The notice has to be given. Those amendments must be discussed in the committee. It cannot be an ambush. However, there are amendments that are minor. Those could be accommodated –THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is me who chooses what is minor.MR BASALIRWA: Yes, I am just amplifying your point that, maybe, for purposes of understanding each other, you do not completely close out amendments. Give colleagues an opportunity and then you decide.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: For purposes of clarity, for such an important Bill – I gave you a whole week; I did not receive any notice of an amendment – whether major or minor – yet you know I am the one who will determine whether it is major or minor. (Laughter) It shows me that you are satisfied with the Bill. What I want to emphasise is a simple point: where we are required to read, let us read. I have seen it: we do not read. We read from [The Deputy Chairperson]5909THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022here. When a minister does not read the whole statement, you do not debate. We have to stop it.DR BATUWA: Mr Chairperson, before I sit down, on this issue, allow me - because I have also been very cooperative where need be. The mind we had was that in many Ugandan families, you find that the person does not rhyme well with the brothers, maybe because of issues of land or the person has many spouses. Therefore, we cannot derive consent from any of the listed people. We know that there is preference. Somebody may want a particular family member to be the one consulted on matters of consent. As such, it was our considered view that for consent – and it being a major issue in organ donation and transplant – we thought that we should now address ourselves to the word “next of kin”. This name can be got from historical documents. There are very many documents we interact with and we are required to state the next of kin. Even when the person is unconscious, we can consult historical documents to get the next of kin.We can also get next of kin from consulting that very person prior to them being unconscious. The proposal and the way we are moving forward is that consent should be derived from the next of kin.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Col-leagues, something funny happened in today’s meeting. You are going to force me to formalise what we had informally. Hon. Batuwa gave us a very good example. We were tired and he made us laugh and relax. He said, “You see, the problem with next of kin is that it might mean one of your creditors.” (Laughter) The Leader of the Opposition was there. He said: “You could be doing badly, and you are on your death bed. If someone has your money he may sign for your organ to be harvested so that he gets the money; he pays his loan and you are declared dead.” (Laughter)That was Hon. Batuwa. The way you have laughed is how he made us laugh. That is why he agreed with “a close relative”. He said “next of kin” would be dangerous because when some of us are taking loans, we include our creditors as next of kin. Attorney-General, can you help us with this?MR KIRYOOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I think as you have stated, this is a serious Bill – dealing with matters of life and death. If we leave these legal definitions - next of kin - we use them in so many different cases, so many different scenarios, for so many different purposes; you can have a next of kin for different things. That is why we thought that “close relation”, which means a spouse, son, daughter, father, mother, brother or sister; it cannot include your debtor, your neighbour or any next of kin that you may have.By the way, honourable colleagues, once your decision to donate is voluntary, that means you are there and you are conscious. So, whatever you are doing is also provided for on how you exhibit your personal consent; no one else can consent for you.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  And this is for the living donor because for the already dead donor, you would have given your consent before dying. But, for the living donor, this is where we need this. Colleagues, I do not want us to go far; we are going to open a long debate on something, which is very clear. This is a Bill that we are trying to tighten as much as possible. Hon. Batuwa, the way the Attorney-General has put “close relation” –DR BATUWA: Mr Chairperson, now that “close relation” has been defined the way it is, it is ambiguous and unless we define “next of kin” in the context of this Bill - unless we define it, but if we take it the way it is, next of kin is also ambiguous. So, we can go with what the Attorney-General has given.5910THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But let me ask you colleagues - You see, whatever you are talking about, “next of kin” is not in the Bill.So, Attorney-General, what the Members are saying is that in cases where you have the next of kin - I think the two clauses, we change them to “close relation”. MR BASALIRWA: The concern of the shadow minister is clarity. My brother the learned Attorney-General and senior counsel, clarity because you see, you run a risk of interchangeably using the word “close relation” and “next of kin”; because, for example, it appears in clause 64. So, just to clarify; if we adopt one statement, we move, because if you do not, then even the implementation of the Bill becomes particularly difficult.MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: I think that is what the Chairperson was reporting. In the meeting today, we said that wherever “next of kin” appears because it is used in many different places in different ways, we use “close relations”.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That  would sort out issues of clause 64 and clause 66, which we shall be coming to. So, I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Colleagues, just go back, read clause 4, and look at “close relations”. I have told you, if you refused to read, this is not a debate. You spent the whole week with the report but you never sent in a single comment; are you getting me? Now, a debate does not mean resolutions. And the debate of any Bill - if I repeat myself for the last time - is on principles and objectives, not clauses. I am implementing your rules; I am not inventing any rules. These are your rules. Procedure? Though in our rules, the Committee Stage is closed to procedure but I will allow you.MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson, for your guidance. I just want to seek your guidance on when we speak to these clauses. Because if we seek to speak to them and you say there is no debate at this time, when do we speak to them to give our ideas about them? For example, some of us did not understand the “close relations” - what it was. We disagreed, and you said there is no debate at this time; when do we speak to the particular clauses?THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able member, did you read the report? When you read the report, which report did not talk about “next of kin” because in the committee report, they did not talk about “next of kin”. It is not part of the definitions. Why didn’t you bring it as an amendment if you wanted it? Therefore, colleagues, I will not allow reading of reports here and then you derail us. This is going to be your learning curve. I will not allow it.MS AISHA KABANDA:  Mr Chairperson, the learning curve is on a very serious Bill; this is life, Sir.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question - if it was life, you should have taken it as a matter of life and death.MS AISHA KABANDA:  Mr Chairperson, I wanted to speak on the “close relation” not “next of kin”- THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able member, under our rules, you are allowed to recommit any clause.MS AISHA KABANDA: Most obliged. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 5 stands part of the Bill - sorry; the shadow minister had an issue.5911THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022DR BATUWA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We have an issue on clause 5. Clause 5(2) gives this council an opportunity to be an independent council. Again, in the very subclause (1), this very clause withdraws that independence. How? Clause 1 reads, “The minister may give directions in writing to the council with respect to the policy to be observed and implemented by the council under this Act and the council shall” the word is “shall”- we should underline it – “…shall comply with those directions.” Therefore, in law, the word “shall” coming before a verb leaves you with no option but to comply. Now, in subclause (2), it reads, “The directions given by the minister under subsection (1) shall not adversely affect or interfere with the independence of the council, or the performance of the functions and exercise of the powers of the council under this Act.” Mr Chairperson, it is our view that we delete from the words, “and the council shall comply with those directions” because when you look at the functions of this council, among many, is that one of the waiting list and regulating the allocation of organs. In this very Bill, there is no policy on how people on the waiting list are going to access organs. It is not clear, whether it is first come, first served; it is not clear whether preference is given to somebody who has donated before; it is not clear whether we are giving organs to people who are critically ill. Therefore, we see a situation where the council takes a decision to allocate an organ to somebody, who, in their view deserves and then the minister comes out contrary - and we know in our land here, that for the first time, we have a minister who is a doctor by profession.So, it is our considered view that “and the council shall comply with those directions” is deleted. We can hold the statement that the minister may give directions in writing to the council with respect to the policy to be observed and implemented by the council under this Act. DR AYUME: Mr Chairperson, I think we had a long debate on that in the morning and the shadow minister seemed to have conceded. I am not sure what transpired during lunch that he has taken steps back. Anyhow, the minister is not going to work in isolation. The council is going to give technical guidance. Even if the minister is not technical, it will be on the recommendations of the council. However, I would also want to draw your attention to the fact that the issue being discussed here is policy. The minister may give direction in writing to the council with respect to the policy. Removing the word “shall” means the council can usurp its powers and decline the quality direction –THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able colleague, I have learnt a lesson. Next time, I will use my time very well other than spending it with colleagues who later on do not respect what was agreed.First, on this issue, the minister will only give policy direction and it shall be gazetted. So, tell me really, which kind of day-to-day interference would the minister make that would require to be gazetted? Every day, I want the council to change A, B, C, and D so, I issue a gazette. Then the minister will be issuing a gazette every day. Whatever policy direction the minister gives to the council, it must be gazetted. This is a clear safety net and it is under this clause, honourable member. The clause says, “the minister shall cause a copy of any directions given to the council under subsection (1) to be published in the gazette” and they are limited to only policy, not the day-to-day operations.DR BATUWA: Mr Chairperson, for the avoidance of doubt, maybe I should be clear. I thought that the way we are proceeding is that I should share the mind I had before the meeting we were in for consensus such that –(Interjection)–  we conceded on certain points but some of these issues exist in the minority report. And the Members who signed the minority report, were not in that meeting –5912THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Then you should have told me; I would not have called that meeting.  DR BATUWA: I should have stated my minority at the right time but do you remember the request I made, Mr Speaker? The request I made before agreeing to the arrangement we have now - because this arrangement is new - I requested that unless I abreast the House with the mind we had while making the minority report - do you get it? Otherwise, I was not given an opportunity to – THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Leader of the Opposition, can you guide us? Colleagues, let the Leader of the Opposition guide us. MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. You know, this meeting took us from 10.30 a.m. to 1.30 p.m. And we tried to cover a lot of ground but we were also circumspect as to some of the issues that could arise when the plenary sits finally.  Mr Chairperson, I would like to advise that the committee chairperson presents the position as taken in the meeting. And if the honourable shadow minister feels that the position has been probably migrated, he would rise and return us to the centre. That would help us to go over this matter better.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Is the honourable colleague satisfied with that?DR BATUWA: Mr Chairperson, how else can I fail to be satisfied by the directive of my Leader of the Opposition? I am very satisfied.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for guiding the House. Otherwise, I was really getting shocked. I kept looking at my colleague, Dr Batuwa, to see whether this was the colleague I was with in the meeting. And I supported many issues in the meeting. Attorney-General, you can guide because we captured it very well.MR KIRYOWA  KIWANUKA:  Mr Chairperson, clause 5, from my record, it was agreed that it should be kept as it is because sufficient safeguards are being put in place to ensure that the minister cannot misuse that authority.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I put the question that clause 5 stands part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 5, agreed to.Clause 6DR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Delete clause 6. The justification is that the type of assistance and support, which the minister is supposed to offer, is not clear. The ambiguity posed by the provision can, therefore, easily be subjected to abuse by wrong elements.DR ACENG: Mr Chairperson, I concur. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you - [Dr Batuwa: “We also concur.”] You did not raise any matter on it. Dr Batuwa, I have your clauses here: they are 5, 8, 10, 28, 29, 30 and 34. I have them well listed, where you raised issues. On the rest, you agreed with the committee.Colleagues, I put the question that clause 6 be deleted. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 6, deleted.Clause 7DR AYUME: Amend the provision as follows –a) Amend the crossheading and the headnote to read “Uganda Human Organ Donation and Transplant Council.”5913THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022The justification is that this is for clarity and uniformity.  b) Amend clause 7(5) by substituting the words “Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council” with the words “Relevant Health Professional Council.” The justification is to accommodate all other professional bodies. DR ACENG: I concur.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.Clause 8DR AYUME: Clause 8 is amended by inserting the words “sociology, pharmacy, IT, surgery and medicine” after the words “financial management.”The justification is to accommodate the transitioning of medicine in the near future.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Let the Attorney-General capture before then Hon. Dr Batuwa can explain something if he is not satisfied. This is because he had raised a minority opinion on clause 8.MR KIRYOWA  KIWANUKA: Mr Chairperson, we took the considerations given by the majority and the minority reports. The minority report talked about including certain qualifications for the board, while the majority report had a request to add Director-General, because this looks like a fulltime job. They cannot have two jobs because the council is going to be very busy. So, we proposed that clause 8 gets two clauses: a) That there shall be a council of seven members. b) That members of the council shall be persons of high moral character and proven integrity who are qualified and have experience in specified fields such as medicine, surgery, intensive care, law, anaesthesia, financial management, bioethics and investigative specialists, sociology, pharmacy and IT.The justification was that the council’s needs may change from time to time and therefore, it may be difficult to prescribe today, the kind of qualifications they will specifically need at any point on the council. So, we thought this was inclusive; but the minister had to explain why they would deviate from these kinds of qualifications. I beg to submit. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Let me first get it. He had a minority opinion -  DR BATUWA: I had a minority opinion, though it should not be mistaken that we did not arrive at a consensus on this issue. The minority opinion we had is that the qualifications that were listed come with bias on the recipient or the patient on the council. We thought that we should include – because these are all doctors; generally, for a doctor, what is important is the wellbeing of the patient. All the decisions you make should be decisions that help the patient. We, therefore, believed that there should also be people who have a bias of the donor such that there is consensus arrived at. This is why we came up with a social scientist who has knowledge and can interpret, understand and relate or help in formulating policies that relate with society because this is where donors come from. This was the mind we had and the consensus we reached is what the Attorney-General has given that we open it up as and when the minister sees relevancy, so that those various professions can be brought on board. So, I concede to the position we took in the meeting. THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal?5914THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Chairperson, on the composition, where they said the membership of the council should be seven, I propose that 50 per cent must be women because many of the medical challenges are women-related. I would like to know how many women are in this council. Mr Chairperson, I would be comfortable with 50 per cent because many of the challenges are women-related. I would like to know this because I was not in this private meeting our LoP attended. (Laughter)THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable colleague, the issue of gender is a constitutional matter. The Constitution settles it and the Constitution is supreme. So, it is covered under the Constitution. MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Chairperson, the Constitution stipulates 30 per cent, and you know that Parliament now has adopted 40 per cent. Since health is extremely important, we can adopt 50 per cent.THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, the Constitution says “…at least a third.” It can even be 100 per cent. So, on issues which are clear within the Constitution, I would say we do not – Mama, we have never forgotten you.   MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I also thank the shadow minister and Attorney-General. Mr Chairperson, we are like in a theatre attending to a patient on life support. You have served on the university committee including search committees identifying the best brains that we have in the country. That is the Presiding Officer that we have. Mr Chairperson, legislation requires clarity and precision. I am struggling to recognise why we cannot be clear on the element of qualifications. We are leaving it open-ended; a mark dispelling the fact that this should be opened wide to different academic and scientific fields. But in legislation, we have to be very clear as far as qualifications are concerned. In conclusion, I ask that with this particular Bill, the duty falls upon every one of us to give the opportunity to the best brains we have in Uganda. THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are now handling the principles. MR KATUSABE: Mr Chairperson, I would even go to the extent that the head of this council should be a professor in the relevant field; a medical professor because I see social scientists or political scientists like me, coming on board. I do not see myself qualified to head that council, and I think this particular Bill should really be very clear as far as guiding us is concerned. Mr Chairperson, a head of such a council must be of a particular qualification. In this case, he or she must be a professor, particularly one with a PhD –(Member timed out.)THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, if you heard the Attorney-General properly, he said the world is evolving at a very fast rate. For example, today, we discussed the issue of the Petroleum Authority where we formed a law and specified who should be on the Petroleum Authority board. At that time, we were looking at qualifications in petroleum. That is where all our eyes were. In the process, just hardly four years, we have gone into commercialisation of our oil. At that time, Parliament had not looked at economists; now they need economists. So, what are they doing? They are looking around and proposing to come here and amend the law so that they can have economists on the board. When you just bring somebody from outside, it becomes difficult; that person cannot have a say like a substantive member of the board. Instead of tying down the minister - we gave examples and we included sociologists and pharmacists as they had brought it.We felt that whenever there is a big transformation in society, new trends emerge 5915THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022– the minister should be able to bring on board all those changes without referring back to the law or spending a lot of money on consultants.  MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Chairperson, going by the -  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Switch on the microphone. MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Going by the amendment of the Attorney-General -THE CHAIRPERSON: We do not deal with small things here. (Laughter)MS NYAKIKONGORO: Going by the amendment of the Attorney-General, I think the title of the clause should change to “Composition and Qualifications.”THE CHAIRPERSON:  Composition is provided under clause 7. Clause 8 is qualifications. That is why I want to give room to people when they are cleaning up because when the Attorney-General was submitting on the Hansard, he said “There shall be a council of seven people” which would be a repetition because it is already covered under clause 7.DR BWANIKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I still have reservations on these qualifications – the many disciplines that we have mentioned. It should be “have had experience in a relevant field”. There is no need for us to mention all these disciplines in the law. It should be “someone who has had experience in a relevant field”. That should be enough. When we start talking about – now, I am going to start asking why you put financial management. Why do you put it? A relevant field should be enough.MR KIRYOWA: Mr Chairman, what the Member is saying is the most ideal because it allows the authority to make - however, in order to keep some degree of control, as to how far the minister can go, when we list these – when you are interpreting a clause like this, we use what they call ejusdem generis rule: you must appoint people who are similar or near these kinds of areas. There must be some similarity, meaning, here, you cannot go and bring a trader and tell us they are going to be here because they are not ejusdem generic to this kind of group.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, why this helped – for example, to the minister, a pharmacist and sociologist were not important but to Dr Batuwa, they were important – and even to me, because I was supporting Dr Batuwa. We widened but also controlled it a little bit. Colleagues, I now put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed by the committee and modified by the Attorney-General.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.Clause 9, agreed to.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: (Dr Ayume rose_) Did you have an amendment on clause 9?DR AYUME: Clause 9 (d) –THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. We shall recommit it because we have already voted on it. Clause 10DR AYUME: Clause 10 is amended by redrafting to read: “A member of the Council shall hold office for three years and is eligible for reappointment.”THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister?DR ACENG: I concur. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, there was an opinion. Attorney-General?5916THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: The minority report was proposing that we have a six-year term, while the majority was saying that we have three years. The minority had a justifiable reason that you lose a resource that is still useful to you in a very short time, yet you may spend a lot of time training and preparing them. However, the majority was also very careful to say that if the person becomes a problem, getting rid of them becomes a problem because we give them independence and a certain degree of security and protection. The middle ground was that let it be three years and they can be reappointed as many times as they remain useful. I beg submit.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon Batuwa?DR BATUWA: We concede to that new version. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Chairperson, I remember we looked at one of the Bills recently and decided that if there is to be renewal, it should not be more than once. If you have given three years, and a person serves for another three years, those are six years. We should not make an individual a permanent member of that organisation because anything can happen. I would rather if the Attorney-General could reconsider – based on the precedents that we have already made – that we should not just leave this renewal open but make it once only.MS OBIGAH: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. It is very crucial and imperative to always have a term limit because some people become “permanent and pensionable”. Thank you. I request that there must be an insertion of one term.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This was the only opportunity we had where Dr Batuwa supported the removal of term limits. (Laughter)MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, this kind of thing, like Mama Cecilia is saying, is correct. We should have control. However, specialists and consultants of this nature –(Interjection)- no, they are there. I will give you an example of what we were struggling with when we were in Makerere. Makerere has an age limit of 70 years for professors. However, a 70-year-old is still useful and vibrant. Even here, you may want to give the minister the opportunity to use those who are still useful. However, because they are coming up for renewal every so often – six years is a long time and that is why we are saying three years, with regular –(Interjection)- the problem with once, colleagues, is that this skill that we are dealing with, of organ transplants, is not highly available to us here. Restricting it may help now, but it may become a problem in a very short time and we need an amendment.MS AISHA KABANDA:  Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We are speaking about highly professional tasks. In my opinion, actually, three years is too short a time. Five years is good time. If we made it five years renewable once, that would make 10 years of service. It is good time for someone to serve. Whereas I hear Mama Cecelia, who wants term limits over that – in my opinion, I would say we would open forever because they are highly professional but we should say “five years renewable once” so that someone has sufficient time to serve. It takes away the tension of renewal all the time.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Seconded?MS NALUYIMA:  Yes, I am here to second the five years, renewable once. Thank you. DR ACENG: Mr Chairperson, we had a long discussion on this. Let us not forget that you may appoint a board and you end up with people with misconduct, bad behaviour and 5917THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022so on. You do not want to get stuck with such people – THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have the process of removing them. DR ACENG: Yes. That is why we said that whereas this is a highly specialised board and we are going to spend resources training them, it is nice to have a three-year limit and you reappoint them if you are happy with them -(Interjection)-  no, we are not saying once because you are spending resources. If they are good, you continue reappointing them. If they are not good, you drop them.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Colleagues, for example, today, one of the specialists we had, Dr Frank from Mulago - I think he was - Dr Batuwa, the Dr Frank whom we had? He is a young person – Oh! He is there. He is one of the few specialists we have in the country. They are not even five in the country; I am told they are three. So, if you put him on the board, how can you say in six years that he must go away when you have not even trained another one? Even if you train – training does not guarantee you such a specialist. You can train and go through that process but you do not get them. Colleagues, since we put a very stringent regime on qualifications, performance and monitoring, and since, for the first time, Dr Batuwa has supported the removal of term limits –(Laughter)- why don’t we really work on this?Colleagues, allow me to put the question because we shall not finish this. There is a proposal from Hon. Aisha Kabanda and it is seconded. It is the first one I will put - here is a question.DR BATUWA: Mr Chairperson, I did not accept the removal of term limits but I conceded to the view –(Interjection)  yes, it can be politically misunderstood. I conceded to the view of the Attorney-General that we are going to invest a lot of money in training these doctors. I know that to get somebody to the level we wish could take 30 years of training, including the time he or she has been trained. So, we cannot give up such talent by putting a restriction. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Colleagues, I want to make a clarification. Someone might misunderstand Hon. Batuwa that he has supported the removal of political term limits. No, that is not what we mean. It was just on a lighter note. This Bill is not political at all. So, I want it to go on record. I do not want someone to go and use it in Jinja that Hon. Batuwa supported the removal of term limits.Colleagues, we have two issues at hand. Let me first put the question on the first amendment – no, we shall not sleep here, colleagues. I put the question that clause 10 be amended, as proposed by the Attorney-General. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.Clause 11, agreed to.Clause 12, agreed to.Clause 13, agreed to.Clause 14, agreed to.Clause 15, agreed to.Clause 16, agreed to.Clause 17, agreed to.Clause 18, agreed to.Clause 19, agreed to.Clause 20, agreed to.Clause 21, agreed to.Clause 22, agreed to.5918THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 Clause 23, agreed to.Clause 24, agreed to.Clause 25, agreed to.Clause 26, agreed to.Clause 27, agreed to.Clause 28DR AYUME: Amend the provision as follows:a) By deleting subclause (1);b) In subclause (2) by deleting the words “notwithstanding subsection (1)”. Redraft the provision to read, “The Minister may, in consultation with the Council, by statutory instrument, designate a hospital as an organ, tissue or cell donation transplant centre.” The justification is consequential. Subclause (1), to which the provision makes reference, was deleted. DR ACENG: I concur.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able Attorney-General? The shadow minister had a contrary view on that but it is now a con-sequential amendment, meaning we cannot do much about it.DR BATUWA: Mr Chairperson, on clause 28, which is in part six and deals with designating transplant centres; we departed from the majority report and were of the view that the activity of harvesting organs should strictly be done by Government. Our fear was of a patient in intensive care unit being looked at as an imminent donor. You could be a patient and you are badly off, and because that very hospital, where you are a patient in their intensive care, has a patient on the waiting list and perhaps, you are having challenges paying your bills - we were fearing that the hospital could start looking at you as a donor and process you that way.The other fear was arising from this activity of donation and transplant being a business venture. While in Turkey, we discovered that investment could go to the extent of US$150 million; that is investing Shs 400 billion in a centre to do these kinds of activities. We know, world over, the cost of these. For example, kidney transplant is about US$80,000 dollars. In developed countries, many people need these services but they cannot access donors. So, we were worried that we could have medical tourism. Somebody comes; you have clients ready to pay US $80,000. You have an investment, by way of a loan, in excess of Shs 400 billion. What is missing are the donors, and they have to be Ugandans. We were worried about the Ugandans who drink and sleep on the road. We were worried about Ugandans who walk alone at night; that these could actually be potential donors and that mafia kind of activity could surface. We were worried and brought our concern and the meeting advised that our concern could be taken care of in clause 54. So, Mr Chairperson, I pray that much as clause 54 is not in my report, when we get to that clause, you allow me to rise such that we fix that loophole and save Ugandans under this law. I beg to move.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I put the question that clause 28 be amended, as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.Clause 29DR AYUME: Amend the provision as follows:a)  By substituting subclause (1) to read as:“A hospital that wishes to be designated as a transplant centre, under section 28, shall apply to the Council for accreditation and designation”.5919THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 28 SEPTEMBER 2022b) By inserting three new subclauses after subclause (4) to read as follows:“(5) A hospital designated as a transplant centre shall be accredited annually for suitability to offer services and issued an accreditation certificate which expires by 31st of December of every calendar year.6. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (iii), the person aggrieved by the decision of the Council may appeal to the minister within 30 days from the date of the decision of the Council” - there was no timeline. Thank you.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairperson, is that all? In your report, there is “seven” as part of the amendment.DR AYUME: “The minister shall dispose of the appeal within 30 days from the date of receipt of the appeal.The justification is for justice to be served to the applicant after all due process is considered.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, honourable minister.DR ACENG: Mr Chairperson, I concur.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able Attorney-General, what is your take on this matter?MR KIRYOOWA KIWANUKA: We looked at it; these are okay.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Dr Batuwa, do you have an issue on this?DR BATUWA: I concur.MR KATUSABE: Mr Chairperson, while I recognise the sensitivity of this process and this particular Bill, my concern is about accreditation in a sense that we are making it to take place every year. I want to know the process, procedure and the mechanism. How often does the accreditation committee sit in a year? I do not want to see a minister struggle on the issues to execute her mandate just because we put it to one year. I am wondering whether it would offend our medical system if we opened this a little to cover two years for accreditation. DR ACENG: Mr Chairperson, first of all, to allay the colleague’s anxiety, all hospitals and clinics are subject to licensing annually. All these hospitals you go to are licenced by the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners’ Council every year. For the case of the transplant centres, it is the Transplant Council to accredit them. It is imperative that they do it annually because you want to make sure that the transplant centre is fit to carry out transplant in terms of equipment, human resources and otherwise. Some of the equipment becomes obsolete. Would you like to be worked on with obsolete equipment or a missing surgeon? Therefore, it is important that every year they are accredited, just to make sure that everything on the checklist is available. Thank you. MR KATUSABE: I am comfortable with the minister’s clarification. I think it has the precision and the clarity required. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.  Honourable colleagues. I put the question that clause 29 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Point of procedure, Hon. Basalirwa.MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Yesterday, you communicated that we shall be having a dinner today. When I look at the wall clock, the time is 6.30 p.m. This is the right time for dinner. I am meant to understand that my colleague is addressing the country at 8.00 p.m. today.5920THE UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL, 2021 THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Your fellow party President?MR BASALIRWA: Yes -(Laughter) – my fellow party President. Yesterday, I did raise health concerns, especially in regard to you. You are over sitting yet you are still a young man, still energetic, still producing and you are not moving. In the circumstances, I move a motion that the House do resume, we go for dinner and wait for tomorrow to finish this business.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable member, let your motion be very clear; let us eliminate the dinner issue.6.34MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA  (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Mr Chairperson, I move a motion that the House do resume.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by Hon. Lulume Bayigga, Hon. Mushemeza, Hon. Rauben, Hon. Otimgiw – now, I have seen the people I have been holding here. (Laughter)Honourable colleagues, I put the question that the House resumes.(Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker, presiding.)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE6.35THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (DR JANE ACENG): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the House has considered the Uganda Human Organ Donation and Transplant Bill, 2021 and passed clauses 1 to 29 with amendments. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE6.36THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (DR JANE ACENG): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. House adjourned to tomorrow at 8.30 a.m.(The House rose at 6.37 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 29 September 2022 at 8.30 a.m.)      [Mr Basalirwa]PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA,.,1,;.\Isi" i llrREPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON THEUGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION ANDTRANSPLANT BILL,2O2ISEPIEMBER, 2022OFFICE OF THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT}N,W,eAt-\0ZstI.O INTRODUCTIONThe Uganda Human Organ Donatron and Transplant Bill, 2021 was read forthe First Time on 05rh July, 2022 and referred to the Committee on Healthin accordance with Rule 129(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.The Committee on Health scrutinlsed the Bill in accordance with rules 129l2), 129 13) and 129 (4) and now begs to report.This report is being presented in compliance with Rule 130(2) whlch statesthat, "The Chairperson oI t}le Committee to which the Bill is referred or aMember of the Committee designated by the Committee or the Speakershall, after the Motion for the Second Reading has been moved under sub-rule (1) and seconded, present to the House the report oI the Committee onthe Brll."2.O BACKGROUNDTransplantation of human organs, tissues and cells has become a worldwidepractice, which has exLended and greatly enhanced the quality of hundredsof thousands of lives in patients affected by terminal organ failures. In 1954,the kidney was the lirst human organ to be transplanted successfully ftomone identical twin to another and then beLween siblings who were not twins.ln 1967, lhe flrst successful liver and human-to-human heart transplantwas carried out. In 1968, several important developments took placeincluding the ftrst successful paicreas transplant. In 1977, the firstcomputer-assisted organ matching system was successfully done.In 1991 at the World Health Assembly in Ceneva, Switzerland, the WorldHealth Organisation (WHO) through Resolution WHA 40.13 adopted guidingprinciples for human organ Lransplants which have had a great influence onprofessional codes and legislations. The principles emphasised voluntarydonation, non-commercialisation and preference for deceased donors overliving donors and for genetically related donors over non-related donors.ln 2004, the WHO'S 57th World Health Assembly adopted anotherResolution WHA 57.1a concerning human organ and tissue transplantation,recommending the use of livrng donors in addition to deceased donors andto take measures to protect the poorest and l.ulnerable groups fromtransplant tourism and the sale of tissues and organs, including attention tothe wider problem of international trafhcking in human ttssues and organs.Data on the unmet need of organ donation in Uganda and the African region1s scanty. In 2016, a total number of 643 organ transplanls were perlormedin Africa and this was lower compared to other WHO reglons. In the UnitedStates of America, approximately 12O,O0O people (including children) needIwPE{114an organ transplant to live. In 2019, they were able to carry out more than38,000 transplants.The mismatch between the growing demand for organ transplants and t]]estrict limits on available supply is the root cause oI many of the legal, ethicaland human ghts issues that arise around organ transplantafuon.In Uganda, medical tou sm is equally a growing trend, with many patientsregardless of social status consrderilg treatment abroad as the only lifesaving alternative. Medical tourrsm, especially to Indra, Turkey, South Africaand the United States of America is fast becoming a mainstay for Ugandansseekrng organ, tissue and cell transplantation.The Uganda Medical Board under the Ministry of Health, convenes at leastonce a month to approve 2 to 4 people to travel abroad for treatment. Thesemedical procedures roughly cost about $25,00O inclusive of travel and hotelfees abroad. However, iL has been reported that a number of other facilitiesin India and Turkey both in urbal and rural areas carry out theseprocedures for about $ 18,000.Travel for transplantation becomes transplant toudsm and thereforeunethrcal if it involves trafficking in persons for purposes of organharvesting or trafflcking in human organs or tissues.However, Uganda does not have a law regulating organ, tissue and celldonation and transplanlation, yet it is increasingly becoming an area ofhealth care that requires urgent and constant attention.Uganda is not a member of the World Marrow Donor Association (WMDA)which is a collective database of hematopoletic cell donor registries from 55countries. About 37.9 million potential donors and over 802,600 cord bloodunits were available as oI Aprtl 2021. When an individual joins a bonemarow donation registry, they are agreeing to donate using whichevermetltod the healthcare professional deems appropriate.The Uganda Human Rights Commission 2021 Annual report cites unla&{ulorgan donation and transplantatlon m the country. The most affected arethe poor and most \,ulnerable groups. This therefore creates the need for alaw regulating and governing the transplanting and donating of organs inUganda in order to prevent the above-menlioned challenges as well asAwWXpromote health care in the country*1&M^'9-2}vr,]--3.O OBJECT OF TIIE BILLThe object of the Bill is to establish a legal framework for the regulation oforgan, cell and tissue donation and transplantalion in Uganda byi. Establishing tJIe Uganda Organ Donation and Tlansplant Council tooversee and regulate organ, cell and tissue donation andtransplantation in Uganda;. Designating Mulago Natlonal Referral Hospital as the pioneeringtransplant centre;. Prescribing a criteria to be Iollowed when designating ahospital/ institution as an organ, tissue or cell donation andtransplant centre;. Regulating the conduct of donaLion and transplant activities;. Establishing policies and procedures for designated transplant centresand approved banks, including ethical standards and educationalseruices to the public;. Establishing a donation and transplant system which ensuresequitable access to quality donation and transplantabon servlces todonors and potential recipients;. Establishing standards for storage of harvested organs, tissues andcells;. Establishing a system of distribution of organs, tissues and cells;. Providing for the transplant oforgans, tissues and cells;. Establishing and maintalning a national waiting list for potentialorgan, tissue and cell donors and recipients drawn from designatedtransplant centres and other hospitals and health facilities;. Creating a database of rnformaLion oI donors and recipients to beretained by the transplant centres, hosprtals and health Iacilities;. Establishing procedures for the transplantation of organs and tissuefrom Lving donors ilcluding due drligence;. Estabhshmg procedures for the transplantation of organs and tissueharvested fiom cadavers;. Prescribing appropdate consent to be given by donors;. Prescribing requirements to be fulfllled before carrying out a postmortem examination of a coDfirmed brain dead donor;. Establishing a human organ and tissue database and reportingrequirements;. Prescribing offences and penalties related to issues of organ andtissue donation and trarlsplantation.,3tury4s!i4-gPlao-s'4.0 JUSTIFICATION FOR THE BILLWorldwide, there is a sharp rise in trafficking of human organs with the poorand other mrlnerable groups in society facing a high risk. Organs areunlau,{ully donated, transplanted and even stolen courtesy of a complexnetwork of buyers, sellers and brokers at the international level. The forcefuldonations start with inhumane and illegal activities Lke human trafhcking,kidnap and murder.Uganda does not have a legal framework to regulate organ, tissue and celldonation and transplantation, yet it is increasingly becoming an area ofhealth care used to cure infectious, genetic and non-communlcabledrseases,There is need to protect the dignity and identity of every person andguarantee, without disc mmation, respect for his or her integrity and otherrights and fundamental freedoms with regard to donation andtransplantation of organs, tissues and cells of human odgin.Annually, Ugandans spend a lot oI money on medical tourism to countrieslike India, Turkey, UK and the USA through out ot pocket expenditure. Thisupsets the country's balance of payments. Those who cannot aflord have apoor quality of Lfe which may result into death.5.O METHODOLOGYWhile considering the Uganda Human Orgarl Donation and Traisplant Bill,2O2l; t}.e Committee applied the following methods:5,I MeetirgsPhysical IneetingsThe Committee held meetrngs with the following entrties:. Ministry of Health (MoH). Uganda Medical Association (UMA). Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC). Uganda Law Society (ULS). Uganda Blood Transfusion Services (UBTS). Centre for Policy Analysis (CEPA) I '. Association of Funeral Sereice Providers of Uganda (AFSPUL). Joint Clinical Research Centre (JCRC)W4.@t a.*$-*ffii. Lubaga Hospital. Coalition of 43 civil society organisations specialising in health rightsadvocacy. Pharmaceutical Society Uganda (PSU). Uganda Medical and DeDtal Praclitioners Council (UMDPC). Plastic Surgeons {skin grafting specialists)Zoom meetings. Dr Cuarav Kharay, a bone marrow specialist lrom Apollo Hospitals inIndia. Officials from t-lle University of Derby, United Kingdom5.2 Written memorandaThe Committee received $ritten memoranda from the following:. UBanda Law Reform Commission. Laboratory technolory students from Clajke International University,Institute of Allied Health Sciences and Makerere University College ofHealth Sciences5.3 Document reviewThe Committee ,eviewed and made reference to the lollowing documentsl. The Declaration of Istanbul on Organ Traffrcking and TransplantTourism (2018 edition). Status of Human Organ and Tissue Donation and Transplantation inthe WHO African Region. Applicable laws5.4 WorkshopThe Committee held a workshop with medlcal speciaLsts in various lields oforgan, tissue and cell therapy like kidney, heart, lung, liver, cornea, stemcells, plastic surgery (skin) and a post-operative care nurse.1^4 Wfl56.0 COMPLIANCE UIITH GENDER AND EQUITY, HUMAN RIGIITS ANDSUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOAISHUMAN RIGIITSProhibitlon of children as potential donotsClause 72 explicitly prohibits any donation from a living child. Children are\,nlnerable and are never in position to consent to such procedures. Thls isimportant in protecting children from exploitation and abuse. However, thisprovision only applies to living children.Protection of poor and vulnerable petso[sThe risk of exploitation of \,nlnerable and poor persons ts high. Guidingprinciple 5 of WHO Guiding Principles on Human Cells, Tissue and OrganTransplantation states that, 'The human body and rts parts cannot be thesubject of commercial transactions." In order to protect persons fromexploitation, the bill under Clause 86 prohibits commercial dealings rnhuman material for transplantatron. Thrs means tl.at monetal] or any otherform of compensation for organs, trssues or cells other than reimbursementof donation related expenses is prohibited. The sale of one pair of organssuch as eyes or kidney by a living donor for linancial or other form ofcompensation is also prohibited.The success of transplantation as a lifesaving treatment should not requlrenor justify victimising of the poor or l.ulnerable people as the source oforgans for the rich.Requirement for reglstered practltloners to obtaln authority andconsent before harvesting any organ, tissue or cel!Clauses 61 arrd 67 require all registered medical practitioners in transplantcentres to obtain consent before harvestrng of any tissue, cell or organ froma donor. Clause 71 alsoprovides for authority for removal of human organs,tissue and cells. The process of obtaining the consent shall be wntten orspoken in a language that is understandable e donor or the recipient6$Wreaf4next of kin under sub clause 61(6). Obtaining consent from any donor beforeharvesting is necessary to ensure that the dght to healt]1 ls respected andprotected.GENDER AND EQUITYFair and equitable systerrClause 53 describes organ, tissue and ceII donation and transplant as a fairand equitable system. Subsection (5) t1lat access to organs, cells and tissuesshall be provided without regard to recipient sexJ age, religion, race, colouror firrancial standing. In order words, access to transplant of organs, cells ortissues is based on the pdnciple of non-discdmination. This is furthergalvanised by Clause 52 which provides for a national waiting list fo,potential recipients that promotes equity and national solida ty.Informed ConsentAny intervention in the health f1eld can only be carried out after the personconcerned has given free and informed consent to the procedure. Clause 67(a) (b) and (c) includes the responsibility of the Council to inform the donorof the long-terrn beneflts and dsks related to the procedure. This will enabledonors to make informed decisions about the donation. In accordance wrththe WHO guiding principles on human cell, tissue and organtransplantation, there needs to be an adequate balance of interests ofrecipients and donors. Benefits to both parties should outweigh the risksassociated with the donation splantation@wrw8,,7ISUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOAJ,S (SDGS)SDG - 3 Good health ard well beingThe Bill is in line with SDG number 3- Cood health and well being whichaims at ensuring healthy lives and promoting well-being at all ages.Transplantation of an organ, tissue or ceII is a life-saving procedure whichgives patients wrth mal or non-functioning organs to have a better quality oflife and live longer. The patlents can be children or adults.7.O COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS AND RTCOMMENDATIONSPART I _ PRELIMINARYPURPOSE OF THE ACTClause 2(c)Clause 2 oI the Bill lists the purpose of the Bill. Clause 2 (c) desrgnatesMulago National Relerral Hospltal as a pioncer transplant centre.The Committee obserued that:Designatjng Mulago as @ piotteer transplant centre maV preDent otlEr facilitiesthat are re@dy for orga.n, tissue and ce haruesling and transplantation fromcommenctng. Different tApes of organs can be haruested and this clausepresumes that Mulago Luitl hdue to pioneer in transplatutation of all thedifferent orgafts, tissues and cells.The prouision also presumes that Mulago meets dll the standards and isreadu for transplant actiuities.The Committee recommends thdt Clquse 2lc) be deleted,Clduse 2(d)Clause 2(d) provides for designation of hospitals as organ, tissue and celltransplant centres.The Commlttee obserued thdt a hospltal should be accredited beforedesignation.The CommltteeCl@use 2(d).recornmend.s thdt the utoccredlt@tion be inserted ini=-,trgs 8l-u(+&@.The Cotumittee further obserued that the amount of data generated fromofgan, cell atud tissue haruesting and transpLantation is a repositorA forknouledge and. research Jor teaching purposes and deuelopment of mediciftes,new transplant techniques, preuention and policg deuelopmeftt.The Commlttee recommetuds thdt d. new pdrdgrdph 0 be inserted toprodde for d ird.neuork jor sclentifi.c resedrch dnd deoelopment inorgdn, cell d.nd tlsdte d.on.ltloF. afid ttd.flspla^tq,tion.CLAUSE 3 . APPLICATIONClause 3 lists organs, tissues and cells which can be donated andtransplanted.Clause 3(c)The Committee obserued that blood is among the List of oryafts, fissues dndcells get facihties like hospitals and health centres uhere blood trqnsfusion isongoing, tuill fall short of the criteia for accreditation for organ, tissue o.nd celltfansplant centres. This means that haspitdls and health centre IVs Luh.ereblood transfusion is taking place uill haue to shut doun blood transf,tsionseruices.The Commlttee recommends that paragrdlrh (c) of Cl@use 3 be d.eleted,Clduse 3(n)The Comtuittee obserued that cells constitute organs and therefore, there is noneed to make a separate tuention o_f tlrcm in (n).The Commlttee recorronend.s tho't the utord cells is deleted Jron tr.eItst,The Cotumittee obserued that hair has ftot been listed Aet it is a tissue Jartransplant.The Commlttee recomrnelds that the utord. cells is repldced ulth h.lirin pdrdgrdph ln),Clduse 3(s)The Committee obserDed thot pardgraph (s) is restictrue and does ftotenuisage emerging deuelopments itu the feld of organ, tissue aftd cell donationand transplantation.The Comrnlttee recom.me'lds that par@graph ls) be amended to deletethe uord.s, "related to those ln pd (d) to lr)"p&4P6^'lvlMu&€,cASSISTANCE AND SUPPORTAccording to Clause 6, the Minister can provlde asslstance and support toany person providing or proposing to provide a service relating to humanorgan, cell or tissue donation or transplantation.The Committee obserued that the ass$tdflce afld suppott refened to isambiguous and can be exploited.The Committee recommends thdt Clduse 6 be deleted.UGANDA HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT COUNCILClause 7{51 states that, "The Council shall be independent but shall work incollaboration with the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council,especially in relation to disciplinary cases against registered medicalpractitioners certfred by the Councrl under this Act to undertake organ,tissue arld cell donation and transplant activities."The Committee obserued that Uganda Medicdl dnd Defttal PractitionersCouncil is one of the four professiorul.l bodies of health uorkers. The othersare Uganda Nurses and Miduiues Council, ALlied Health ProJessionaLs Counciland the Phqrm@cV Board.The Committee recommends that Clouse 45) oJ the BiU ls dmended torepldce Vgdflda Medlcdl dnd De'l't.II Prdctitioners Council with thereleodnt pto.fe sslond.l bo dies,COMPOSITION OF THE COUNCILThe Committee obsFrved that the Bill does nol have a provision oncomposition of the Council.The Cotumlttee recommends thdt d neut cl@use be ltuserted d.-fterClo,use 7 to prottlde Jor' on oJ the Council.PART II - TIIE MINISTER AND TIIE HUMAN ORGAN TRANSPLANTCOUNCILWfrt\tI's.p00IDISQUAIIFICATION FOR APPOINTMENT TO TIIE COUNCILClause 9 of the Bill lists the grounds for disquahfication for appoinLment tothe Uganda Organ Donation and Transplant Council. Clause 9(d) states thata person shall not be appointed to tl-e Council if he or she is serving on anyother Council or Board.The Committee obserued thrlt Clause 9(d) is too general and mag preuentqualified persons Jrom serutng oft the UgarLda Human Donation andTransplant Council on accoutTt tlLdt theA are seruing on other councils orboards.T'4e Corn lttee recornmends thdt the councils or bodrds lor uthich ametnber is d.isquo.lifr.ed be llmtted to statutory bodies and councils lnthe hed.th sector.PART Iv- DESIGNATION OF TRANSPLANT CENTRES AND APPROVAI OFBANKSDESIGNATION OF TRANSPLANT CENTRESClause 28(I) designates Mulago National Referral Hospital as a pioneertransplant centre.Clause 28 (2) states that, "Notwithstanding sub-section (1), the Ministermay, on recommendation of the Council, by statutory instrument, designatea hospital as an organ, tissue or cell donation and transplant centre."The Comtuittee obserued thctt deslgnating Mulago ds a piofteer tr@nsplcmtcentre DlaA preuent other Jacilities that are readA for organ, tissue arud celllTdruestiftg and transpldntation from commencing. Different tApes oJ organscaft be Llaruested and this clause presumes that Mulago LuiLl haue to pioneerin transplantat@n ol all the different oryaas, tissaes and cells.The prouision also presumes th,at Mulago meets all th,e stdndards dnd isreadA for transplant actiurties.The committee recommends thdt Muld.go Hospital should be subjectedto acctedltation bg the Cou cil a d d.eslgnation bA the Mlntster llkeother health ldcllities. Therelore, Clduse 28 (1) shotlld be deleted,APPLICATION FOR DESIGNATION AS A TRANSPLANT CENTREClause 29(1) states that, "A hospital that wishes to be designated as atransplant centre under section 28 shall apply to the Council in a mannerprescribed by the Minister byW,1,B1\tions."Nr.ptv1Clause 29 (3) states that, "Where, after the due diligence carned out undersubsection (2) and after giving an opportunity to the applicant to be heard,the Council is satisfied that the applicant does not meet the requrrements ofthis Act and the regulations made under this Act, the Councrl shall, rejectthe application giving reasons for the refusal in writing.The Cornmlttee obserued that a hospttal slautd be accredited beforedesignalion to ensure compliance uith approued standards.The Cornmittee recomrnends thdt Clause 2917) be d.tuend.ed to ilcludethe utord q.ccred.lted.The Committee obserued that the tineJrame uithin u.)hich to communicate theCouncil's decision is ftot stated.The Cofimittee recommend.s th.rt Cl@use 29(3) be d.rnefuded to lnchtd.e30 d.@!s ds the tltueJrqme withln uhich to cornnunicdte the Council'sdeclslon to the dppltcdnt,The Committee furt?Er obserued tl@t qualitA assurance and cot'Ltrol is acontinuous process arLd as sucht transplant hospitals need annualaccredttation and designation so ds to eftsure that theA cofttinuouslg adhereto st@ndards.The Committee recommends that a fleu pdtagr@ph (5) be added toproolde Jor d. hospltal deslgnated os a trdnspl@nt center to be@cctedlted annuallg Ior suitabllttg to offet sefuices aftd issued @dccredltdtlon certlfi,cate uhich expires bU the 37d oJ Decenber oJeaery callendaf gearf.QUALIFICATION FOR DESIIGNATION AS A TRANSPLANT CENTREClause 30 lists qualilications for designation as a transplant centre.Clause 30(a) states that a designated transplant centre shall have,"lntensive Care Unit and High Dependent Unit beds dedicated to thetransplant programme connected to the theate by a sterile corridor orinterconnectivity with dialysis capability;Clause 30(b) states, "specialised medical professionals, including atransplant surgeon, physician, anaesthesiologlst, intensivist and transplantnurse qua.lifled and experienced in the t,?e of organ, tissue or cells to beharvested and the transplant activities to be carried out;",N Clause 30 (c) stheatres; one forBtates that a transplant centre should have two adjthe donor arld another for the recipient.acent12ulStuo'"*MF(rIClause 3O(g) states that, "any other requirement that the Minister mayprescribe by regulations or standards issued by the Minister."The Committee obserued that. Cllniccll pharlnacists dnd couftsellors are missing from the l]"st oJ kevprofessionals needed. Clinic@l pharmaclsts trained in organ tratTsplantunderstand the medictne requirements and tn the eretut of adDersereactions) theA are ctapable of responding- Professional counselling isneeded before the procedure to auoid cases of depressioft.. Tte requirements for an ifttensiue c@re unit and adJdcent theatre applAto donation and tr@nsplant of solid organs;. The need for therapeutic drug monitoing facilities is not itldicatedamong the requirements.. The need for a uell stocked ph@rmacg is mlssing Jrom the list ofrequirenlents.. The prouision caters for solid organ traftsplants and ignores cells andfissaesThe Cornmlttee recommends thdt:clduse so(dl dnd 3olc) be dme ded to state thd.t the prouisionsqudlw lor solld orgd.n trd splants.A neu sub-clause be tnserted. d.fter A to prorrlde lor arequirement Jor ther@peutic dn g monltoring ldcilities.A ne@ sub-clduse be lnserted dfter (g) to piovide Joi arequirement lor a phdrrnacg stocked ulth relevdnt mediclnesand supplles.A neut sub-clduse be t^serted d.fier (h) to cater for cell ond cotne@tronspldnt centres uthose reqtlrements urill be prescrtbed bg theIfiinister.DESIGNATION BY A MINISTERClause 31 (1) states that, "The Council shall, after being satislied that ahosprtal meets aLl the requirements of this Act, regulations made under thisAct, standards rssued by the Minlster and any other applicable law,recommend the hospital to the Minifor designation as a transplantcentre,",sW13ElrJtnjfur"ueThe Commlttee obserued that different institutions are q)allfi.ed in different indifferent areas of tr ctnsplantatio n.The Commlttee ,-ecommends thdt the sub-clause be @mended bglrTsertlng the requlrement bg an instldrtion to ojJer spectfic trdnspldntsefl)lces Ior tuhlch the Jd.ctlttg is qud.llfied to do so,REGULATIoN OF coNDUcT OF DONATION AND TRANSPLA-I,ITACTIVITIESTCtause 33(4) states that, "The Council shall, in a manner prescribed byregulations, approve Iocal and expatriate transplant surgeons before theycan undertal<e transplantation activities under this Act."Clause 33(5) states that, "A transplant surgeon shall not be approved undersubsection (4) unless he or she is registered by the respective professionalCouncils."The Committee obserued that the manclate mefttioned in 33(4) qftd 33(5) ts forUganda Medical and Dental Practitiofters' CounciL.The Committee tecommend.s th.rt Cloluse 33/4) dnd 33(5) be deletedAPPROVAL OF BANKSClause 34(7) states tiat, "the national blood bank shall be accredited by theCouncil, but shall in its day to day activities report to the Minlster."The Committee observed that Uganda Blood Translusion Senrices has asystem in place for the collecting, processing, storage and distribution ofblood countrywide. The Committee was informed by the Minister that aseparate Iaw will be developed to regulate blood and its products.The Commlttee recommends thdt Clduse 3417) be deleted.POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATED TRANSPLANTCENTR.ES AND APPROVED BANSKSClause 35 (1) ofthe Bill states that, "Designated transplant centres andapproved banks shall maintain policies and procedures which shaII detail allaspects of retrieval, processing, testing and storage and practlces lor organs,tissues and cells."pWl(/g.a14l-,qClause 35(3) states that, "ModiflcaLions of standard procedures anddevelopment oI new procedures shall be approved by the registered medicalpractitioner."TIE Committee obserued that there utll be no consistenca andstandardisatiofl if each designated transplclflt centre deuelops their ownpolicle s and pr oce dures.Th,e Commiltee further obserued. that there will be no ndependent reuieu ofthese policies and regulations deueloped bA the designdted traftsplant centre.The Comrnittee recornrnends thdi Clause 33(1) be dmended. to prot idethd.t dlt pollctes derreloped bg the deslgndted trdnspldnt centres shdllbe d.pprooed. bg the Council drtd, should conJonn to the reguldtiofis.EDUCATIONAL STAJTDARDS TO THE PUBLICClause 37(1) states that, "Each designated transplant centre shall assisthospitals and health centres in establishing and lmplementing protocols formaking routine inquiries regarding organ, cell and tissue donations bypotential donors."Clause 37(4) states that, "Every designated transplant centre shall produceor have available literature and media items that provide education andawareness creation for donation of organs, tissues or cells."Clause 37 (5) states that, "A designated transplant centre shall beresponsible for establishing and assisting in the dissemrnation of t}Iematerials referred to in subsectionTlrc Committee obser,ed thatThe uord "protocols" is not consistent uith other lausTh.ere uttl be no consistencA and stdndardisation if each designatedtratTspl@nt centre deuelops their oltn eductltioft and auarenessIiterahlre and media items.There Luill be no iTdependent reuieu of education and au)ctrenessliterahtre and media items deueloped bA the design@ted transplantcentreW$'F9.c15A@]rr"eme Co,,I,!4^lttee recotnmend.s thdt the uord ptotocols tn Clduse 341) bereplaced urith g idellnes,The Comatltee further recommends thdt Clduse 37(4) and. 37(5) bedmended. to prottlde thdt d.ll educdtion and. dtDdreness llterahtre ondmed.la lterns deoeloped bg the deslgnated trqnsplq,nt centres shall bedpproved bg the CourtctLPART VII-STORAGE OF ORGA.T{S, TISSUES AND CELI,S OUTSIDE THEBODYFRAUDULENT ACTTVITYClause 51 (1) states that, "Where a designated transplant centre or approvedBank discovers that a fraudulent activity has occurred in the distribution,shipping or Iabelling of any organ, tissue or cell imported or exported by thedesignated transplant centre or Bank, an investigation shall be conducted toidentify the root cause of the fraudulent activity.The Committee observed that scope of fraudulent activities in organ, tissueand cell donation and transplant goes beyond distnbution, shipping orlabelling.The Committee recommends thdt Clquse 5111) be dmend.ed bge4>andlng the scope Jor Jrdudttlent dctivltg to horuestlng,trd.nspldntlng, retumlng or nec.rll,NATIONAL WAITING LISTClause 52 states that, "The Council shall establish and maintain a nationalwaiting list for potential organ, tissue and cell donors and recipients drawnfrom designated transplant centres; hospitals and health centres."The Comtuittee obserued th.lt the procedure for people who donate is d.onereal time, hence no need for uaiting.The Commlttee recommends thdt Clduse 52 is dmended bg remoolngthe wotd donors.FAIR AND EQUITABLE SYSTEMClause 53(3) states that, "The Council may also authorise the importation oforgans, tissues and cells from an international transplant organisareferred to in subsection (2)."16+kslsgll4The Committee obsetued that use of the uord importatlon mal] bemisinterpreted to mean commercialrsation of orgdns, fissa/es and cells let theBill prohibits the sale of organs, tissues dnd cells.fr.e Commlttee recommet ds that Clouse 53 is dmended bg repldctngthe aord, "lnportatlon" utth "shdring" uthere s,t.arang meo'nsI,aedtc@llg sd ctloned transbou^dd.ry movement oJ orgd.ns, tissues orcells fiom o e otgd.n b.Irtk to d other i,t cds€s where the?e dreogreemefits q.pprorred bg the Mlnlster.TRANSPLANTATION ACTTVITYClause 54 {1) states that, "The ret eval and preservation of human organs,tissues and cells for transplantation shall only be performed by a registeredhealth professionals approved by the Councrl arld in accordance with lhrsAct, regulations made under this Act, any other applicable law arrdstandards issued by the Minister.The Committee obserued that the retieual team includ.es uanous lealthprofessionals uho are not only hcensed ba thelr respectiue professionalbodies- S.tbjecting them to approual bg the Council maa constitute doublelicensiflg.The Committee recommend thdt releoqnt prolessiono.l bodies shottld.repl@ce the Coufictl q.pped.rlng ln clduse 54(7).Clause 54(4) states that, "All transplant activity shall be performed to thehighest professional and ethical standards."The Commtttee obserued that ethical staftdards are set bg the proJessionalbodies.The Cofimlttee recomtnend.s thdt Cl.luse 54(4) should be amended bgputtlng d. prot,lsion Jot a.ll trdnspldnt d.ctiuities to be prescribed bA therelevant prolesslona.l bo dles.Clause 54(5)Clause 54(5) states that, "When a person has been conhrmed brain dead bythe team in care, the Council shall lmmediately be notlfied to send aflindependent neurological team to confirm the death for purposes ofdonation."@&lv1s?11The Committee obserued that th.e team uhich canf.mls brain death ncludesother prokssionals like neuro surgeon) neuro phAsician, anaesthesioLoglstaftd ifttetlsiuist.The Commlttee ,'ecommends thdt the urord neurologlcd.l be deletedClause 54(8) states that, "The independent team in {5) shall consrst of aneuro surgeon, neuro physician, and an anaesthesiologist or intensivist."Clause 54(9) states that, "The independent team and organ ret eval teamshall be self-sufficient and shall not require anesthetic, theatre or surgicalstaff from the donor hospital and shall be available 24 hours a day withoutother elective commitments during thet time on call and able to respondappropriately if there is more than one donor on the same day-"The Cornmlttee recommends t Lat the tuto clduses be merged,Insertlon oJ q neu, slrb-clquse (9)The Committee observed that no provision has not been made for a braindead potential donor who is in an intensive care unit in a hospital that doesnot provide organ, tissue and cell transplant services.The Commlttee recotnmeads that a new sub-clause (9) be inserted tocater for brain death in atr intensive care unit of a hospltal.DONATION AND TRANSPLANT OF ORGANS, TISSI'ESI AND CELLSREMOVED FROM LIVING DONORSClause 67 (4) states that, The Council shall ensure that lhe donation islegal and justrlied by ensuring t}lat the proposed donor(d) understands that it is illegal to accept any financial or otherinducement for the donation but that he or she may have anyexpenses or loss of earnings reimbursed.{e) understands that he or she may be compensated for anyunanticipated harm resulting from the donation."The Committee obserued that the organs, tissues and cells are donated free ofcharge. Reimbursement for loss of earnings aftd compensation for anVunanticipated harm resultlng from dotuation maAbe constnled to mearl apaAment for the organ, tissue or cellIs,lMs318uThe Cotumlttee recommends that:clduse 644) ld) be amended to,'emolE ., ptot ision for ang expenses orloss oJ ednlags teltubursed,Clause 67(4) le) should be ch.Inged to put d provisio to the elJect thqta llvlng do,ftor understdnds thdt he or she mag be cornpe^sated JorJustifid.ble expenses which should be @pprooed bg the council.AUTHORITY FOR R^EMOVAL OF HUMAN ORGANS, TISSUES AND CELLSClause 71 (4) states that, "The autllority given under subsection (1) orsubsection (2) or, as the case may be, subsection (3) shall be suftrcientwarrant for the removal, for therapeutic purposes, of the human organ,tissue or cell but no such removal shall be made by any person other than aregistered medical practitioner from a designated transplant centre".The Commlttee recommends th@t, iJ a potentldl donor dies wlthoutgtvtt g hts/he. conser.t, .rnd the fiert oJ ktn cd.nnot be contacted, thdtbodA should. not be used Jor dondtlon ptrposes,PROHIBITION OF DONATION FROM LTVING CHILDClause 72 prohiblts donation of an organ, tissue or cell from a living child.The Committee noted that medically, stem cells are drawn from bonemarrow and peripheral blood, which regenerate and they do not cause anyharm.The Commlttee recommer.ds thot the clause be redrd.ft.ed to cdter Jorthe Jollourtng:Prohibltion oJ donation Jrom a living chlld. sd.ue Jor exceptlonq.lcircu !6tances approved W the Councll ulth the consent ofparent/gud.rd.la.n.htt proolslo^s und.er @hlch @ lilring child ,n@g dofidte. The prottlslo^slnclude: stern cell therd.pg jor minors uho dte turins or close slbllngsafrer dpproodl bg the CouncilPresct'lbe o penaltg of UIe imprisonment lor a perso't u)ho co$trqoenesthe pror,lslon14wVs,ffi,wClause 73 (a) states that, "Where a child is brain dead or has died,appropriate consent means- (a) the express consent of the child in forceimmediately before the child died witnessed by at least one close relative oran authorised oflicer."The Commlttee obserued that a minor cannot giue consent since childrei d.onot ha'e the capacitA to enter iftto @nA binding agreement except forexceptional circumstance s.The Committee recornme ds th@t Clause 73(a)be deleted.APPROPRIATE CONSENT BY LIVING ADULTClause 74 (2) states that an adult between the age of 18 and 21 yearsrequires two witnesses while giving consent. One of the witnesses should bea person with parental ghts over them.The Committee noted that clause 74(1) takes care of the interest of sub-clause (2).The Commlttee recomtnends th.tt Cld.use 7412) be deleted,APPROPRIATE CONSENT FROM BRAIN DEAD OR DEAD ADULTClause 75(4) states that, "The Council may apply to court for consent wherea person dies wittrout express consent a:rld does not have any closerelations."The Committee obserued that seating a court order to haruest organs ortssues lrom cadduer takes time and bA the time it B granted the organ maAbe spoiled. The fequiemeftt to get consent from court can create a uindou)tuhich can be abused. Fut'thennore the Commtttee obseroed th,at thetlmeframe uithin uhich to m@ke the application is not stated.The Comrnittee recornmend.s that the sub-cl@use 74 (4) be deleted.,REQUIREMENTS FOR CARRYING OUT POST-MORTEM EXI,MINATIONClause 78 lists the requirements for carrylng our a post-mortem oncadaveric donorATPROPRIATE CONSENT FOR DONATION FROM A BRAIN DE.AD ORDEAD CIIILDMIAu&qr-20Clause 79 is about authority for removal oI human organ, cell or tissue froma body sent for post-mortem examination for certain purposes.The Committee noted that Clause 78(1) requires that a post-mortem shall becdrried out on all cadal)eic donors ond shall be conducted at the sclme timeas the haruesting of the organs to detennine the cause of death and thesuitabilitll of the doftoLThe Committee obserued that hotueshng organs, tissues and cells sent forpost fiortem coulcl be abused dnd in cctses oJ medico legal nature, it maAdestrog euidence that tuight be needed at a later date. For ilstance, ift casesof exhumat[on.The Committee furth.er obserued that there is no requirement for ceftifcation oJdeath bA ttLe Council before a post mortem is carried out. This could create apossibilitA of a person alleging that the organs are h@ruested from donors tuhoare stiu aliue- Ift dddition, Clause 75 @lre@dA takes care of hoLD orgdtTs areharuested Jrom the dead.The Cornmittee recommends thdt Clduse 78 dnd Clduse 79 be deleted,PART XI-OFFENCES AND PENALTIESPREVENTION OI' ORGAN, TISSI'E OR CELL TRATFICKINGClause 88 (2) (a) states that, "The prohibition under subsection (1) shall notprevent payments which do not constitute a financial gain or comparableadvantage, in partrcular-(a) compensatron for hvrng donors of loss of earnlngs and arly otherjustifiable expenses caused by the remov.rl or by related medicalexaminatlons;The Cotumittee obserued that the prouiston is sllerll on uho approues thejustif.dble expenses. Cotupensation for loss of eamings can be abused and.commercialised. It mdA be construed as pqAment for the organs, tissz/es o,'cells prouided bg the donor-The Commlttee recomrftends thot Clause A8(2) (d) should be amendedto dllotD onl! justlfi.able expenses @hich sholtld be approtEd bA theCouncll.l'rv1@aN$fg',327GkWv'-Clause 88 (2) {b) states that, "palrment of a justifrable fee for legitimatemedical or otlter related technical services rendered in connection with thetransplantation; and (c) states that, "compensation in case of undue damageresulting from the removal ofan organ, tissue or cell from a living person.Tle Committee obserued thtlt the fee for legitimate medical dnd other technicdlseruices rendered in connection uith transplantation m@A uary from time totime; hetuce it should be catered for in the rerylations.The Comtuittee further obserued that coftsent is sought before going Jor atuAsurgical procedure and before co4seat is giuen, the donor must haue receiuedall the releudnt inJonnation dnd expl@n@tions tncluding ang eDenh)ctlities thatmaa qise.The Commlttee recommends that clduses 88/2) (b) d.nd (c) be deleted.OFFENCES BY BODY CORPORATEClause 91 provides for olfences by body corporateThe Conmittee obserued that th.e ckluse does not prescibe penalties for bodycorporate-The Comrnittee recomfitends that d neu sub-clduse be insetaed d.fter97(4) to prescribe q pendltg not exceeding fioe hundred thousdndcufiencg poiftts.GENERAL PENAITYAccording to Clause 92, "A person contravenes a provision of this Act or anyregulations made under this Act, or any condition of tlle designation grantedunder this Act for which no punishment is separately provided in thrs Act isliable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding ten thousand curency points orimprisonment not exceeding three years or both."The Cammittee obserued that tLLe peftaltA dnd the pison sentence are notdetenent enouglLThe Committze recommends the penaltg to be lncreased. to onehund,red thousand, cuftencg polnts dnd the prison sertte,!,ce to 72gedfs.I14ru$ry,a\ER.EGULATIONSClause 96(21 (a) outlioes the areas for which regulations may be made.(a) "the criteria for designation of transplant centres;"(f) t}Ie walting list(s) the form in which authority for the removal of any human organ, cell ortissue from an unclaimed dead body may be grven by the person in charge ofthe management or control of the hospital or prison;Tlrc Committee obserDed thctt:On 96(2) (a) that desigftcttion mdg not be cdnled out beforea.ccreditation.. On 96(2) A thc.t potential recipients shaf orgafts, tissues and cells LUiIIbe from d.ifJerent rcgions across the country.. On 96(2) (s) thdt tLE clctuse is givng the potuer to consent to remoual oforgans, tissues or cells from unclaimed bodies to pison/ hospitaimanagement. That is contrary to the prouisions oJ CLause 75 and 76uhich gioes the pouer to coftsent to close relat{ues or nomincatedrepresentdtiues. Clduse 96(2) (s) mag be abused.The Committee recommends thati. accreditatlon should be done before designatiorr in clause 96(2)(a).. the watting list should be nattonal in Clause 96(2) (f).. clausc 96 (2) (s) be deleted.The Committee further obselued that Clause 96 (2) does not have prouisionsfor look back procedures, procedures for shdring oJ organs, rectall and retumand fees to be charged by the Counal.The Committee recommends thdt lour neu prordsions be inserted dfrerpdt@grd.ph (o.a) to cater lor look bo.ck procedures, recdll and returrt,procedures Jor shdrlng oI orgons, lees to be charged. bg the Cou cll.Clause 96(3) (a) provides for a penalty for contravention of any regulation ofa fine not exceeding thirty thousand currency polnts.The Committee obserued that the penaltA is excessiue.The Committee recomfiends the penaltg to be reduced to tel thouso.adcurrencg points Jrorn thirtg cutfeficg poirtts.tt423-@-W:=*s..CODE OF PRACTICDClause 97 (2)(k) authorises the Minister to issue a code of practice inrelation to the import or the export of the body of a brain-dead person ororgan, tissue or cell from a human body for use for a scheduled purpose.The Committee observed that use of the words import and export may bemisinterpreted to mean commercialisation of organs, tissues and cells yetthe Bill prohibits the sale of organs, tissues and cells.The Comrnlttee recornmends thdt clduse 97 12) (k) is @mended bAteplaclng the uord., "lr,4port d.nd exportD uith "shdrhg" uhere sharlngtued.fts medicdllg sdflctioraed transboundary rnotefitent ol orgdns,tissues or cells lrom one orgdn bank to @nother in cdses urhere thereare agt'eements dpproted by the Mlnlster.AUTIIORISED TRANSPLANTATION ACTTVITIESSchedule 2 of the Bill lists authodsed transplantation activities and theyinclude: donatron, transplantation, harvesting organs, tissues and cells.The Committee obserued thctt storage dnd. distibutiotu tthich are patt of theorga\ tissue and cell transplctnt actiuities uere ftot prouided for ift Schpdule2.fhe committee recommends that stordge and dist?ibution be qdd.ed toschedule 2 oJ the Bill.GENERAI OBSERVATIONSINADEQUATE FUNDS PROVIDED UNDER CERTIFICATE OF. FINANCIAIIMPLICATIONSRule 118 (1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda requiresthat a Bill introduced in the House shall be accompanied by a Certihcate ofFmancial Implications (CFI) rssued by the Minister responsible for Finance-(2J The Certificate of Financial Implication issued under sub-rule (1) shallindicate t1-Ie estimates oI revenue and expenditure over the period of not lessthan 2 years after coming into effect of the Bill when passed.(3) In addition to sub-rule (2) above, the Certificate of Frnanclal Implicationsshall indicate the impact of the Bill on the economy.The Ceftificate of Financial Implications tabled with the Uganda HumanOrgan Donation and Transplant Bill complied with the requirements of RuleW24 l-fu1aS,3-Bkb6^ea&118. It was tabled with the Bill, contained planned expenditure for a pedodof 5 years and included a statement on expected savings to Government.However, the Committee noted that the funds proposed may not beadequate for implementation of human organ, tissue and cell transplantprogrammes. During the interface of the Committee on Health with themedica-l specialists, the Committee was informed that the following pillarsare required for a functional organ, tlssue and cell transplant programme:. Skilled medical experts. Infrastucture where transplant is done (sterile theatre, coridors andwards). Enabling legal framework. Adequate funding for medlcines and supplies requiredThe medical experts expressed concerns over t}Ie gaps in human resourcesand lacilities (infrastructure and equipment) for lunctronal organ, tissue andcell transplant in the country.According to Clause 28 of the Bill, transplant rs to be pioneered at MulagoNational Referral Hospital. During the preparaLion of the budget forFy2O22123, the Drector General of Health Services reported that MulagoNational Referral Hospital has a gap oI86 super specialists of which 23 arefor surgery. He said Minrstry of Health requires Shs 15.72 billion to recmitspecialists to ft1l all the vacant posts in t}Ie refefial hospital. However, onlyShs 2.658 billion has been provided in the CFI for regional transplantcentres for a period oI ftve years. Furthermore, only Shs 911 milllon hasbeen provided for capacity building for a period of 5 years.This \i.i11 not be adequate for putting in place the requisite infrastructure,hire and train the required specialists.This programme requ[es a lot of publicity arld communicatron for people tounderstand and be willing to donate their organs to tlose who are in need.However, only Shs 202 million has been provided for this activity for aperiod of 5 years.The Commlttee recommends thdt Mlni.stry oJ linance, Pldnniflg dndEconomic Deoelopment should prottide ddditiondl Junding lorsuccessJtul lmplementatlon oJ the Ugdnda Hum.Ln Orgdn Dondtion dndTyanspldnt progrdmme once the BllI ls pdssed.tu,11ts@,w"a.o coNcLUsIoNThe Organ Donation and Transplant Bill when enacted into law will cover aspecialised part of medical care in the country which has hitherto beenunregulated. The Bill presents an opportunity to streamline and strengthenthe regulatory framework of medical practice in Uganda in matters of ethicsar1d discipline in this sensitive and vital areas of medical practice.Rt. Hon. Speal<er and Hon. Members, I beg to move that the report oI theCommittee on the Uganda Human Orga! Donation and Transplant Bill beadopted.$Iua26s&.---\ NFnMb*PROPOSDD AMENDMENTS TO THE HUMAN ORGAN DONATION ANDTRANSPLANT B[LL. 20211. CLAUST 2: PURPOSIEa) Delete paragraph (c)JustilicationThe clause Luould crecte an assutuption that Mulago is readg and hasmet tlE stanr)ard citei.l for dccreditcltrofl ctnd d.esignation.Different tApes of organs can be haruested and Aet Mulago mdl] not bein posrtion to offer the entire spectfi)m of trdnsplant seruices Aet the bitunder clause 3 prouides ouer 79 seruices to be offered dndimplemented, and other centers might be readg to commence operdtionbefore Mulagob) Insert the word "accreditation" before the word "designation"JustilicatioIr:. To allou due process of accreditatton and destgnation to take placec) Insert a new provision after paragraph (i) to read as-"To provide for a frarnework for research and development."Justlficatlon:Research is a repository Jor knotuledge and can be used Jor teachingpurposes and for the deuelopment of neu) techniques, prcuentiofi andpolicA deuelopment.l-t'tfl27@-ua"e-w4SrJ2. CLI|USE 3Amend the provision-a) By deleting paragraph (c); and deleting reference to "blood" wherever itappears in t}Ie bill.Justifrcatlon:Regulation of blood transfusLon Lohich is alreadg on going in hospit llsand health centers uould affect the operations of the health centres.The olfteftt faciltties uthere blood donation has been going on uill fallsl.@rt of the citeia for qccredrtation and this Luill affect current supplaof bloocl- Therefore, tt toould be proper for "blood" to be regulatedunder a separate legal framework.b) in paragraph (n), by substituting "cells" with "hair"c) by substitutrng paragraph "(s)" with the following-"(s) any other organ, cell or tissue for the purpose of transplantation."Justilication:. To be all inclusiue and accommodate emerging deueloprnents in science3. CLAUSE 4 INTERPESTATIqNa) Substitute the delinition of "tissue evaluation" with the following-"Tlssue ev"aluatiotr" means the analysis ofabnormality, contamrnants, compatibillty anddetermine its fitness Ior purpose"tissue for viabrlity,micro-organisms toJustlfication:. The current derttuition in the billis narroltbl Insert tlle following new dehnitions:"autograft" means tissue whlch is transplanted withln the same person;"allograft" mears trssue that rs transplanted from one person to another;slt428fq,J"brein dead" means a condition where a person is on an artificial lifesupport machine, with irreversible cessation of all functions of the entrebrain, including the brain stem, conhrmed by Electro-encephalogram (EEG)and independent team, and the person has no chance of revival;"bone marrow" meals the soft, spons/, gelatinous tissue that fills themedullary cavities, or the centers of bones, whrch rs responsible for theproduction of red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets;"A rctrietral team" means an intensive care team that is capable ofhandling a patient on life support;"stem cells" means undifferentiated cells originating from adult orembryonic tissue that can turn into specific cells, as the body needs them;"stem cell transplant" means a medical procedure performed to replaceboDe marrow that has been damaged or destroyed by disease, infection, orchemotherapy''.Justiflcatiotr:. for claitg4. CLAUSE 6:Delete clause 6Justilication:The tApe of assistance @nd sllpport uhich the Minister is supposed toolfer is flot clear. The ambiryitV posed bV the prouisroft c@n therefore beeasilA subject to abuse bA LDrong elements-5. CLAUSE 7.Amend I he provision as follows-JustllicEtlon:. For clantA and uniJormitAa) Amend the cross heading and ttre headnote to read as-"Uganda Human Organ Donation and Transplant Council"l-A29ts4b) Amend sub clause (5) by substitution the words "Uganda Medical andDental Practitioner Council" with the words "relevqnt healthprofcssional councils"Justlllcation:To accommodate all the other prafessional bodies6. INSDRTION OF A NEW CLAUSE ATTER CLAUSE 7.Insert a new clause after clause 7 as follows-"(d) rs servrng on any other statutory council or Board m the healthsector"'composition of the Council"The Councrl shall compose of(1 ) The Director General(2) Persons who are qualified in, and have had experience and shorltrcapacity, and are representatives in ttre following specialized fields;(i) Surgery;(ii) Law;(iii)lntensive Care;(w)Anesthesia;(v) Financial Management;(vi)Bioethics; and(vii) Investigative Specialist.(3) The chairperson who shall be appointed by t}Ie Minrster from amongthe members.(4)The Executive Director, who shall be, the secretary to the council andshall be an ex-offrcio member of the council, without a right to vote.Justificatiotr:To estdblish the goueming bodA oJ the council7. CLAUSE 9 DISOUAIIFICATION FROM APPOINTMENT TO THECOUNCILAmend t1-re provision as follows-a) Redraft paragraph (dJ to read as-0l-u0rq{$Lb6t"YJustlllcation:. To auotd conflict of interest.bl Insert a new paragraph aJter Paragraph (d) to read as follows"(e) is directly involved m the organ, cell or tissue transplant senrice."Justifrcationto a Doid conflict of tnteresta. CLAUSE 11.Delete sub clause (41Ju6tiflcation:To auoid utLfaimess and possible abuse of pouers bg the appointngauthoritA.9. CLAUSE 24. DESIGNATION OT TRANSPLANT CENTRESAmend the provision as follows -a) By deleting sub clause (1)Justiricatlon:. Consequential amendtuettb) In sub clause (2) by deleting the words "Notwithstanding sub section (11"Redraft the provision to read"The Minister may, in consultation wlth the Council, by statutoryinstrument, designate a hospital as an organ, tissue or cell donation andtransplant centre."Justifrcatio n:. Consequentidl. Sl1b clause (1) u)hich the prouision makes reJerence towas deleted.WsA31r.+IBPbile10. CLAUSE 29. APPLICA TION FOR DESIGNATION AS A TRANSPLANTb) by nserting 3 new sub clauses after sub clause (4) to read as follows-"(5) A hospital designated as a transplant center shall be accreditedannually Ior suitability to offer services and issue an accreditationcertificate which expires by 31st of December of every Calendar Year. "Justilication:. To ensure compliance and Jor qualita @ssuraftce"(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub section (31, the personaggrieved by the decision of the Council may appeal to the Minrsterwithin 30 days from t}le date of decision of the Council.Justlficatlor:To prouide for timelineCENTREAmend the provision as follows-a) By substituting sub clause (1) to read as-"A hospital that \.{rishes to be designated as a transplant center undersection 28 shall apply to tlre council for accreditation and designation."Justllicatlon:For qualitA @ssurance before tLLe transpldnt centres are designation32"(7) The Minister shall dispose of the appeal u'ithin 30 days for the date ofreceipt of t}le appeal"Justlficatlon:For Justice to be serued to the applicqnt ajler alL due process rsconsidered.ftA'@vo"-Iw4s&IqI1. CLAUSE 30. OUAIIFICATION FOR DESIGNATION AS A TRANSPLANTCENTRE.Amend the provision as follows-a) In paragraph (a) by deleting the words "and high dependent unit beds"JustilicationFor claitAb) In paragraph "(b)" by inserting after the words "anesthesiologist" thewords "chnical pharmacist"Justifrcatlol:. It is necessary to haue a clinical pharntacist on the team-c) Insert at the beginning of paragraph {c) the words "at least"Justlfication:To giue room for JlexibilitA depending on the category oJ center beingestabllslrcd.d) insed "two new paragraphs' after "paragraph (0" to read as" a licensed pharmacy stocked with necessary medicines andrelated supplies for organ donation and transplant services;"a valid operating licence of the facfity from Uganda Medical andDental Practitioners Council.'Justlflcation. Thts list of seruices lacks citical components uhich shbuld. not beblanketed among the "otherc'. A trdnsplant center shoulcl be llcensed. Itis also necessary for it to haue a PhLarmacA stocked uith releuantmedicines and supplies necessary for a successful trctnsplaftt process.L2 CLAUSE 31. DESIGNATION BY A MINISTER.Amend sub clause (1) by inserting at the end of the provision the followingwordsI'u+&'we"to operate specilic traflsplant servlce for which the Hospital isqualilied".JustllicationEctch hospital should be assessed against standctrds bA the couftcil.The Minister therefore should designate d Hospitat Jor example @s aand Liuer if it meets both requirements- A bldnl@t designatiotu as a"Transplant center" should be auoided.13. CLAUSD 32. EXISTING CENTERSa) Amend sub clause (2) (a) by inserting the word "accreditation" before theword "desrgnation"Justlfication:. Consequential14. CLAUSE 33.a) Delete sub clause (a) and (5)Justlficatlon:It usurps the pouers of the Medical Councilb) Delete the second sub clause (2)Justilication:. To auoid repetition.15. CLAUSE 34Delete sub clause (7)JustificationAccreditation of blood setuices cannot be catered fol in this lalt dnd u.)illbe catered Jor in anotler lau)fl,(,.g2w'gruTtr)]l'tt417. CLAUSE 3716. CLAUSE 35Clause 35 is amendedl(o)in sub clause (1), by inserting immediately after the word"procedures" the words "and shall conform to regulations madeunder this Act";(b)In sub clause (3), by inserting immediately alter the word"shall", the following words "in consultation with the Council"Justificatlon. For stand@rdization oJ policies and procedures. To prouide for checks and balances.Amend the provision as follows-a) In sub clause (1) by substituting the word "protocols' with the word"guidelines"Justilicatlon:For uniformiqJ and consistencv uith other piece of legislation.b) In sub clause (4) by inserting at the end of the provision the words "asmay be approved by the council"Justilicatlou:To act ds qudlitlJ control i@asures18. CLAUSE 40Substitute "Transport" with "Transplant"JcEliEecllsE:. To correct a tltping error19. CLAUSE 42Substitute sub clause (3) with the following-"The Minister may, in consultation wilh the council, by regulation, prescrrbeaddlt1onall'n4Wuirements for recallprocedures."35F?gLboteJustlfrcation:To cater for any euenfualities that might qise20. CLAUSE 53Clause 53 of the Bill is amended in sub clause (3) by substituting the word"importation", the word "sharing";Justificatlon. To chatve the teminologV used to refer to exchdnge of organs uithother tnternatlonal transplant organizations rather thai export oforgdns uhich connotes commerciaLization of org@ns, tissues and cells.21. CLAUSE 54. TRANSPLANTATION ACTTVITYAmend the provision as follows-a) In sub clause (1) by deleting the words approved by the council'Justification:This is a function of Uganda Medical and Dental Practttioner Councilb) In sub clause (4) by inserting at Lhe end of provision the words "as maybe prescribed by thei, respective prolessional bodies"Justification:The proursion should clearlg prouide for the person Loho determines theproJessional and ethrcal standards-c) in sub clause (5) by deleting the word "neurological" appearing before theword "team"JustilicationThe independent team is inclusiue of other professronalsd) Amend sub clause (8) by substituting the cross reference "(6)' with "(5)"Justifrcation:To streamline the cross refe l.14$g.l@,ba Ye) Redraft sub clause (9) to read as follows-"(9) where a person has been declared and conhrmed brain dead rnaccordance with sub section (5), in an Intensive Care Unit oI a hospitalwhrch is not a designated Lransplant centre, a retdeval team shall bedispatched by the Council to retrieve the potential donor to atransplant centre."Justirication:. for clantg22. CLA67Amend the provision as follows-a) In sub clause (4)(d) by deleting all the words appearing after the word"donation" andRedrafting sub clause (4) (d) as follows-"understands that it is illegal to accept any financral or other inducementfor the donation of the orgen;'b) In sub clause {4) (e) to read as follows-"understands that he or she may be compensated for justifiable expenseswhich should be declared to and cleared by the Councrl withinreasonable time."Justilication:To guard against commercidlization of organs, tissues or cells23. CIAUAD 7lAmend the provision as follows-a] In sub clause (3) by delete the words "of the removal";b) In sub clause (6) by deleting the word 'the" appeadng at the beginning ofline three.Justlficatlon:. To correct grdmmaticalc) In sub clauseIfl4SJt"daBtt7) bv-1^:riBy deleting the words "of age" appearing aftcr the words "eighteen years"Justificatlon:To coftect grdmmatical eftord) substituting the words "any of the parents" with the words "any closerelations"Justlfication:. To auoid creattng a ladtnd in the lau.24. CLAUSE 72Substitute tle provision with the following"72, Prohibition of donation from a living chlld(o) Donatron from a li!'rng child rs prohibited save for exceptionalcircumstances approved by the Council, with the consent oI a parent orguardian-(b) A person who contravenes the provision of this section commits anoffence and is liable on conviction to lmprisonment for life.(c) For the purpose of this section, exceptional circumstances meanhaematopoietic stem cell, allograft and autograph to a twln or sibllng."Justilicatior:. There are circuttustances that warraftt donation bg a liuing child such asdonation for bone marrolu transplant Jor conjoined or identical twinsLuhere one ht)in can be alloued to donate to tlle other based on souftdmedical assessment.25. CLAUSE 73Delete clause 73Justifrcation:The prouision presumes that a child hos capctcltlJ to consent. It is tritealdu erson under the dge of 18 Aears is legallA considered to bel'14MsJf,-g;4o6t^e-a child and that as a child he or she automaticallu d.oes not haue thecapacita to consent.26, CLALSE 74.Amend the provision as follows-a) In sub clause (1) by substituting the words "sound mind" with the words'mental capacitY';Justification:For consistencA uith the teflninologA used in the Mental Health Act,2018, LDhrch outlaloed tle use of the uord "unsound mifld" aftd insteadadopted the use of tl9 uords "mefttal incapacitA".b) Delete sub clause (4)b) Delete sub clause (2)Justification:. The Prouision lacks claitA, and besrdes the content of sub clduse (2) iscatered for under sub clause (1)27. CLAUSE 75a)Amend sub clause (1) by deleting the words'brain dead or"Justiflcation:For cl@itAJustification:. It is likelA to be mdnirylated/ abused. The time taken to secure a courtorder mau go beAond the time ol uiabilitA oJthe organ, tissue or cell.28. CLAUSD 76. NOMINATED REPRESENTATTVES.Amend sub clause (10) by- I 'ltlSubstituting the words "unsound mind" witl the words "mental incapacity'and male subsequent amendments whenever it appears in the brll#'r'tr.,Justification:. Consequential @mendmeftt.29. CLAUSE 78Delete sub clauses (3), (a), and (5)Justlfication:haruesting organs, tissues o.nd cells sent for post mortem could be abused and in cdses oJ medico-legal nadtre, it maA destroA eDidence thatmight be needed at d ldter daA; lor exctmple, tn cases of exhumation.30. CLAUSE 79.DeleteJustilicationBecause there is no requiretnent for certifcation oJ death before post-mortem bg the council, tuhich would create a possibility of personsalleging that organs uere haruested from @ patient who uas still aliue,and in ang cctse, clause 75 alreadA takes care of hou.) organs areLwruestecl ftom tle dead.31. CLAUSE 88al Amend sub clause (1)(c) by inserting the word "unjustifiable" immediatelybefore the word "finalcral"Justilication:Sometlmes use of moneg is requved Jor purposes of organ, cell or tissuetrdnsplant.b) Amend sub clause (2) as follows. in paragraph (a) by deleting the words "loss of earnings" andinserting the words (as may be approved by tlle council" at the end ofthe provisionJustification: t-u)s401a61^e-u&WrNa.3llse of tLe uords "loss of earnings" can easilg be abused andcomrrlercialized; and use of tlle uords "as mag be approued bV theConncrl'is @ ensure quolilA conlrol.(c) Delete paragraphs (b) and (c)Justlllcatlon:Paragraph (b) shall be catered Jor in the regulations, and paragtuph (c)is delated because Consent is sought before going for any surgicalprocedure and the consent explains aA euentuallties mag anse.32. CLAUSE 91Amend the provjsion by inserting a new sub clause after sub clause (4) toread as follows-"(5) A body corporate that commits a:o offence under subsection (1) isliable, on convictlon, to a fine not exceeding live hundred thousandcurency poirrts."Justification:. BodA corporates should be prescnbed a more stingent penaltA33. CLAUSE 92. GENERAI PENALTY.Amend the provision by substituting lor the words "ten thousand currencypoints" with "one hundred thousand currency points or imprisonment notexceeding twclve years, or both"Justilication:. To prescibe a more deterrent penaltA34. CLAUSE 96. REGULATIONSAmend sub cla(d) Redraft sub clause (6) as follows-"(6) A person who contravenes this secbon commits an offence and isIiable to life imp sonment."Justlllcation:To prourde for a more deteffent pendltuI416oU""*WMS(2) as follows./sea) In paragraph (a) by inserting the words "accredrtation and" before theword "designation"Justlllcation:The transpldflt center must first be accredited before designationb) In paragraph (B by inserting the word "Nationa.I" before the word "waitinglist";c) By deleting paragraph (s);d) By inserting four new paragraphs after (o) to read as lollows. "fees to be charged by the council". "recall procedures"r "look back procedures. "procedure for sharing of organs"Justlfrcation:To be more inclusiuee) Inserting a new provision after sub clause (3) to read as"For the purpose of this section, "Sharing oI organs' mea.ns medicallysanctloned movements of a body organsj tissues or cells from one organbank to another.Justificatlon:for cLantA35. SCHEDULE 2Insert number {4) atter "(3)" to read as-"4. Storage"Justification:To be all inclustueactiuitiesStorage is one of the components of transplant6r$ )ffinl-fl541F[.,5COMMITTEE ON HEIIITII - ENDORSEMENT OF TIIE REPORT ON THEUGANDA IIUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANT BILL,2O2ISIGNATURE s/NoNAMEHon. Dr Charles AJrume -chalrperson1Hon. Ssebikaali Yowerr - Vice-chalrperson23F{.84e+Hon. Ninkusiima John PaulHon. Namukuta Brenda5Hon Nakazibwe Hope Grania6Hon. Lematia Ruth lrlotly Q ysl *7Hon. Laker Sharon Balmoyi8Hon. Bebona Babungi Josephine9Hon. Chelain Betty Louke11l0Hon. D, Bhoka Didi George1{Hon. Atwijukire Dan Kimoshol2Hon. Otimgiw lsaac Ismail13Hon. Ayebare Margaret{-4"$-t4. LHon. Rutahigwa Elisa \15Hon. Dr Ruyonga Joseph16Hon. Sekyanzi Benard KiryaHon. Eng. lrene Muloni Nafuna18Hon. Mbavo EstherHon. Dr Nandagire ChdstineNdiwalana1920Hon. Dr Kagabo Twaha Mzee21Hon. Zaake Francis22Hon. Nanyondo Veronicah23Hon. Dr Kamara Nicholast7A---t"1IHon- Dr Lulume Bayiga Michael 2425Hon. Col. Dr Victoria Nekesa26Hon. Auma Kenny I27Hon. Makokha Margaret2AHon. Nakato Mary AnnetHon. Dr Opio Sarnuel Acutl30Hon. Bahireira Tumwekwatse BSylviaHon. Zawedde VictoriousWHon. Nebanda Florence Andiru 3233Hon. Rwaburmdore TarsisWt,t34Hon. Batuwa Timothy Lusaala3nMINORITY REPORT ON THE HUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPI.ANT 8II,I., 2O2ISEPTEMBER,202211. INTRODUCTIONRl. Hon. Speoker ond colleogue Members of Porliomenl, on beholf of members ofthe commltiee on Heolth who hove signed on to this Minority Report, lwould like tostofe from lhe onset lhot we ore proud of lhe immense effort ond work ihot wenlinto ihe mojorily reporl which iook core of mony of our vrews ond posiiions ondlndeed the low is limely lo enoble tjgondons toke odvontoge of odvoncemenl inhumon science ond medicine ond will go o long woy lo sove lives ond prolongliving.On srh July 2022, ihe Mjnlster of Heollh tobled in Porlioment the Ugondo HumonOrgon Donolion ond Tronsplonl Btl, 2021, ond ihe some wos referred to theCommitlee on Heollh in occordonce wiih Rule 129(l ) of the Rules of Procedure ofPorlioment.The Bill inlends lo provide o legol fromework lhof would enoble corrying oul oforgon tronsplonts in Ugondo. The object of this Bll is to esioblish o Legol fromeworkfor the regulotion of orgon, cell ond tissue donotion ond tronsplontolion in Ugondo.The lqw oims ai proiecling the dignity ond identity of every person ond guorontee,wiihoul discrlminotion, respecl for his or her integrily ond other rlghis ondfundomenlol freedoms with regord to donoiion ond ironsplontotion of orgons,tissues ond cells of humon origin.Pursuoni to Rule 205 of the Rules of Procedure of ihe Porliomenl of Ugondo, wehereby present dissenling opinion from the opinion of mojoriiy of lhe Commrttee.I. AREAS OF DISSENTWe dissenled with mojority of the Committee on ihe followingo) Need lo orronge close relolions in order of oscendence for purposes ofesloblishing who should be contocled firsl where consent js needed.b) Powers of ihe Minister over the Council which compromises iheindependerce of il'e Counc:l;c) Proposed compelencies for members of lhe Council ihot eoyes out criticolprofessions ond codres lho'i shou d be on the Councild) Tenure of the Hurnon Orgon Donolion ond Tronsplont Councile) Accrediiolion ond licensing of multiple cenlers for orgon horveslingf) Accredilotion ond licensing of multlple centers os orgon bonksg) Exporling orgonsh) lnclusron of o mechonism to protect vulneroble populotions ond migrontworkers23,0: DISSENTING OBSERVATIONS3.3: Powers of lhe Minisler over lhe Council which compromises lhe independenceof lhe Council.We disogreed wilh ihe mojorjty committee on the powers of the Minisier io direcithe Council ond the requiremenl os provided in the Bill to hove the Council compy\/ilh lhe directives os o must, yel the some low provides for lhe independence oflhe Council.Recommendolion: Arnend Clouse 5(l) io give room to lhe Council to consider lhedlrectives ond guidonce of the Minisler wiihoul tolking lhem up by force.3.4: Proposed competencies for members of lhe CouncilClouse 8 of the Bill guides on the key quollficotions ond compelencies of lhepeople who should be members of the Council. The key competencies listedexcludes o Phormocisl who ore persons with expertise on drugs to guide on policyond oversight mollers ot lhe council level. Drug supply ond monogemeni, drugcosts, drug sofety, drug interoclion, drug dosing ore highly technicol ospecis oforgon lronsplonl thot need oversighl ond policy fromeworks. Tronsploni polienlshove fo ioke lmmunosuppressont medicolions for life which come ol cosls ihotneed to be monoged ond currenlly eslimoled ol UGX 36,000,000 per yeor, oreexposed to drug sofety concerns orising from orgon replocemeni even where crossmotched, dose odjustmenis due lo orgon voriotions ond drug interoc'fions forrecipienls wilh mulliple oilments on o cocktoil of drugs. The structure furlherexcludes o Sociol Scientisl on the commiltee, o resource needed lo oddress lhesirong socio-culturol issues in Ugondo's setling. The council os prescribed in ihe bill iso full time council with day to doy responsibilities.Recommendolion: Amend Clouse 8lo include o person troined os o sociol scientislond o phormocisl io be pori of lhe Council.3.5: Ienure ot lhe Humon Orgon Donolion ond Trqnsplonl CouncilWe disogreed with the majority of the members on the issue of the lenure of lheCouncil. The Bili, in Clouse 10, proposes thot lhe ienure of 'lhe Council sholl be threeyeors renewoble once. We ore convinced, guided by evidence ovoiloble, lhotindependence of council rrembers is offecled when they hove 10 work for renewolof lheir oppoln'lments.3Recommend nAmend Clouse l0 io provide for lhe lenure of office to be oneterm of six yeors non-renewoble3.6: Accredilolion ond licensing of mulliple cenlers for orgon horveslingClouse 28 provides for lhe Council io designoie a hospitol os on orgon tronsplont ordonolion cenier. We disogreed wilh the mojority repori in os for os the mojorityogree with lhe proposed low seeking 1o liberolize lhe horvesling of orgons tovorious centers thot would hove solisfied certoin criterio os sholl be provrded for bylhe Minister on odvice of the Council. We mointoin thol the horvesllng ond bonklngof orgons should be under lhe direcl monogemenl ond control of the Council inthe dlffereni opproved cenlers ond hospilols should only be occrediled lo dotronsplonling.Recommendolion: Amend provisions of the Blll to ensure thoi orgon horvesting isunder the direcl control of the Councll. Specificolly, Clouse 28 (1) should beomended os suggested under ihe recommended omendments on Poge 7.3.8 Quolificotion for designolion os lronsplonl cenkesClouse 30 provides for the quolificolion for designolion os tronsplonl cenlres. wedlsogreed with the mojorily in regord lo the need for the provision of o Phormocyond o blood storage unil os one of ihe requirements for the ironsplont centre. Thelronsplonl centre will need drugs for immunosuppression during ond post orgontronsplont. ll wil! olso requlre blood ond other medicol supplies. Whereos the clouseprovides for olher requiremenls prescribed by regulolion by the minisler ii isimpero'tive thot the minimum requirements is stipuloted in lhe principol Aci for iheovoidonce of doubt.Recommendolion: Amend clouse 30 to include o Phormocy ond blood slorogeunit.3.3 Prevenlion ol orgon, lissue or cell kotfickingClouse 88 provides for the prevenlion of orgon, lissue or cell trofficking. Coses ofvulneroble persons who hove been exporled obrood for lobor ore owosh witho!legotions thot their orgons ore horvested wilhoul lheir consent. There hove beenmedio reporis of persons who ore menlolly incopociioted ond slreet children beingtqken obrood for illegol horvesling of their orgons under lhe disguise of medicoltreotment ond odoption respeciively. Provisions under this couse do nol coler forillegol orgon horvesling lhoi is done on vulneroble Ugondan citizens ondinvestigolions being medicol in noture moybe out of reoch of the offected victims.Recommendolions: omend clouse 88 to provide i'or the Minisier io prescriberegulotions to sofeguord vulnerobLe persons exiting lhe coun'iry frorn exploitolionond medicol investigotion ossistonce for viclims of illegol orgon donotion.4to lhe d I Bill2021Proposed Amendmenl 'lClouse 5(l): Amend Clouse 5 (l) by deleting the words, "... ond lhe counci, shorlcomply wilh lhose direclions" ol the end of the clouse sentence.Jusliticolion: Clouse 5(1) seems to be in conflicl with clouse 5(2) in os for os sub-cLouse I gives powers to the Minister to give direclions ond mondotes the counci10 comply ond sub clouse 2 purporls lo guide thoi the directions sholl nol odverselyoffecl or interfere with the independence of ihe council.Proposed Amendmenl 2Clouse 8: Amend Clouse 8 by odding the words, ", Pho'I'I.ocisl ond sociol scienrist"ofter the word "monogemenl" ot the end of the clouse senience.Juslificolion: The processes surrounding orgon horvesl ond lronsp onl, both before,during ond ofler invove o ot lo do with sociol behoviors ond culturol odjuslment.There is o lot of work io do oround sensrtizoiion of lhe communrty, counselling of lhedonors ond donees ond culturol re-odjuslment. lf lndeed the reosoning behind ihelisting of compelencies required for members on the Council is to ensure successtulorgon donolions ond lronsplonis, then the inpul of o sociol scien'iisl on ihol Councrlis of much volue.Secondly, Drug supply ond monogement, drug costs, drug sofefy, drug inleroclion,drug dosing ore highly technicol ospecls of orgon tronsplonl thot need oversightond po icy fromeworks. Tronsplont potienls hove to loke immunosuppressonlmedicotions tor life which corne ot costs thot need to be monoged ond currenllyestimoied 01 Ugx 36,000,000 per yeor, ore exposed lo drug sofety concerns orisingfrom orgon replocemenl even where cross molched, dose odjustments due loorgon voriolions ond drug inleroctions for recipienls wilh mulliple oilments on ococktoil of drugs. A Phormocisi, who is on expert on drugs therefore needs to beincLuded.Proposed Amendmenl 3Clouse l0: Amend Clouse l0 by replocing lhe text with lhe following text, "Amembet of ihe Council sholl hold oflice for o nonienewoble one lerm of s,x yeors. "Juslificolion: The Orgon Council con only ploy their role if lndependent. Clouse l0proposes the tenure of office for lhe council members to be three yeors renewobeonce. The period of ihree yeors is too shori to guorcntee lhe independence of lhechoirperson ond lhe council members. The foct thot they ore eLigible forreoppoinlment mokes it worse orguobly becouse some of lhem could executeHtheir dutiI necessorily in o monner thot ensures justice, bul in o woy thollhe oppoinling outhorily so os 10 secure o reoppoinimenl. This is pleoseexocerboted by lhe provision to hove the members of the Council oppornied bythe Minister. The experience in olher reloled bodies like Humon Rights Commissronshos shown thot shori ond renewoble ienures of such bodies compromise lheirindependence. ln the cose of lncol v furkey, the Europeon Court held thoi omongthe concerns thot mode the lndependence of the judges in issues questionoblewos ihot lheir term of office wos only four yeors ond subjecl to renewo .The orgumenl ihot giving members of the Council o long term of six yeors presenlschollenges os lhey moy behove ony woy, they wonl does nol ho d woier slnceCiouse ll provides for terminotion of oppoinlment of o Council Member.Proposed Amendmenl 4PART lV: Chonge iitle of Pori lV os suggesled thus; DESIGNATION OF ORGAN, IISSUEAND CETI.S DONAIION, TRANSPTANT CENTERS AND APPROVAL OF EANKSJuslificolion: The iit e does not copture the orgon horvesling ond donolion bit.Proposed Amendmenl 5Clouse 28 ('l): Reploce Clouse 28(l ) with the fo lowing iext, "Ihe Counci, sho,lestobrish ond tun otgan, ,issue ond cells donolion ond hdvesling centers in oreosond regions os the counci, sholl deem it necessory. "Juslificolion: The Committee ogreed lo delete Clouse 28(l ) since il wou d bediscriminoiory lo legislote Mulogo in the low, il should olso opply like olhers. Wetherelore propose to hove lhol clouse provide for lhe provision io creole orgondonolion ond horvesling os preserve of governmeni. Whereos orgon, cells ondtissue tronsplont con be liberoljzed ond left to hospilols ond olher heo ih corefocilities, horvesting of the some should be the preserve ond conlrol of thegovernment. This is becouse hoving multiple horvesiing cenlers creoles choLlengesof quolily conkol ond moy fuel lrofficking in orgons which lhis low inlends to curb.Secondly, the low ond World Heol'lh Orgonizotion (WHO) guiding principlesemphosize thot lhere should be no trode in orgcns ond orgons should be given torecipienls free of chorge which implies lhot governmenis should be in control ofthese orgons. Unless ihe Council horvesi these orgons, il will be difficult 1o hoveconlrol over the some yel Clouse 53 of ihe some Bill suggesls ihal it's the Councilthot shol hove powers to olloco'te orgons, iissues ond ceLls io people on ihewoiling lisl. How sholl lhe Council ensure ollocotion of orgons il does not own? 11 willolso creote cho lenges where on orgon horvested by one heolth foclliiy/hospitol is6required bypr vole heolldon'l own?oret in onolher hospitol. Whot would be ihe moiivotion oflities ond hospitols lo invesl in horvesting orgons which lhey orefociFuriher, when hospitols both privole ond public ore designoted by the Mlnister osHumon Orgon Donolion ond Tronsplont focililies. there in lies o risk of conflicl oflnterest. This conflict of inieresl envisoged to rnonifesl in o woy thot; o potient in theintensjve Core Unit (UCU), on yenliiolion. is looked ot os in rmminent deoth rolherihon crilicolly sick. Under the presumpiion thol deoth ls obout lo hoppen, focusmoy be shifted lo oddressing lhe demond of the orgonon recipienls woiling lisl.The low is liberolizing orgon donotion ond tronsplont progroms to include privotehospiiols. ln the foce of inlernotionolly recognized chollenges of orgon lroffickingond lronsp onl lourlsm os pronounced in the lstonbul Declorotion, 2008; we shouldnot only rely on reslroining provisions in ihis proposed low but hove systems ondmechonisms lhoi compel complionce ond overi lhe obove chollenges, Wetherefore contend ihot oll horvesting progroms should be done by Governmentthrough the CounciL, ond the horvested orgons be disiributed lo deslgnoledhospiiols whether public or privote, in occordonce with lhe woiling lisl provided forin Clouse 53, tor the purpose of ironsplonllng.We olso note thot this proposed low pronounces itself lhrough mony provisions ondonotions progroms ond lronsplont progroms being neorly free of chorge.However, lhe low does nol expressly slote wheiher lhe surgicol procedures loeffeci horvesting ond the consequenl tronsplont wil be free os well. We ore olive tothe subsisiing frnonciol burden of undergoing o surgicol procedure in lhe premiumprlvote hospltols in lhls country, Unfortunotely. ihese will be two surgicol procedures{horvest ond lronsplont) lo oddress the lheropeulic benefit of the recipient. Thecost is foreseen to be discriminolive. Yet. heollhcore should be one of the benefitsto be derived from the lox citizens poy. When government iokes on lheresponsibility of horvesling; the hospitol bill will 1o o greot extenl be monogeobeespeclolly in privole focililies; omong olher benefils of ensuring thol whoever is onthe woiting lisl gets o desired orgon, lissue or regordless of his or her finoncio stotus.Since cilizens ore willing to donoie lheir orgcns free of chorge, in o cost shoringorrongement, let the Governmeni olso toke over lhe responsibility of invesfing inhorvesting of the orgons for the benefli of oll.Proposed Amendmenl 6Clouse 28 (2): Delele the words "donolion ond" in the clouseJustificolion: This is to moke il cleor thol designolion of hospitols con only be inrespecl of lronsp oniing nol donotion ond horvesting.IPloposed AmendmenlClouse 29: Addub-clouse 5, "A hospilol whose opplicotion is reiecled os perSection 4 oboye sholl conlinue implementing lhe recommendotions of the Counci,unlil lhe Council is sotisfled ond lhe decision of the Council in lhis rcspect is finalond noi oppeoloble."Juslificolion: This is importonl to solve the vocuum creoled by the currentorrongemenl of the low ond io ovoid unnecessory ond costly liligotion onddrogging of the Council to the Courts of low.Proposed omendment IClouse 30 lnserl immediolely ofJer sub-clouse f, o new sub-clouse wilh lhe followingtexl, o Phormocy ond blood sioroge unit.Juslificolion: The lronsplonl cenlre will need drugs for immunosuppression duringond post orgon fronsplont. lt will olso require blood and olher medicol supplles.Whereos lhe clouse provides for olher requirements prescribed by regulolion by theminisier it is imperolive thot the minlmum requiremen'is is stipuloled in lhe principleocl for the oyoidonce of doubt. There is further no legol definition of o fullyjledgedhospiiol in this country. The medicol ond dentol proctilioners oct cross referencedin the bill only defines heolth unil which includes o privote hospitol, clinic, nursinghome, moternily centre ond oiher government units of the some noture.Proposed Amendmenl 9Clouse 34: The subjitle should be omended by replocing the word "opprovol" withthe word "Esloblishmenf. "Juslificolion: ln line wilh the proposed Amendment to hove orgon horvesling ondsloroge o preserve of governmeni, ihe bonks should be estoblished by lhe Councilwhich sholl then distibute the orgons io hospitols only when they ore lo be used.Proposed Amendmenl '10Clouse 34 (t ): Reploce the currenl text in lhe Bill with the following lexl; "IheCounc,'l sho,, esloblish bonks for pwposes of this Acr. "Proposed Amendmenl 1'lClouse 34(2): Amend Clouse 34(2) by replocing lhe current text in the bill with thefollowing lexl: "All otgon, tissue ond cells bonks sholl be operoted by the Council inoreos os ,he council moy deem necessory. "Proposed Amendmenl l2Clouses 34 (3. 4, 5 ond 6) Delele sub-clouses 34 (3), (4), (5) ond (6)8Juslificolion: The scuses weredrofled from the ongle of orgon, tissue ond cellsbonks being monoged by vorious hospltols. Where the bonks ore be ng monogedby lhe Councrl, these provisions ore redundonl ond not necessory.Proposed Amendmenl 13Clouse 38(l ): Amend Clouse 38(1 ) by substituting lhe words "opproved by theMinislei' wilh "creoted."Juslificolion: This is to olign wilh lhe chonge lo hove orgon, tissue ond cels bonksesloblished by the Council noi os opproved by the Minisler.Proposed Amendmenl 14Clouse 38 (4): Delete lhe clouseJuslificolion: This is to olign wiih lhe chonge to hove orgon, tissue ond cells bonksesloblished by the Council.Proposed Amendmenl l5Clouse 38 (5): Amend the text by substiluting the word "opproved" wilh"estoblishmenl of"Juslilicolion: This is 10 olign with lhe chonge lo hove orgons, tissue ond cells bonksesloblished by the Counci ond provide guidelines for lhe esloblishmenl of bonks ossholl be monoged by the CounclL.Proposed Amendmenl '16Clouse 46: Amend the clouse by subslituting lhe word "opproved" with the word"esloblished."Juslificolion: This is to olign wilh lhe chonge lo hove orgon, iissue ond cells bonksestobLished by lhe Counci .Proposed Amendmenl I7Clouse 47: Amend the clouse by substituting the word "opproved" wlth the word"esloblished. "Justificolion: This is lo olign with ihe chonge io hove orgon, tissue ond ce ls bonksesloblished by the Council.Proposed Amendmenl 2'lClouse 49(2): Amend the clouse by substituting the word "opproved" wilh lhe word"esloblished."9Juslificolion: Thiso olign with the chonge to hove orgon, tissue ond cells bonksestoblished by the Council.Proposed Amendmenl 22Clouse 5l (l ): Amend the clouse by substiluting the word "opproved" wlih theword "esloblished."Juslificolion: This is to olign wilh lhe chonge lo hove orgon, tissue ond cells bonksestoblished by the Council.Proposed Amendment 23Clouse 53(2): De ete cloJse 53(2).Juslificolion: Whereos lhe spirit of provision 53(2) is logicol, ond humone; ond oworeof our weoknesses in ensuring complionce, we ore convinced thol lhe need toproiect our low from provisions thot con be exp oiied to benefit orgon troffickers;by for outweighs the need 1o poy oitention to internotionoL relotions.Proposed Amendmenl 24Clouse 53 (5): Amend Clouse 53(5) to odd. "...or ony other discriminotory ground"ofter "finonciol slonding" to coler for discriminolion on ony other bosis lhat rnoy nolbe envisoged now.Juslificotion: Clouse 53 (5) ottempls lo loy down grounds upon which one shou dnot be discriminoted. The lisl seems to be exhousliye os rl does not provide room forony other ground thol moy not be foreseen by the low. Amending os proposed willensure lhol ony other form of discriminotion is token rn'lo considerolion ond it wouldbe up to courts 10 interpret whether lhe oci or omission quolifies to be bronded osdiscriminoiory.Proposed Amendmenl 27clouse 86 (l): Amend the clouse ond delete the words, "olhet thon rcimbursemenlof donotion rcloted expenses... "Jusfificolion: Clouse 86(l ) creotes o window for monetory compensolion or onyother form of compensotion for dono tion-reloted expenses. Leoying ony openingfor monetory compensotion is likely lo be obused ond commerciol deolings inorgons ond lissues will be disguised os reimbursemenls. The provision should beomended to complele y prohibit ony form of monetory or ony otherreimbursement. The only suppori o donor should expecl s medicol fociitotion toensure ihey hove recovered fu ly lo function normolly.Proposed Amendmenl 2810ct 2): Deleie Clouse 88(2)Juslificolion: Jusl llke in Clouse 86(1), il should be cleor.to o I donors thot nomonelory compensollon is expecled beyond medicol treoimeni to re-insiote lherninto o situolion they were in before the operolion. ln short, oi no single poini n I meshould o living donor expect poyment inlo his or her occounl for donoling onorgon.Proposed Amendmenl 29Clouse 88: nserl two new sub-clauses immediotely ofier c ouse (5) os follows:New Sub-clouse I"The Minister moy by regu otions prescr be meosures to sofeguord ond prolectvu neroble persons inc uding the menlo ly incopocitoied, sireet children, theunemployed, ond olhersi from belng exploiled lhrough the ilegol removo of lheirorgons os they exit the country for lobor, odopiion, medico treotmeni or otherpurposes."New Sub-clouse 2"The Councrl sholl moke provlsions for hondling of medicol comp oinls trom victlmsor persons offecled by orgon lrofiicking ncluding medicol core such osrehobi iiotion servrces in o designoted focllily ond medico invesligotions in onopproved focilily"Juslificolion: Coses of peop e who hove been exported obrood for obor oreowosh wilh o legolions thot their orgons ore horvested wilhout their consent. Therehove been medio reports of persons \ /ho ore mento ly incopocitoted ond streetchildren being ioken obrood for illega horvesting of iherr orgons under the disguiseof medico treolment ond odoption respectively. Thls ow should therefore rnokeprovisions lo strenglhen screening ot the ports of entry vio ihe port heolth focilitiesfor ony specified group of persons before exiling ihe couniry ond upon return ondpul in other meosures to sofeguord lhem. This wi help prevenl but olso improvedelecllon. lt wl I olso ensure ihol persons offecled by orgon trofficking or lhe viclimswhelher hoppening within or obrood hove occess to medicol core for voriouspurposes inciuding rehob iiotlon or invesi gotions due lo the troumo they hqveundergone. lnvestigotlons should furiher be done only in opproved focililies ioovoid folslficoiion of evidence consldering syndicoied nolure of ih s crime. Thehumon body in orgon trofficking serves os the scene of crime.11IIcoNcLUsroN.Rt. Hon. Speoker, resources hove been ollocoled lo lhe Commillee members ond1wo benchmorking lrips lo Turkey ond lndio hove been ononged lhls month. Oursuggestion is thot the commiiiee report would be enriched with knowledge ondexperiences derived from lhe exposure trom those two couniries where such o owcnd proclice is in ploce. Undertoking the bench morking lrips cfler we hovepossed ihe low is like putling lhe corl before lhe horse. We iherefore requesi you,Rt. Hon. Speoker ond Honouroble Colleogues, 1o consider ond support the MinoriyReporl.MEMBERS OF THE COMMI]TEE ON HEAI.TH WHO SIGNED THE MINORITY REPORT ON THEHUMAN ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPI.ANT BIII, 2021.Signolure SNNomeo"raL72