Wednesday, 25 September 2013

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the Vice-President, distinguished Members of Parliament, I welcome you to this sitting. First, I want you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Siyaboona Child Development Centre represented by hon. Mayende and hon. Makhoha of Namayingo District. Please stand up. You are welcome. (Applause)

Secondly, I would like to inform the Members of Parliament that the Parliamentary Commission has handed over the site for the construction of the additional floors on the North, East and West wings. We shall have another floor on this building. This will give us another 80 offices here. If you hear a lot of activity, do not complain because there is going to be a lot more knocking and movement. If you are inconvenienced, understand that we are trying to create room for you.

Thirdly, I want to remind Members that we announced the meeting of the Parliamentarians for Global Action tomorrow at 9.00 O’clock. Please attend. 

On a sad note, hon. Kasse Mubanda lost her daughter, Dr Wapenyi. She died abroad but the body will be arriving on Saturday and they will have a vigil at their home in Muyenga and then burry on Tuesday in Nakifuma. I think we shall let you know of the finer details later but that is what has happened to our colleague.

3.05
MR IBRAHIM NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is in regard to Rule 29(8) of our Rules of Procedure. In November 2011, I presented a petition here on behalf of the councillors of Kira Town Council, which is part of my constituency, regarding the issues of public funds by government officials. Madam Speaker, you referred that petition to the Committee on Local Government and Public Service; it is now almost coming to two years and the report about that petition is nowhere to be seen yet this Parliament continues to appropriate money and send to that area which government officials are putting to personal use yet our Rule 29(8)) gives the committee 45 days to submit a report. That is the procedural issue that I am raising.

THE SPEAKER: The Business Committee will examine that issue and let you know.

3.06
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): Madam Speaker, yesterday we had some copies made and I know more copies were made this morning but I am being told that they are not here yet. But I am certain except that I was not at the ministry this morning. I am sure copies were made.

THE SPEAKER: Let us defer for a few minutes, let me get hon. Kibuule.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION BY HON. RONALD KIBUULE

3.07
THE STATE MINISTER FOR YOUTH (Mr Ronald Kibuule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to make a personal explanation under Rule 46 of our Rules of Procedure. Permit me to issue this statement as response to the article in The Daily Monitor of 22 September 2013 under the heading; “Minister Okays rape of women in miniskirts.” 

I am a father; I am a leader; I am a son of a woman. The essence of The Daily Monitor report was that while addressing the youths, I okayed rape of girls who put on miniskirts and that the victims of rape should not be assisted by the police –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: This is a personal statement not subject to debate.

MR KIBUULE: I would like to put it clear that I did not okay rape and I cannot okay rape. I am a strong advocate of the women and I have actually proposed before –(Interjections)– the truth of the matter is that on 21 September 2013, I was invited to Ntungamo by hon. Tashobya. I visited Kajara County in Ntungamo District to address the youths on how the youth livelihood programme is going to address the empowerment of the youths of Uganda.

I took the opportunity to address the youths on issues regarding employment, the history of our country, the important role the youths can play in developing themselves and the country. As I was concluding my address, I complimented the youths who attended the meeting to take the economic empowerment seriously. I also complimented them on the way they were dressed. They were decently dressed and I thanked hon. Tashobya, stating that putting on loose trousers commonly known as “balance” and very short skirts has partly contributed to crimes such as rape in urban centres. 

I am a law abiding citizen of this country. The Penal Code is against rape; I am a husband of two wives; I am a father of girls; I have sisters and I can never advocate for rape which is a capital offence in the laws of our country.

I, therefore, pray that hon. Members and other Ugandans will stand with me in my fight against primitive acts of rape of our children and women. I also request colleagues to join me in promotion of moral upbringing of our children. Together, we can downgrade the profile of rape in this country. May anyone intending to be a rapist stand warned! 

Madam Speaker, I thank you and I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday I did not say the minister for the youths should come and speak. I said hon. Kibuule and that is why he has made a personal statement.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON THE NODDING DISEASE

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before the Member reads his report, I will amend the Order Paper to also allow the Minister for Education to brief the country on the UNATU issues which we wanted explained yesterday.

3.11
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, as far back as 2007, a strange disease struck some districts in Northern Uganda; its cause was mysterious; it made the patients to nod and for lack of a better term, it was called, “The Nodding” disease or syndrome.

The affected persons displayed mental retardation, regression in growth, drooling of saliva, vacant special stare, disproportionately enlarged lower lips, dental abnormalities and head nodding with or without seizures.

On 28 February 2012, Parliament passed a resolution urging Government to identify resources to facilitate research into the causes of disease; identify funds to enable the feeding of the affected persons and urged the Ministry of Health to come up with a supplementary budget request within two days to address the nodding disease.

In April 2012, a supplementary request was accepted by this Parliament. For purposes of keeping time, I will refer you to page 2 and we look at the composition of the sub-committee which was formed.

The Speaker responded to the request by the Acholi Parliamentary Group led by hon. Beatrice Anywar and nominated some members from the Committee on Social Services by then to study the issues raised and undertake an on-spot assessment of the situation as depicted by the Acholi Parliamentary Group and the members were nominated and their names are here.

I was the chairperson of that sub-committee and I had other seven Members making a total of eight. The committee was guided by the following questions that formed the committee’s terms of reference:

    1. Whether the nodding disease devastated the lives and livelihood of the people in the affected areas.
    2. Whether the interventions by Government had been adequate and the resources provided used appropriately.
    3. Whether the supplementary budget of Shs 7 billion had been used to control and eradicate the nodding disease in the affected areas.
    4. Whether the nodding situation warranted declaring Northern Uganda a humanitarian disaster area as the best way of containing the nodding disease in Uganda.

We had a simple methodology on page 3: we held meetings with the following critical respondents which you can read for yourselves.

Findings, observations and recommendations
Geographically, the most affected districts were Pader, Lamwo and Kitgum with varying intensity across the different sub-counties in the respective districts. The most affected sub-counties were Awere, Puranga, Angangura, Atanga and Pajule in Pader District; Palabek Gem, Padile East, Padile West, Palabek Kal, Palabek Ogili and Lokung in Lamwo District; Akwanga, Kitgum Matidi, Labongo Amida, Namokora in Kitgum District plus the sub-counties bordering the banks of River Aswa.

The children who had been registered to have the nodding disease were 1,406 in Pader, 770 in Kitgum, 181 in Lamwo totalling to 2,357 cases. The Ministry of Health estimated the total number of nodding disease cases to be around 3,000. However, massive screening was on-going to establish the actual numbers of nodding cases.

A number of sub-counties in Pader, Lamwo and Kitgum had not been reached by the nodding syndrome screening and treatment teams. Some children in Gulu, that is Adeki area, Nwoya and Amuru were reported to be affected by the syndrome but the necessary intervention such as screening, treatment and provision of food had not been undertaken. The nodding disease interventions were restricted to Pader, Lamwo and Kitgum.

The screening exercise in Lamwo, Pader and Kitgum should be speeded up to cover all the affected sub-counties in these districts. We also recommend that Government should also undertake the necessary interventions in the districts of Gulu, Nwoya and Amuru such as the screening and treatment of the reported cases. 

Interventions by Government

We were interested in establishing whether the interventions by Government had been adequate and whether the funds appropriated by Parliament reached the intended beneficiaries. The committee established that ever since the outbreak of the disease, Government had made interventions with the view of arresting the situation. The following are cases of some of the Government interventions:

    1. The sub-committee noted that Government intervened when the disease broke out as far back as 2008. Investigations teams were setup by Government to study the problem. 
    2. In March 2012, Cabinet set up an inter-ministerial committee on the nodding disease management chaired by Dr Steven Malinga who is resting in peace. By then, he was the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness.

You can read the rest on pages 5 and 6, seeing that the number is big.

The mandate of the above committee was to coordinate multi-sectoral interventions, receive progress reports, review strategies, give policy directions and report to the Prime Minister. This committee made field visits to the affected region and produced reports. 

In addition, in May 2012 His Excellency the President made two visits to Northern Uganda on a fact finding mission on the subject. He launched a massive drug distribution and a measles campaign. This is when everybody in Northern Uganda was given a drug called Ivermectin.

Furthermore, the Government constituted a sector specific committee in the Ministry of Health which comprises medical management related institutions namely, Ministry of Health, World Health Organisation, UNICEF, Centre for Disease Control, that is, CDC Atlanta, Makerere University Medical School and Gulu University Medical School.

The committee was handling treatment and was also meant to research into the causes, surveillance and control of the vector that is suspected to be causing a problem.
The Government came up with a national response plan towards combating the nodding disease syndrome estimated to cost around Shs 7 billion. The key components of the national response plan were: case management and treatment, research, surveillance, vector control, relief and food supply, psychosocial support to victims and families, social mobilisation and awareness creation, teacher orientation on management of the affected pupils, public awareness and education through radio and TV, coordination of all the stakeholders, provision of quick maturing seeds to the affected families.

Budgetary Intervention

Government made budgetary interventions to operationalise the National Response Plan as follows:

    1. A re-allocation within the Ministry of Health resources yielded Shs 1.1 billion.
    2. A supplementary budget of Shs 3.75 billion was passed and by 5 July 2012, Shs 2.75 billion had been released.
    3. The remaining Shs 3.2 billion was expected to be released in the financial year 2013/14 to handle the second phase of the response plan.

The Shs 2.75 billion supplementary release was released to the Ministry of Health, to be disbursed to the affected district local governments and line ministries as follows: Pader District (Shs 115 million), Kitgum District (Shs 101 million), Lamwo District (Shs 99 million) but you can see that when we go to 5.3, Lira, lastly, was going to get Shs 50 million.

Observations on the adequacy of the interventions by Government

The committee observed that indeed, Government made numerous and appropriate interventions to arrest the situation. 

Food Relief: Procurement and distribution

The food relief is one of the appropriate interventions that Government came up with. Based on the findings of the committee, the majority of the children affected by the nodding syndrome were malnourished and stunted. The majority were from poor families, characterised by food shortage at the household level. 

The malnutrition arose because of: (1) the long standing civil war which could not allow people to grow appropriate food; (2) affected children could not eat as they could nod on mere sight of food and that one was a paradox; (3) families of affected children spent most of their productive time looking after these children instead of farming and to us who went there, this resulted into severe shortage of food in the households in Northern Uganda.

The committee was informed that the Office of the Prime Minister had used the Shs 400 million availed to purchase and distribute food to the affected families by the nodding syndrome. The Office of the Prime Minister commenced provision of food to the affected families in March 2012. By July 2012, the OPM reported that it had delivered 206 metric tonnes of relief food (beans and posho) worth Shs 535,600,000 and therapeutic feeds.

The committee was informed that each member of the family in the affected districts was provided with 12 kilogrammes of posho and four kilogrammes of beans for one month. 

The committee found that the Office of Prime Minister transported food items up to Kitgum main store, and then further distribution to various terminals was being carried out by the Red Cross volunteers in the districts of Kitgum and Pader, while Lutheran World Federation was doing the distribution in Lamwo. The districts reported having got food in March and May of 2012 and were awaiting further distribution. This report made us a bit uncomfortable because we were wondering how the Office of the Prime Minister could send food to Kitgum and leave it to be distributed by volunteers. To us, it was a deliberate omission and unfortunate.

There was also provision of food supplements, but this was limited to acute malnutrition cases that were admitted at the health facilities only. For example, Lamwo reported receiving 200 bags of supplementary feeds to treat severe malnutrition cases and the committee observed that the food was not of adequate quality to meet the nutritional needs of all the children in the affected areas.

Secondly, not every affected child was accessing the fortified food necessary to combat evident malnutrition.

The committee also observed that there was lack of involvement of some local leaders in the food distribution intervention. Some local leaders reported that they did not have information on how and when the food was being distributed and this was the major complaint in Kitgum District. We felt that this omission was also unfortunate.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister should take keen interest in ensuring that the food distribution is effective. The Office of Prime Minister should follow through the distribution process up to the last recipients. 

Local leadership should be notified on days of food distribution to create harmony within the population and enhance transparency and accountability.

Food supplements such as multi-vitamins and powdered milk should be availed to every child with Nodding Disease to address the concerns of balanced diet to curb malnutrition.

Screening, treatment centres and provision of drugs

As seen above, this responsibility for clinical response was given to the Ministry of Health. The committee observed that various screening and treatment centres had been opened in the affected districts. These included, Padibe Health Centre IV and Palabyek Kal in Lamwo, Kitgum Hospital in Kitgum and Pajule Health Centre IV and Atanga in Pader. Lira and Gulu regional referral hospitals had been designated to handle severe cases that cannot be managed in the screening and treatment centres. However, these referral hospitals were not well equipped in terms of trained staff.

The committee further noted that several outreach centres had been established in the respective districts as a means of reaching the wider population. At the outreach centres, the services carried out included treatment, counselling, sensitisation and referral. Outreach services were offered on a weekly basis to the affected communities and at the lower health facilities by staff from the designated treatment centres.

The committee noted that the screening and treatment centres as well as mobile clinics in affected districts were screening and offering comprehensive treatment including anti-epileptic drugs, nutritional rehabilitation, and psycho-social counselling and support.

The committee further noted that the Ministry of Health had developed and provided treatment guidelines to the treatment centres.

On page 11, the committee further noted that National Medical Stores had delivered sufficient stocks of –

MR NGANDA: Madam Speaker, the matter that we are handling is a serious matter but I can see senior ministers, the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for Constitutional Affairs, are actually sleeping – 

THE SPEAKER: From where I am sitting, the Prime Minister is reading that report, the Minister for Constitutional Affairs is admiring the children who are seated in the Gallery. (Laughter) But chair, maybe you could go to the recommendations quickly.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, let me rush. The committee found that the staff recruited by the Ministry of Health to manage the nodding syndrome were the only ones accessing risk allowance of only Shs 10,000 per day while the other health centre members that are employed by the local governments were not accessing the money and this was causing a lot of disharmony.

Lack of facilitation to the village health teams

The committee further learnt that village health teams had been mobilised to help in sensitising the communities to take the affected children to the outreach and treatment centres and adherence to medication. However, the committee learnt that the village health teams had been neglected in terms of facilitation yet Government had sent there enough money.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that each member of the village health teams should be paid at least Shs 25,000 per month as a motivation allowance.

The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Health should stop discrimination among the health workers involved in Nodding Disease Syndrome treatment. The ministry should use the funds allocated to it to pay both its employed health workers as well as those recruited and employed by the local authorities.

The committee further recommends that Government through the Ministry of Health should inject more funds to train health workers in the two regional referral hospitals of Gulu and Lira and equip them to acquire the capacity that can adequately handle Nodding Disease patients.

The committee recommends that provision of power to the health centres and nodding disease treatment centres under the Energy for Rural Transformation be expedited and fast tracked in these treatment centres as an emergency because most of these health centres we found in Northern Uganda had no power at all and yet the children were nodding and convulsing – they would use the lanterns and we thought that the fire from the lanterns would burn these children.

Research

Before Parliament approved a supplementary budget to address the nodding disease syndrome, the Ministry of Health in collaboration with the Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in Atlanta had carried out some preliminary investigations on 139 children with Nodding Disease in Kitgum and it was found that 128 children had low levels of Vitamin B6 in their serum and 69 children had high levels of Onchocerca Volvulus antigen. That is a scientific name and for people, the Onchocerca Volvulus antigen is the one that causes Onchocerciasis or River Blindness. (Laughter) I will be very simple.
 
The researchers also tried to establish the serum levels of metallic substances like selenium, copper, zinc, lead and mercury but no abnormal results were found in the 132 samples tested. This is good news for us.

However, because of the small sample size, the researchers could not conclusively affirm whether the findings were statistically significantly linked to the Nodding Disease hence, the need for a larger scale investigation.

The committee observed that Shs 400 million - and this is a fact - was later availed to a team of researchers in the Ministry of Health to assess the prevalence and distribution of the disease in Northern Uganda; to estimate the actual burden of the disease; its distribution and actual number of deaths. The committee noted that by 5 July 2012, a total number of 13 research protocols had been approved by the Ministry of Health and four had been okayed. The committee was further informed on 16 July 2012, the researchers would complete work on 20 July 2012.

On further inquiry, the committee learnt that the said funds, Shs 400 million, were spent on the development of research protocols, but not on research itself. So, these guys ate Shs 400 million specifically to prepare paper as research protocols and to me, as a doctor, it was an insult and the committee members were very uncomfortable. The committee recommends that a forensic audit of this expenditure be conducted by the Auditor-General to establish the value-for-money for this expense.

Secondly, intensive research on the Nodding Disease should be carried out by the Ministry of Health and the findings should be released to Ugandans because people want to know what is killing these children.

The education intervention

As earlier communicated, the Ministry of Health was supposed to be collaborating with the Ministry of Education in terms of teaching children and parents. 

The committee noted positive response to treatment by the children who were being treated at the health centres that the committee visited. However, the committee was informed that the nodding syndrome was chronic and the response or treatment was just to limit the frequency of seizures. The children could not recover completely. 

Limiting the frequency of seizures was dependent on the strict adherence to taking the prescribed drugs. The health workers reported instances where the affected children fail to adhere to the drug prescription, thereby affecting the reduction of the seizures.

To mitigate the situation, the government thought it prudent to engage teachers in the treatment and education of the affected nodding children. This would be done through a teacher orientation programme for the management of the affected children while at school. By the time we were writing this report in February, Shs 150 million had been earmarked for this exercise to be disbursed to the Ministry of Education for onward transmission to the affected schools.

At the time of the visit to Northern Uganda, the committee found that the Ministry of Health had not yet disbursed the funds to the Ministry of Education to implement the education related activities. In response, the Ministry of Health indicated that the Ministry of Education and Sports had not signed a memorandum of understanding detailing how it was to use the funds. Later, the committee was informed that the said funds had been just disbursed.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health releases the money to the Ministry of Education and this money does what it is meant to do. 

Food security

The committee noted the visible signs of malnutrition among the affected children. The committee learnt from the respondents that the affected families faced food insecurity as there was minimal agricultural production and productivity going on. The committee also learnt that most families were taking only one meal a day. From the look of the affected families, the illness seemed to be a disease of the poor people. In an assessment done by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries, it was observed that the children who fed on three meals a day got fairly stronger than those who fed on fewer meals.

The committee deduced that health and nutrition education among the population was very urgent in addition to the intervention to increase massive production of food stuff as quickly as possible.

The committee learnt that in the National Nodding Response Plan, the Ministry of Agriculture had been directed to spearhead the food and nutrition security intervention. 

Consequently, the Ministry of Agriculture came up with the following intervention plan in the short term: plough and harrow one hectare of land for each household using tractors; provide two hand hoes and one machete to each household; provide seeds (maize, beans, cow peas, soya beans, spinach, and sweet potato cuttings) to each family; provide immediate training and regular extension services; provide training on nutritious food formulation and preparation. The Ministry of Agriculture estimated the budget for this intervention was Shs 1.097 billion. However, of the supplementary funding released for the intervention, the Ministry of Agriculture was allocated Shs 100 million. 

The committee recommends that food and nutrition be prioritised and fish farming be included in the response plan. The committee further recommends that a forensic audit be conducted on the utilisation of Shs 100 million by the Ministry of Agriculture.

Psycho-social support

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development was charged with social and community mobilisation as well as provision of psycho-social support services to the Nodding Disease affected families. The ministry received Shs 100 million, which was spent on orientation/training of community development officers, disbursed to the district support implementation of nodding disease social observation response plan, and technical support supervision in monitoring visits by ministry officials.

The committee further observed that the above intervention had not achieved its intended objectives fully. For example, the committee learnt that some parents neglected patients saying they would not fully recover. Some health workers expressed fears that the disease could even be contagious. The committee recommends that the package of psycho-social given by the Ministry of Gender be reviewed.

Public Awareness, Mobilisation and National Guidance

Madam Speaker, on page 16, the committee noted that the function of public awareness and mobilisation was a responsibility of the Ministry of Information and National Guidance. The committee noted that the ministry had developed radio messages on the nodding disease, translated them into English and Luo, ran them on UBC, Mega FM, Might Fire FM and even went on to hold  talk shows, visited leaders and the affected families and so on.

However, the committee noted that there was some misinformation on some of the intervention activities. For example, there was some propaganda that some of the food distributed contained poison. And also that the areas where Joseph Kony hails from had been deliberately skipped to have those kids perish under the nodding syndrome.

The committee also noted that some of the research findings had not been disseminated to the communities affected to dispel rumours about the nodding disease. The committee recommends that more regular talk shows be held with the attendance of the health professionals. Similarly, the Ministry of Information and National Guidance should involve more media houses in highlighting the nodding disease syndrome to avoid misinformation by some media houses.

Poor sanitation

The committee was informed by the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness who coordinated response that the hygiene in most homes was poor. Most homes had no latrines and bathing shelters. The committee also observed that most of the sick children could not be bathed.

The committee, therefore, recommends that some of the funds under the nodding disease response be used to improve on the provision of clean water, boreholes in the affected communities and if possible, some soap can be supplied.

Involvement of other partners

The committee established that a number of agencies had got involved in activities related to the nodding syndrome response. These included – you can read them on page 17. The last ones are: UWONET, FIDA, Care and Action Aid.

When you go to page 18, the committee recommends that Parliament collectively commends the above agencies for the tremendous work they have done in responding to the nodding disease in Northern Uganda.

Conclusions

The committee established that the districts in Northern Uganda are affected by the nodding disease and mainly children of both sexes but below 18 years. From the findings of the committee, the affected children are presented with stunted growth, wasting and nodding. 

Considering the terms of reference given to us, as I go to number one, had the nodding disease devastated the lives and livelihoods of people in the affected areas? The answer, Madam Speaker is yes. The disease devastated the livelihoods of affected poor families. It has caused fear and breakdown of families where some husbands in the affected families were reported to have abandoned their homes. In addition, food production was greatly affected in such families as parents and relatives spent most of their time looking after these nodding children.

Was intervention by Government adequate? Madam Speaker, the response from the Central Government appears to have been timely and adequate. For example, a national committee was set up. The supplementary budget was also given. The President launched, in the affected areas, a massive drug treatment in immunisation.

However, the committee found poor coordination at the local levels and the poor political participation by some local leaders. The coordination by the Office of the Prime Minister in food distribution was found wanting. For example, food was being delivered to the district headquarters but with no follow up to establish whether it had reached the intended beneficiaries. Yet, Madam Speaker, when you go to Gulu and you see the branches of the Office of the Prime Minister, they look better than some of the offices here in Kampala and the cars are there. So, we wondered why they did not do their work appropriately.

Were supplementary resources effectively utilized?

By the time of the visit, the committee established that although some districts had received, the others had not. These included districts like Amuru, Nwoya and Gulu. Also some central stakeholders had either not received their money or had received it but not yet implemented any activities. The committee recommends that the Auditor-General examines the performance of the supplementary budget.

Does the situation warrant declaring the affected region a humanitarian disaster? Madam Speaker – and I want to be very sincere with myself and on behalf of the committee – from the assessment by the committee, the incidences of the disease – when I talk of incidences, I mean the new cases that are coming up – seem to have reduced and are now containable not prevalent. The disease – I am now talking about epidemiology – appears not to be contagious or transmittable from person to person. 

The total number of registered cases, approximately 3,000, compared to the total population of the people in Northern Uganda does not warrant declaring the region a disaster area. However, the committee recommends that Government should put in more efforts to comprehensively contain the problem of nodding disease, in particular, in research to establish the cause of the disease. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the report on Table. I beg to report. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Dr. Medard Bitekyerezo and the Committee on Social Services then. One is that this study was commissioned more than one and a half years ago. I don’t know whether there is a new resurgence of the disease. I would think that we just have two or three contributions and we adopt the committee recommendations because I think they are good. Okay, let us have hon. Beatrice. But also the Minister of Health will have to say something. I will also allow the maiden speech of hon. Mutono and hon. Migadde.

3.49
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for working the report out. Yes we have heard the report. But the general feeling is that what the Government is treating is the results but the problem is not established.

I would like to take this opportunity to give the picture of the current situation since the committee last travelled to Northern Uganda to establish facts surrounding this syndrome. The truth is that as we speak, there should have been screening in all the sub-counties to establish the number of the patients therein. But as I said that has not been done. Therefore, the estimated numbers, as you hear them of 3,000 is just the government position. 

The World Health Organisation said 5,000 and from the VHC, the number was put at 7,000 children. As I speak, Madam Speaker, we have new cases emerging. Within the last three months, we have had 13 new cases in Tumang. 

Two, I want us to admit that the psycho-social support that was supposed to be done is not yet in place. Actually, when we talk about the teachers having been sensitised - I want to inform you that the nodding children in schools are scarecrows most of them having withdrawn back to their homes, but without attention. And this is where I call upon Government to establish centres to cater for and even educate the affected children.

The issue of food that is being given out to the people – the truth on the ground is that the food is distributed in the ratio of TWO kilogrammes of posho to one kilogramme of beans. But, Madam Speaker, you are also aware that there were press reports that most of the food that was distributed was rotten. So, the issue of having the children with nutrition deficiency comes into play. If these children really need a balanced diet, can the beans and posho, much of it rotten, result into this? The call is that we need more fortified foods and balanced diets for these children.

I also welcome the recommendation of the committee on lights in the treatment centres. And I ask that Government, especially the Ministry of Energy with Rural Electrification should come on board. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the State Minister for Water, hon. Betty Bigombe, for timely availing a borehole for these nodding children last week.

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of some metallic substances, actually that is the cornerstone of the problem. I would want Government to do a further investigation into this matter and come to a logical conclusion. The CDC report should be released. When I talk to them, they say it is with Government and that it has all the details.

Lastly, the children are already tending to be chronically sick. It is as if we have condemned over 7,000 children in Northern Uganda. So, it is high time we holistically looked at how best to handle these children in order to make their lives better. This can be done by us providing them with wheel chairs, special education, establishing the centres where they can have their medication - the worst of all, some of these children are now becoming of age and so, they are being raped - we now have, as I speak, 13 babies who I term the grandchildren of the nodding disease. The children have already been raped but with nobody taking care of them. Even Government is not taking interest.

If this disease is contagious, why are we not protecting these children? I would like to call upon Government to bring on board these so-called grandchildren of the nodding disease, give them special attention –(Member timed out_)

3.54
MR PETER MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is a clarification that I seek from the committee. On page 7, the committee notes that Shs 2.75 billion in supplementary was released and was disbursed to the different districts as follows – there is a list. But on page 8, when you total up the amount that was distributed, you actually get Shs 3.465 billion. So, where is the Shs 715 million coming from? Are we using the right figures? That is my clarification. Thank you.

3.55
DR PATRICK MUTONO (NRM, Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to take the Floor for the first time. (Applause) Permit me to utilize this dear time to thank God and to thank Members of this august Assembly for whatever assistance you rendered to me to enable me join this House. (Applause)

During that time, some Members called me while others joined me in the campaigns but I also know that a lot more wished me well especially the colleagues on this side of the House. (Laughter) I thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, I also would like to take this opportunity to thank this House for the befitting welcome it accorded me on the day of my swearing in. The people of Butebo County were in the gallery and others were watching live on television and are very thankful for the welcome that they saw for their new representative.

I also would like to thank Government and the House for the send-off that was accorded to my predecessor, the late hon. Dr Stephen Malinga. (Applause) While he lay in state, we were watching on television and noticed that you accorded him good accolade. But above all, many of you turned up in our village on the day of his burial. The people of Butebo County and Pallisa District will always be grateful to this House and the Government for that gesture that was given to the late hon. Dr Mallinga. You know very well that the people of Butebo County loved him so much.

However, when the late was in this House, he on many occasions took to the Floor to raise issues of concern not only to the nation, but also for the people of Butebo County. So, we thank you for giving him that opportunity. We also thank the Government for giving him a chance to serve his people the way he did. He loved his job and I am sure he would have loved to complete his term and it is not a secret that I campaigned with him many times - over 10 years - and the people of Butebo always told me to wait because they thought the late hon. Dr Mallinga was still doing a good job.

And, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I alerted you that this is hon. Dr Mutono’s maiden speech. Do not interrupt him. That is our practice in the Commonwealth.

DR MUTONO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much, for protecting me. As I join this august assembly, I come knowing that our people have aspirations. They aspire to have good health, good education, jobs, but of course those aspects have a lot of deficiencies in our communities. And these aspirations usually are the building blocks of socio-economic transformation. We know this House has the power and the knowledge to discuss and legislate on such issues.

On the nodding disease, I want to say, we don’t have the nodding disease in Butebo County, but it is an affliction that affects many of our people in Northern Uganda. I have visited Northern Uganda – the nodding disease affects me personally – my wife is from Gulu. I have visited – (Interjections) – my only wife is from Gulu. (Laughter) I have visited Northern Uganda as I visited my in-laws and we visited the patients of the nodding disease. The most striking thing that I saw was the extreme poverty that I found in these homes - lack of food, extreme malnutrition and varying sad circumstances which I recognised. Of course, the nodding disease has so many other implications found along river banks with the black fly which causes river blindness but I believe an intervention in the area of nutrition would go a long way in preventing the nodding disease. 

One of the things that we notice from the report is that when the food rations were given, they immensely improved the lives of these people. The people who are affected are the children between five to 15 years but we all know that that is the time when there is development and it is the time for education. So, our children in Gulu are not really equipped to survive other bouts because of that nodding disease. 

It is my wish and prayer that we double our efforts in funding to improve on the nutrition of these children and through education. We need a full blown nutrition education programme for the mothers, the children and the caretakers alongside all the other interventions which I am thankful for from the Ministry of Health and the government, which they have put in place. And, of course, I thank the committee that was led by hon. Dr Bitekyerezo for that report and for highlighting what has been taking place. 

Madam Speaker, as I end, I would like to allude to a comment that was made during the day of my swearing-in. It was made by the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, about the illegality of my election. Of course, at the time, it was my first day and I restrained myself from making a comment but I took that comment as irrational and because the Electoral Commission had declared me the winner, I think he was usurping the powers of the Electoral Commission. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to tell the House and my people of Butebo that I will work for the unity of the people of Butebo. I will serve all without discrimination regardless of the electoral machinations that took place. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much and we welcome you again, hon. Mutono. Let us have hon. Tanna, for two minutes.  

4.04
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for an excellent report because they have touched on all facets of the issues raised. Many colleagues including myself never knew that the nodding disease existed until hon. Beatrice Anywar brought it to our notice. I would like to thank her most sincerely and the colleagues from Northern Uganda for bringing out such a pertinent issue to this House and to the nation. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank you. You have been extremely passionate on this issue that has not really been given its due attention. I believe that once we adopt this report, then the Executive shall give it the due attention that it requires because this has potential of affecting our future. I thank you. 

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the presenter of the report for a comprehensive report. However, I want to start by making a humble request that if it is okay with the House, since my ministry is mentioned in a number of areas here, that I am allowed to come and present a very comprehensive report about what we have done; the challenges we have met and what needs to be done particularly from the side of Parliament to support the efforts of the ministry in delivering relief specifically to this category of people that are in this report.

Secondly, while from your body language that seems to have been granted, allow me – (Laughter)– just to clarify a few things. The report was looking at the Uganda Red Cross and created an impression that what they were doing is out of what is supposed to be done by virtue of their mandate. I want to make it categorically clear that it is in this very House through an Act of Parliament that the Uganda Red Cross was operationalised and established as an auxiliary of the state, which works with my ministry, particularly in areas of emergency and humanitarian intervention. So, I want Members to know that each time we are making an emergency intervention anywhere in the country and because of the infrastructure that is available in the Uganda Red Cross, we use them and we coordinate them using the local governments that are directly responsible for steering the people who are in the epicentre of the problem. So, what they are doing is not out of tune with what they are supposed to do.

I want again to say that if it is okay, I would be happy to come and make a presentation to this House on all the resources that were availed to us by this House, how we have used them and the challenges we are facing and to also indicate to this House how we have walked an extra mile particularly in supporting the Ministry of Health. Madam Speaker, as you may realise, the responsibility of giving fortified food was supposed to be the mandate of the Ministry of Health but as the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, we went an extra mile and mobilised fortified food on top of what we were supposed to buy, that portion being to support the acutely malnourished children and we will be very happy to come and make that presentation and other humble requests as soon as this House allows us, probably in a week or so from now. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, of course, the disease happened in the North but it can happen in any part of the country. So, I think the Members will be interested in knowing how to manage that. So, bring the statement and we shall give you time. 

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report and just for clarification, I just want to let hon. Anywar know that the backbone of the treatment of this nodding disease syndrome rates on the control of the convulsions, malnutrition and growth retardation which is aimed at replacing the micronutrient deficiencies. So, the Ministry of Health really is focusing on that for now and the Ministry of Health, through the National Medical Stores, continues to provide constant supplies of the anti-convulsants –(Interruption) 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way and Madam Speaker, thank you. The matters you have raised which were included in your response as a ministry in my view tackled the effect of the disease in the body but I want to ask; has the government up to now not established the following: the cause, the nature of the disease in terms of whether it is a communicable disease or not and all – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you are smuggling. The minister has just started speaking; you do not know what she is going to say. Give her time to respond, please. Hon. Minister, come back to the Floor. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this was also very clear from hon. Bitekyerezo’s presentation. He said the disease was not contagious and therefore – (Interjections) - no, it is not contagious and, of course, that is the ministry’s position as well. And we, as a ministry, have not yet received the results – we have sent various researchers and we are still waiting for the results. And as indicated by my colleague, at an appropriate time, we could come and give a detailed report. This matter is –(Interjections)– please, may I continue? We shall come at an appropriate time and give a detailed report because the one I have, as of now, is not conclusive and, therefore, I do not want –(Interjections)– it is not conclusive. I just want to inform the Members that it is true the Ministry of Health has a national response plan and this plan focused on certain key areas, one of which was to ensure appropriate treatment and management of cases – which we have done and are continuing to do. The other is to enhance the nutrition of the sick, which I have already mentioned; strengthen surveillance at the community level – which we are continuing to do. We shall give further details later.

But regarding the report that has been raised, there are things I need to respond to. The village health teams were used during the prevalence survey study supported by CDC in Pader, Kitgum and Lamwo districts. And the VHTs were paid; money for the VHTs’ facilitation was actually included in the district transfers as read out by hon. Bitekyerezo. So if they were not paid, we may have to just make a follow-up with the districts but the money was remitted to the districts.

On the issue of power, I want to report to this House that solar panels have been installed in some health facilities –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude your response.

MR OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I am just making brief responses and will come with a detailed response later. So if Members could only listen and come in later.

I was reporting on the solar panels which we have put in Atanga and Lamwo and arrangements are also on-going to train all health workers in all the affected districts.

Something has been made regarding the Shs 400 million; I think I also need to give a report on that, although the information that I have is that the research protocols presented to the Ministry of Health were developed without any funding. And none of the Shs 400 million was spent on the research protocols presented. So, Madam Speaker, we shall come back later. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the House adopts the report of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT BY THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL

4.15
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): Madam Speaker, the issue of the court award to Severino was raised by hon. Lukyamuzi. Initially, the allegation was that the ministry had not appealed against this award. Subsequently, this changed to filing of the appeal late. Madam Speaker, I have written three times on this issue. The most comprehensive report regarding the status of this case is in my report dated 5 August 2013, which is Annex A to the letter on top.

Severino filed a case in the Constitutional Court, seeking to challenge parliamentary resolutions which had been passed on the 10th and 11th October during the oil debate. Prior to the hearing of this matter, we had conceded to two issues, namely, that the petitioner had a right to bring this matter to the Constitutional Court and that Parliament was not vested with powers, under the Constitution, to order the Prime Minister or a minister of Government to step aside.

Madam Speaker, at the hearing of this matter – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, where is the statement? It seems you have just brought your letters; where is the statement itself?

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I first received a letter, requesting me for a report end of July and on 5th August, I did write a letter to the Clerk to Parliament, which is Annex A to the first letter – 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure to find out whether we are proceeding well. As far as I understand, the Minister, who is my friend, should be presenting to this House a ministerial statement. Instead, my good friend, hon. Peter Nyombi, has brought correspondences between him and the Clerk, rulings of the court, extracts of newspaper cuttings, which in my view, do not constitute a ministerial statement. I would like to find out whether he is procedurally right to continue on the basis of letters, court judgements, rulings and photocopies of newspapers, and yet in my opinion, this is a gentleman who has been in this House long enough to understand the House procedures?

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Attorney-General, I think you are taking this House for a ride. The question was: Have you appealed against the decision – the taxation? That is what the House wanted to know; not these letters. We expected you to have said, “We appealed on such a day and the hearing is on such a day,” but not these letters. That is what we expected you to do.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I can answer straight away. We have appealed against the award of Shs 12.9 billion to Severino.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear the point of order from hon. Katoto.

MR KATOTO: Madam Speaker, every person in this country is suffering; people are poor. And a court awards a lot of money to someone while people are dying because there is no medicine in hospitals. We told the Attorney-General to appeal and he is here dilly-dallying. Is he in order to take us astray when Ugandans are suffering?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Attorney-General, we want a one-page statement saying, “We appealed on such a day and the hearing is on such a day,” or “It has been concluded.” That is what we want to hear and not this because everybody has this.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Speaker, I will make that statement; my hesitation was that this matter is in court. But I will make a brief statement of one page.

THE SPEAKER: No, no, no. To say that you have appealed when the matter is in court; what is wrong with that? You are informing the House of what is happening; you are not going into the substance of the matter.

MR PETER NYOMBI: So, Madam Speaker, I am informing the House that we have appealed against the award –

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, if you come with a one-page statement just with those facts - we agreed on 20th, the hearing is on the 3rd - Yes. Next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

4.22
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, permit me to present a statement to Parliament on the issues relating to the recent industrial action by the teachers. Earlier on, we had promised that when we are ready, we shall come to this House with a brief statement.

The Ministry of Education and Sports and Government as a whole have, since the commencement of the industrial action, been constantly engaging the leadership of UNATU and all the stakeholders in consultation and dialogue with a view to resolving the issues of the strike amicably.

Cabinet on 16 September 2013 constituted a sub-committee to explore means and measures to avert the negative effects of the industrial action on the teaching and learning process in our education institutions. The sub-committee members have visited various parts of the country to interact with the local leaders and the teachers and to explain government’s position with regard to the industrial action. 

The sub-committee has further interacted extensively with UNATU leadership while exploring measures to resolve the impasse amicably. It is from this consultation that the sub-committee and UNATU were able to enter into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), which was signed yesterday on 24 September 2013. 

The gist of the MOU is that parties to it have agreed to explore further options to address the plight of the teachers. Specifically with regard to salary enhancement, a select team has been constituted to explore the scenarios under consideration and the team has been directed to commence work on 2 October 2013 and submit their report on 10 November 2013.

Meanwhile, UNATU made a commitment to suspend the industrial action with effect from today 25 September 2013. I have attached a copy of the MOU to this brief for your information and for the information of the Members. For the benefit of doubt, the copy which I have attached to what I am reading is this one, which I am laying on Table.

The Ministry of Education and Sports has also put in place mechanisms to ensure that the schools operate in accordance with the school calendar, and I have also continued to engage with UNATU leadership with a view to finding lasting solutions to the plight of the teachers.

I was specifically privileged to address the UNATU general assembly together with my colleagues; the Minister for Security, the Minister of State for Finance and all ministers of state in Education on Monday 23 September 2013 on which occasion I explained Government’s position with regard to the industrial action. I also made a plea to the teachers to call off the industrial action as consultations continue. A copy of my address to teachers on Monday is attached here for your information and for the information of the members of Parliament and I lay it here before Parliament.

Let me take this opportunity to thank all the teachers who reported to their duty stations on 16 September 2013 and who continued to do so diligently until the impasse was resolved. 

In the same vein, I would like to extend Government’s appreciation to all the national and local leaders who rose to the occasion to explain key issues at stake during the industrial action. I would like to single you out, Madam Speaker, because you were quoted in some sections of the media authoritatively explaining to the Ugandan people in the Busoga sub-region and encouraging parents and teachers to resume work.

I would like to appeal to all my colleagues, Members of Parliament, to take interest in this matter and participate fully in mobilising the local communities to ensure that children are available at school and are productively engaged in academic and educational programmes in preparation for the national and end of year examinations. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. For God and My Country.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, thank you very much for this update and I think we are happy to hear that the teachers are back. In relation to your programme, I just want to know whether the Budget Call Circular will not be out before the discussions are concluded because we are talking about November. I do not know whether the Ministry of Finance is going to issue the budget circular. I think it is important to know. When will the Budget Call Circular be issued because it contains the ceiling for the budget? If your negotiations are going to end in November, I do not know what will happen.

The consultations for the Budget begin this month and they are going to issue the ceiling for next financial year. So our interest is to know how this process will fit into that one.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, the Budget Circular will take into account the promise this country and Government has made to our teachers so that should not be cause for worry at all.

THE SPEAKER: That is a government assurance. I wanted him to say it on record as Ministry of Finance.

4.29
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, this issue of the teachers’ increment was raised here in Parliament. When the Ministry of Education committed itself that it is going to pay teachers 20 percent, in effect that was part of the Budget of the Ministry of Education. Now what is this Budget Circular you are talking about, Madam Speaker? I would love to know because earlier on, the government issued it.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we are saying is that this time when they issue the Budget Call Circular, it should contain the interventions relating to the Ministry of Education and specifically for the teachers so that we do not quarrel in June. We should know in November that it is not there and we start quarrelling then. That is what we are asking for.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have seen what the minister presented and what they agreed on with UNATU. They are saying the salary will be 20 percent effective January 2014. So what did you agree on? Can we understand on what you agreed on regarding teachers’ salaries?

Madam Speaker, assuming we take proposal number one of January 2014 of 20 percent increment - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I think we shall be anticipating because they are going to discuss these three scenarios so I do not think we should discuss them. We might actually prejudice - let us note them and monitor – yes.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, let me give clarification. The scenario the Leader of the Opposition is giving proposes that they were given to Government by UNATU. And when we were in consultation with them, we decided that we cannot categorically take a decision overnight on any of them. So the agreement is there on the document which I laid here and is attached on my statement. Beginning 2nd October, we shall begin discussions specifically on those scenarios; that is what we agreed and that is what we signed to. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think we can delve into this because we were not party to it. Let them do the negotiations. If at the end of the viva they haven’t agreed, then we can intervene. But for now, let us note that preparations and the interim agreement that they have. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS AFFAIRS ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION REPORT, JULY, 2013


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that report was presented, it is for debate, unless the chair wants to give a small synopsis, but it was presented. 

Honourable members, you may recall that we received this report. It was our first report of the Standing Committee on Human Rights; we were very happy about it and you said you needed time. So the time is now for the debate. 

4.33
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I want to beg your indulgence. Members do not seem ready – actually speaking for myself, I am not ready because I saw the Order Paper a bit late so I did not carry a copy of my report. I would like to request you that we defer debate on this report to tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: It was presented very comprehensively. It is really important for us to debate it; either we adopt it – 

4.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS AFFAIRS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Madam Speaker, since the Members have confessed that they did not read the report, we can defer it until tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: okay, next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE LOCAL AUTHORITIES ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2010

4.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I know the committee is going to present the report. But yesterday, when the Committee of Local Government presented their report on value for money audit on NAADS, the report was said to be shallow and improper. 

I tasked the chairperson to look for the Report of the Auditor-General on the Value for Money Audit in Kabalore, Kasese, Lira, Manafwa, Mubende, and Tororo and we have managed to get it. I have gone through the report which I will lay on Table and there was nothing to do with values. What it dealt with was policy and even went into drawing picture of the animals, which were got. 

So, I stand here to say that the committee never erred in the process of value for money audit, but what they did was to produce a report according to value for policy and not value for money. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report and it would be good if you look at it; the problem is – the Auditor-General should have said “policy audit” and not “value for money audit”. I want to tell Parliament and the whole country that –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank very much Leader of the Opposition for giving way. I chair the committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. Before us, we have considered some value for money audits. I would like to site the example of National Medical Stores where there isn’t – 

THE SPEAKER: Have you presented a copy to the House – 

MR AMURIAT: I am addressing my mind to the report 

THE SPEAKER: No, how can you bring us something which is still in the offing? You are not allowed to anticipate; you are in breach of our rules.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, they were looking at systems and processes and then drew findings and conclusions. It is on that basis that the committee made its report. There is also auditing of systems, it is allowed. But I want to tell Parliament that the sentence we passed on the committee yesterday was harsh and not based on correct information. Since we now have the information, I want us to withdraw the sentence – (Interjections) – yes. 

Look at page 1; executive summary page 2 is monitoring and evaluation – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I do appreciate what you are saying, but this House has been concerned about the lack of value for money audit. We even wanted to create a committee specifically for that. So if the heading says “value for money” and the contents are not value for money – the report should have stated that it is not value for money audit but something different. That is what they should have said. But if you purport bringing value for money, I judge you on basis of what you have said.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are right; “value” means you get the value and output and match it with what you put in; so you are right, Madam Speaker. 

But in future, we want our committee to get the real reports with value and world over they are dealing with value for money. But for this one of yesterday, it was systems and design evaluation report. I beg to lay it on the Table for Parliament to know what we are saying.

4.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Madam Speaker, as the Chairperson Local Government Committee, I take responsibility for that report and I would like to report that the committee did a good job on that report. I remember sending to your office different types of value reports, which I personally signed: value for money and value on policy. I did after paying a visit to the House of Commons. Now, it appears some people, because they could not understand the difference, did ridicule my committee and therefore –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, yesterday, we received the report he is alluding to; and we thought, as Parliament, that it was not to the standard of a value for money audit. And the Leader of the Opposition has just mentioned that it was not actually value for money audit but it was value for policy something. And the Chairperson, who is my good friend, is insinuating that Parliament does not seem to understand the difference when actually, you did rule that if the committee found it not to be value for money, they should have said so. 

So, is he in order, when he knows very well that it is his committee that did not give the appropriate recommendations to this House, to insinuate that Parliament does not understand the difference when we actually do? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we fully understand what we do in this House. Really, if you wanted to audit policy you would have said, “This is a policy audit,” and we would have understood and listened and debated a policy audit. But you titled it “value for money” and that is what we were expecting. Please, present local governments accounts now. 

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, thank you for your ruling. But I want to say I seriously take responsibility for that report and I request that you give me time to present that report - (Interjections)– yes,  so that the House clearly analyses the policy as regards to NAADS in Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: You will have to change the title. I was expecting a value-for-money audit. That is what I wrote on the Order Paper. You change the title and then come back. For now, present the local government accounts. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not want to contribute to this for one reason. The Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament. After what transpired, and as Public Accounts Committee, we had raised the same issue to the Auditor-General that, you see, these value-for-money audits do not relate to the budget and, therefore, there are no figures in the report. The parliamentary liaison officer from the Office of the Auditor-General did consider and say, “Look, since this was the first audit, I think we may have to improve the other audits.” But we also have other reports where we are in the process of finalising and it was coming to the same thing of - 

The guidance I am seeking, Madam Speaker, is whether this is not a matter - since it is about Parliament because the Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament; you are our Speaker; we are also Members of the committee - which we need to handle in-house other than coming on the Floor then we say, “The Auditor-General-” I am wondering whether it is not proper that with your indulgence, maybe we can have a meeting, the Auditor-General - who is our officer- with the committees, so that we deal with the issue the way it is supposed to be. But in the spirit it is moving, I am becoming very uncomfortable. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think if you are in the process of completing and it is looking the same way, you include a paragraph there that what we have presented is a policy audit, not a value-for-money audit. And you tell us here on the Hansard - Yes. So, please, go to the local government accounts. Let us leave the Auditor-General; he is not here. Please, leave the Auditor-General; we shall meet him. Proceed. 

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, with your permission, allow me to present a report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Auditor-General’s report for the year ended 30 June 2010 for 48 districts. 

Madam Speaker, the report of the local government accounts committee is presented to this House in accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution, Rules 170(2) and 170(3) of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament. 

The report covers the financial year for the details of that particular report. I want to leave this area because there is methodology, background and other things. I think I should not go into that. But I would like to acknowledge the participation with the Office of the Auditor-General, the Members of the committee and other relevant organs, which contributed to this report. This report is divided into two main parts: the general observations and recommendations. Now, I am on the second page: general observations and recommendations.

As a matter of concern, most of the accounting officers were in acting capacity with the previous accounting officers not present. Although the accounting officers were supposed to inherit liabilities and assets of the office, it would have been better for the accounting officers who caused financial irregularities to explain themselves. It was reported that some accounting officers had refused to cooperate with the current accounting officers.   

Compliance with accounting regulations 

The committee noted that most of the accounting regulations are still not adhered to contrary to what is required of the accounting officers. Accountabilities are not submitted in time and they spill over into other financial years. Personal advances should be recovered within the agreed period and the official advances should become personal after the three months as stipulated in the regulations. The committee, therefore, recommends that the financial regulations should be strictly adhered to and any deviation, the accounting officer and the chief finance officer should be held liable. 

Embezzlement of public funds

The committee observed that there were some cases of outright theft of funds by officers. The committee noted that much as such cases were reported to Police, prosecution and witnesses are not always available to defend these cases. The outcome is that the culprits are released and the government funds are lost. The committee recommends that in such incidences, relevant authorities in the district should be brought on board to handle the matter and the district officials should always be available to be witnesses in these cases.  

Administrative and personal advances

This is the most abused financial regulation as evidenced from the growing queries on this particular item. Financial regulations require imprest and advances to be repaid within three months. The committee observed that advances and imprest remain unaccounted for by the end of the accounting period. Subsequently, these advances are sometimes irregularly written off as bad debts without following the requisite procedures or some staff die without accounting for the advances in the stipulated time. 

The situation is further compounded by lack of appropriate documents and advance ledgers in most cases as not properly maintained which makes follow up impossible. From the districts reviewed, a sum of Shs 1,101,226,121 remained outstanding at the end of the year. The committee, therefore, recommends that accountability of official allowances should not be allowed after the three months and recovery should be restricted to the earnings of the officer or the accused. An officer should not receive new advances before preparing accountability for the old advances.

Incompletely unvouched expenditure

The above item is either deliberately done to defraud public funds or due to incompetence or lack of staff in some districts. During the submission, it was reported that most of the vouchers were actually available but could not be traced due to incompetent staff. Such evidence was verified by the committee and the Office of the Auditor-General and some were cleared while others could not be cleared. The committee recommends that such irregularities and negligence should be addressed by the districts through disciplinary action and retooling of staff to adhere and follow the financial sanctions to the logical conclusion. 

Persistence of the above query should be perceived as failure of the accounting officer and the district administrative officers to train and discipline the staff and, therefore, be liable. 

Non-remittance of statutory deductions 

The sum of Shs 1,651,194,682 was not remitted to URA as withholding tax or VAT. A number of accounting officers presented authentic URA receipts which were not yet secured at the time of audit while other districts have entered arrangements with URA to make partial payments at the agreed payment schedules. It was also noted that the URA has been delaying to issue payment receipts to local governments yet payments are made in time. This is irregular and causes unnecessary queries.

The committee recommends that since these are deductions not meant for the districts, they should be remitted as soon as they are collected. The committee also recommended that the contractors who do not meet the obligations of remitting tax like VAT should be blacklisted and made to pay any arrears. URA should issue payment receipts on time. 

Unauthorised transfer of funds

The committee also noted that the practise of these illegal transfers is common in many districts and usually abuse votes in conditional grant accounts. In most cases, they are transferred to finance on urgency administrative undertaking including allowances of councillors. The committee noted that this practise affects programmes in the districts and the transfer is not without any authority. To make this worse, there was no activity report for the diversion and to show the urgency or the reason for that diversion. This is a dangerous precedent because it breeds corruption and promotes poor planning and prioritisation of financial management. 

The committee recommends that this practise should be stopped and disciplinary action be instituted to the perpetrators of the practise. 

Irregular procurement process

Although the Public Finance and Accountability Act came into force in 2003, the previous arrangement to make the process was equally being abused. It was however noted that since PPDA came into force, the cases of this nature have reduced though the ones that came up are of big magnitude. There were numerous cases of influence peddling, collusion, conflict of interest in the management of procurement and here, the committee therefore strongly recommends improvement in this particular area and particularly in the store recording, adherence to PPDA and regulations thereof. 

Capacity and competence of some local government staff

Madam Speaker, the committee noted with concern that most districts do not have adequate staff. This is a very serious problem and this affects the performance of districts. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Public Service should urgently work together to fill the posts in local governments with competent and professional staff and measures should be put in place to ensure sustainability of the acquired staff. 

Unauthorised expenditure

The total amount spent unauthorised stands at Shs 4,332,000,000 for the year we are talking about in all the 45 districts. The committee notes that this may be a deliberate move by accounting officials to carry out unplanned activities which please them and most likely benefit from these actions. In most cases, the funds spent without authority is in billions. There are usually no activity reports; accountability is not available, which raises concern. This is compounded by the fact that district consideration of what was done – normally it causes a very big problem as far as this matter is concerned.

The committee, therefore, recommends that authority should always be sought for these public funds to be committed.

Poor revenue performance

The committee noted that most districts did not realise their budgets. This is because the sources of revenue are limited and therefore the budgets of nearly every district are limited.

The committee, therefore, recommends that professionalism in budgeting should be upheld and all departments should be involved. The allowances of councillors should be a function of what has been realised in implementing the budget and not on budgeted figures. This is because at times they budget for more money so that they can have more allowances. 

The council should scrutinise activity reports before approving excess expenditure and reviving budgets. Local councils should put in place a mechanism to enhance local revenue. 

But as you are aware, Madam Speaker, most of the sources of revenue were taken over by the central government. And as a result, the funds that they get are limited and that is why this problem is prevalent in nearly every district.

District Public Accounts Committee sittings

The committee noted that in most of the districts, the PACs never sit. As you know, just like we have PAC in Parliament, districts are supposed to have their PACs. But these do not meet.

The committee, therefore, recommends that these PACs which draw allowances and yet they do not sit, should refund the money and the accounting officer should report the matter to the council.

Board of Survey

Where part (v) of the Local Government Finance and Accounting regulations require the appointment of boards of survey at the end of every financial year, the committee noted that this practice still persists, despite the earlier committee recommendation to the effect that districts which do not put in place the board of survey should be penalised for incompetence and the accounting officer, especially, should be warned.

Public land

The committee noted with concern the trend of encroaching on local government land and land belonging to other government institutions. The rate is alarming and local governments seem to be helpless because most of this land is not secured by land titles. 

The committee recommends that all public land should be secured and local governments should be helped by the central government to acquire land titles. This is because they do not have enough money even to process these titles.

In conclusion, the above general comments are substantiated by detailed analyses which follow in part (2) of the report. It should, however, be noted that most of the general concerns cut across local governments and financial years since they are basically the same issues. And I am sure when you heard yesterday’s presentation, they are nearly the same issues. Year in and year out, these are the same issues that come up.
I, therefore, beg this august House to adopt this report and recommendations therein. And as I move from district to district, I wish to lay on Table the minutes of our meetings for the financial year 2010, for both local authorities and municipalities. This is because I will later come here to present the report for municipalities.

Amolatar District – 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Chair, I propose that you read the district, the subject and then the recommendation, without going into the accounting officers’ response and so on.

MR SABIITI: Amolatar District: Incompletely unvouchered expenditure of Shs 14,638,144; lack of support documents on that money. 
The committee observations: The list of debtors presented by the accounting officers showed disparities in some of the names of the payee compared to the vouchers.

The committee noted that no reports were made after officers attended such workshops. If the workshops were genuine, participants would have ticked the invitation letters at the venue.

The committee recommendation: 
    (a) The accounting officer be held liable for making payments without written evidence of invitation to such meetings. 
    (b) The accounting officer should always demand for and keep reports as a basis for future reference.

Missing vouchers

The committee observed that the payment vouchers were missing; the internal auditor extracted wrong information and no documents were forwarded to the Auditor-General for verification.

Our recommendation is that this query should stand.

Amuria District: Unaccounted for funds are Shs 53,898,100. Our observation is that money was duly accounted for and documents were tabled for verification. These were checked by the Auditor-General and the committee found it necessary to recommend that this query be dropped.

Madam Speaker, there is a problem; because of insufficient staff in every district – although the Auditor-General does his work in the districts, you find that, because of the shortage or incompetence of staff, when the Auditor-General goes for audit, some vouchers may be available but nobody can even trace where they are. And whenever a committee pay a visit to such a district, these vouchers - for example, when we go for recess, we force them and we sometimes direct them to brings those documents and they go back to bring them.

So, Madam Speaker, you can see that it is extremely difficult to adhere to the regulations because if they are brought – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what part of your report are you reading?

MR SABIITI: I am trying to explain this case because yesterday it came up.

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Namayanja stood in for you very well yesterday; she explained. Just read the subject, observation and recommendation.

MR SABIITI: So, for this particular query, we recommend that it is dropped.

Doubts on repair of vehicles of Shs 7,138,000 

There is a response from the accounting officer. The committee observed that repairs were doubtful because of the way they were hurriedly done and because of the absence of satisfactory explanations. Again, documents were later presented to us and the auditors went through them and this query was dropped by the committee.

Irregular appointment of District Internal Auditor

The committee noted that the irregularity identified by the Auditor-General is correct. We also observed that the district has no functional district service commission and an appointment has not been regularised. The appointment should have been on probation and not on promotion because this officer applied as a new entrant; it was wrong for the Commission to have appointed him in that particular office.

The committee directed the accounting officer to ensure that the person occupying that office is only paid a salary he is entitled to. Also, the accounting officer should liaise with the district chairperson to ensure that the District Service Commission is urgently put in place.

Non-recruitment of a District Engineer

The committee observed that the district has no functional District Service Commission and appointments cannot be done. Therefore, the accounting officer should liaise with the district chairperson to ensure that the District Service Commission is urgently put in place.

Amuru District Local Government 

Un-vouched Expenditure of Shs 21,451,520

The committee observed that there was deliberate action by the accounting officer to deny the auditors documents, which is illegal. The documents were forwarded to the Auditor-General who verified them and they were found to be correct. The committee recommends that this query be dropped.

On page 6 –(Interruption)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You realise that we have a very big document and we are going to deal with 48 districts. At this rate, it will take us a week. I do not know what we can do, but I would suggest that we just look at recommendations for every district instead of going through the entire report. The observations are too many.

THE SPEAKER: The chairperson had actually summarised all the threads running through the whole report and he has identified all the problems, which run through all the districts. Maybe we could just stick to those, because you have highlighted all of them. In fact, many of them came in yesterday.

MR SABIITI: With your permission, Madam Speaker, maybe I will just go to the recommendations.

THE SPEAKER: That is what I had suggested earlier because ultimately, I am going to direct the Clerk to reflect the whole report in the Hansard.

MR SABIITI: Let us go to doubtful expenditure on page 7. The committee recommends that the accounting officer should remit the balance to URA. This was a question of URA funds, which had not been remitted. 

Revenue shortfall 

I have already explained this. We recommend that this query be dropped because they have no funds. Even if they budget, they do not have the money and sources of revenue. 

Advances 

The accounting officer’s response is there. Here, again, the Auditor-General submitted evidence of recoveries and we dropped that query.  

Apac District

The committee observed that this case is in court and it would be prejudicial. The query therefore stands.

Delayed abandoned contracts to various private firms 

After visiting those areas, we found that the query, which had been raised, was no longer relevant. We request that this be dropped.

Local revenue shortfall 

I have also talked about this. We recommend that this query be dropped.

Doubtful tax remittances 

The committee found that there was some forgery involved in this query. The query was, therefore, stood over pending the report of CID and the Auditor-General.

Unaccounted-for funds of Shs 12,060,000 

Again, the committee requested the Auditor-General and CID to follow up this matter. So, we stood over this query and, therefore, it stands.

Irregular procurements 

After explanations on papers presented, the committee recommends that this query be dropped.

Arua District 

Funds were transferred irregularly and categorised as expenditure item of Shs 1,801,019,664 and Shs 1,100,387,768 respectively. We got letters of transfer for these and, therefore, this query was dropped.

Unaccounted-for funds 

We recommend that the accounting officer should recover all the money and make good the loss.

Tax Anomalies 
The committee requests the Auditor-General to investigate Withholding Tax and get back to the committee; so, this recommendation stands.

Pay As You Earn 

The accounting officer was advised to obtain relevant regulations and comply accordingly. This audit query stands.

Irregular cash drawings of Shs 5 million 

The vouchers were given and the auditors reviewed these vouchers and confirmed this query should be dropped. We recommend the same for the following query. 

Loss of motorcycles 
The committee observed that motorcycles were stolen from staff. However, only one report was availed for verification. The committee demanded that CID follows up this matter. So, the query stands. 

Borrowing of Shs 1.540 million 

The explanation we were given was that the Auditor-General looked at these documents. We therefore recommend that this query be dropped. 

Bugiri District 

Improper award of contracts 

The committee observes that Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets (PPDA) regulations were violated, which state that contractors have to be awarded to the lowest bidder who meets the bidding criteria. 

The committee also noted that the accounting officer had enough time to obtain authority from the contracts committee for change of valuation criteria but he did not do it. The committee noted that the action of the accounting officer was deliberate to defraud the council. The committee, therefore, recommends that this accounting officer should be disciplined for flouting the regulations. 

Universal Primary Education programme 

The committee observed that the advice by the Auditor-General to liaise with all relevant stakeholders so as to address the weaknesses in the programme is being followed. The committee recommends that the district should continue with its concerted effort to ensure that the standard of primary education is uplifted. 

Outstanding advances 

The query stands. 

Bushenyi District 

Administrative advances 

We recommend that the accounting officer recovers all funds from the relevant officers. 

Over commitment 

Again, this is on budgeting. The council and the accounting officer should be strict and adhere to financial regulations. The accounting officer should be cautioned. 

Unaccounted-for and abandoned pit latrines worth Shs 87,500,000
 
After visiting the location, we found these toilets were in place. So after verifying the documents, the query was dropped. 

Undisciplined Pay As You Earn deductions 

The committee observed that for Uganda Revenue Authority to have frozen an account, it means that the district has stubbornly taken long without submitting deductions. It also implies that there were payments for fines and other costs due to negligence of the accounting officer. So, after presentation of papers, the query stands. 

Administrative advances 

This query stands. 

Understaffing in health centres
 
Understaffing is a problem, as stated in the general outline. The accounting officer’s response was that the wage bill was inadequate, particularly in the health sector. The committee observes that lack of funds is affecting districts in filling vacancies in the health sector. The Ministry of Finance should find funds to fill up these positions. This is policy, so the committee recommended that this query be dropped. 

Drug stock-outs in health centres 

We found out that this was a regular matter. However, after scrutinising the papers, we discovered that the problem was with the accounting officer. The committee recommended that requisition for drugs should be made in time and regularly. This is again a policy matter, so the committee recommends that it be dropped. 

Undelivered drugs amounting to Shs 18,329,139 

The committee recommends that this query stands and the money is recovered. 

Buyende District 

Unaccounted-for fuel worth Shs 20,804,220 

This was a classic case of theft. The CID was directed to take up the matter and the query still stands. 

Delegated grants withheld by Kamuli District 

This was a management problem. The committee recommends that the two districts should sort out the issues. In cases of failure, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Local Government should act as arbiters. The division of districts at times causes problems among districts. 

Staff shortages 

This is a common problem. The committee recommends that the district liaises with the responsible ministries to recruit staff and fill in these staffing gaps. As I stated, this is a big problem in nearly all districts. 

Dokolo District 

Unaccounted-for funds 

Accountability was made and the auditors recommended that since the accountability had been made, the query be dropped. 

Fuel deposits 

Shs 14,372,000 were not supported with authorised requisitions. The committee recommends that all funds be recovered or the accounting officer should make good the loss. 

Revenue shortfalls 

Again, this is a budgeting issue, which we have already talked about. The committee recommends that the accounting officer ensures that the budget is revised by the council so that it is proper.

Irregular procurements of Shs 21, 855,000

The committee recommended that the Auditor-General harmonises the position with the accounting officer and reports within a week, which he did not; so, the query stands.

Gulu District Local Government 

Unaccounted-for funds

The query still stands. We recommend that more verification on this should be done.

Tax remittances to URA

This is also a big problem but it was verified. Documents were presented and the Auditor-General advised that the query be dropped and we concurred with the Auditor-General.
 
Personal advances

We recommend that the accounting officer should recover all the balances or make good the loss if he fails to recover all this money. The regulations demand that within three months, this money should be recovered.

Leavers still on payroll
These people were paid money and the accounting officer had not taken action. So, the accounting officer should recover the funds or make good the loss.

Inspection reports

This was administrative. The query was dropped.

Committee observation

This is a common problem with National Medical Stores. It was noted that some supplies were not even requested for, which created room for expiry. Many drugs in districts expire and some of them are not relevant. So, the management was advised to ensure timely supply and distribution of drugs. Management should always check on the shelf life of drugs delivered to ensure long lasting stocks. National Medical Stores should desist from supplying what is not requested for by the user units.

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should continue trying to recruit more staff and consult the council on how best the district can attract and retain staff. 

Short delivery of drugs

This is the same issue that we have talked about. It is purely administrative and we advise that this query be dropped.

Ibanda District

Irregular salary top-up of Shs 25,920,000 was paid to three doctors. We directed the accounting officer to recover all the funds and stop the practice which he was using until the illegality is corrected. 

Unacknowledged Pay As You Earn

The committee observed that audit is a process and these receipts should have been traced during the entire audit period. There is a tendency of accounting officers to deny such vital documents deliberately for reasons best known to them. This query stands. 

Iganga District Local Government

Unspent balances

The accounting officer told the committee that authority was sought and a letter was given and, therefore, it was proper for the district to use that money. The query was dropped.

Vacant positions

This is common, as I stated in the general comments. The committee recommended that this query be dropped but there should be administrative arrangements to make sure that funds are availed and the District Service Commissions are in place to appoint people to be in those offices.

Universal Primary Education Performance 
The committee observed that this is a very serious matter. The committee recommends that school inspections should be enhanced and direct promotions should be discouraged as a policy matter.

Unrecovered funds

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should follow up this case, which is in court; so, this query stands.

Failure to board off vehicles 

These are management issues brought about by lack of staff and incompetence. The committee recommended that the vehicles should be boarded off immediately. 

Isingiro District Local Government 

Non-authorisation of Funds of Shs 750,339,692 
A letter was given and authority was given. So, we felt this query should be dropped.

Revenue shortfall 

This is again also on budgeting. The accounting officer should ensure that the budget is revived and the books of accounts revived accordingly. Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should carry out regular vaccination programmes to avert perennial problems.

Irregular gratuity payments

The correspondences were analysed by the committee and found authentic and acceptable. So, we recommend Parliament drops this query.

Understaffing

This is a management problem as I stated earlier. The committee recommends that this query should be dropped.

Non-remittance of shared revenue

The committee observed that the accounting officer’s submissions revealed that he lacked knowledge related to the financial regulations which he is supposed to be implementing. A total of Shs 8,597,600 was not remitted to the lower local government council as provided for in the financial regulations. This hampered delivery of services by the lower local governments. 

This is very common, and the committee recommends that the accounting officer be further trained in financial regulations governing local governments and makes use of his finance department to acquire similar knowledge. We found, particularly in the districts which are new, that the capacity of officers is actually lacking. 

Incomplete assets register 

The committee noted that the local governments are losing land due to the negligence of the leadership in not acquiring titles. I have already talked about this. The accounting officer should ensure that the assets register is updated on time in compliance with the financial regulations. 

Jinja District Local Government 

Unspent conditional grants

The committee observed that permission was sought to use the money retained from the account and later used for the service it was intended. 

Madam Speaker, we are of the view, as a committee, that if money is disbursed from the central government to the local government - these are autonomous bodies; they can be sued and can sue - there is no need for money which is not used there to be returned to the Consolidated Fund account. Maybe the issue that would come up would be just to account for how that money was used, particularly if they have programmes for that particular amount of money. So, we propose that this query be dropped.

Non-functional theatre at Bugembe Health Centre

The committee notes that the accounting officer gave an adequate response. The committee recommended that this query be dropped. 

Audit of Universal Primary Education programmes

This is a management issue. It is similar to the issue where we were trying to audit NAADS and some people could not understand how we can audit policy. 

Delays in completion of public works 

The committee observed that this is a serious query and, therefore, it should be upheld and money recovered. 

Delayed construction of Masese Seed School

The accounting officer did not give an explanation to the committee. The query should be upheld.

Bugembe workshop

The committee dropped that query after the explanation from the accounting officer. 

Kabale District Local Government

Penalties for wrongful dismissal of the former CAO
 
The council acted in excess of its powers and did not consult with higher authorities. The accounting officer expedited the payment to avoid other related costs. The committee noted a loss of huge amounts of money as a result of wrong decisions by the council. 

The committee recommends that the relevant authorities in the district should always consult with the relevant technical institution before important decisions are taken. In the case of dismissal of the former Chief Administrative Officer, this loss would not have been incurred. This query was dropped. 

Unexplained primary teachers’ arrears of Shs 177,662,432
 
The committee observed that there could have been collusion that resulted into payment of ghost teachers in the district. The accounting officer was directed to verify the list and confirm whether names on the list correspond with the names of teachers they had in the district. If there are teachers who do not appear on the payment, that list should be compiled and sent to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who should investigate and find out who these people are. So, the query stands. 

Drugs amounting to Shs 20,663,565

The committee noted that drugs were invoiced before they were ordered and delivered. The district storekeeper received the drugs and issued a “goods received” note without checking for the quantity and quality. The in-charge collected drugs without signing for them. 

The committee recommended that management be seriously cautioned to ensure compliance with standing procedures, and all deliveries should be verified before being taken to charge. 

Lack of land titles

This is also a management problem. The committee recommends that the query be dropped. 

Compliance with primary health guidelines 

The committee observed that some health centres lack enough staff and most things were not being done properly, but now they have been streamlined. The committee also learnt that the accounts have been separated and the cashbook is now available - the query was on availability of those books. Reports regarding use of funds are now being made. Since this anomaly was rectified, we recommend that this query be dropped. 

Health Centre IV Rushoroza

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should always ensure compliance with the public healthcare guidelines. The committee recommends that this query be dropped. 

Unaccounted-for Funds
Accountability was not availed at the time of audit and this contravenes the National Audit Act, 2008. Accountabilities were tabled to the committee but were not found satisfactory. The accounting officer should recover the money or make good the loss. 

Irregular procurements and renovations 

The committee concurred with the Auditor-General that there was collusion in the procurement process and that the accounting officer be held responsible for the anomaly. The committee observed that the accounting officer failed to adhere to the regulations and recommends that he should be disciplined for making loss in the management of public funds. 

Staff shortages 

This is the same problem. We recommend that this be dropped. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, we had earlier said that you had captured the highlights of the problems in all the areas and they are the same. The individual ones are really for the minister to handle. Why don’t we just stop there? 

I ask the Clerk to reflect the whole report in the Hansard and then we can have a brief debate, since you have captured everything and they cut across – apparently all the districts are the same.

MR SABIITI: I agree with you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I direct the Clerk to reflect the entire report in the Hansard so that it is fully captured. Thank you, honourable chair. (Applause)

MR SABIITI: In addition to having laid this report on the Table, I once again lay it on the Table as demanded by the Members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, yesterday you received other reports and again the headings were more or less similar; maybe we can just have three contributions. By the way, honourable members, if I see any committee member standing up today, I will suspend you. So if you are a member of the committee, sit down; if you stand up I will suspend you. (Laughter)

5.53
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson and his committee for this elaborate and extensive work. Considering the time that we have, I will just make statements on a few general concerns. 

My first comment is on procurement. I want the minister to find a way of handling this problem because the procurement process in the districts is causing a lot of problems. There are a lot of delays; in fact, in many districts real work starts after December. We pass the budget here but real work on the ground generally starts in January. These delays are sometimes intentional. The Procurement process is delayed because they are waiting for people to agree on bribes. So, I want to ask the Minister to closely look at this matter. The financial year is only 12 months but real work in districts starts very late because of these delays.

My second comment is about capacity. The chairman rightly mentioned the lack of capacity in many departments in the districts. As we speak now, many districts cannot recruit because of budget constraints; they do not have the money to fill these posts. Members of Parliament attend some of these meetings, for example, the ones concerning roads, but you will find that there is no engineer in the works department. The fellow who is manning that department is just an ordinary member of staff. I do not know if the minister can say something about this. 

We understand that the districts cannot recruit and if they recruit, it is up to them to find money. This is absurd! We should agree on the minimum staffing levels in every department so that we know that every department is manned by someone who can run such an important department.

Lastly, when they mentioned Kabale and what happened there, I wondered why the committee did not even warn the council after it made this –(Member timed out_)

5.57
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to give me some information on councillors’ emoluments. The report says that the councillors cause diversion of funds, but this is because they are poor. They spend so much effort and resources to become councillors at the district but find nothing. So, they end up doing illegal things to survive.

Last year, I think there was some talk about Shs 20 billion provided in the Budget for councillors. This money disappeared and yet some of us had told our councillors to expect something. If we really want work to be done at the district level, we should have some form of monthly emolument for councillors and allowances - (Member timed out_)

5.58
MRS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As observed yesterday, this report paints a very gloomy picture of decentralisation in Uganda. It is high time we examined decentralisation as a policy. 

That said, I want to propose that this House finds a solution to the issue of selling district land. Very soon, we shall find that we have nowhere to house districts. When it comes to Buganda, the ownership of this land is contested. Recently, the President signed a memorandum with the Kabaka and it was agreed that this land would revert to the Buganda Kingdom. Madam Speaker, I request that a ruling be made on this matter, that the local government minister at least issues a circular to restrain district officials from sharing district land. We know that at the grassroots land is shared between politicians and civil servants.

The other issue I would like to comment on is the public accounts committees of districts. When you look at their composition, most of them consist of former campaign managers and politicians who did not make it during the last elections. These committees are partisan in nature and serve those who appointed them. In fact, it is just a way of employing campaign managers and politicians, and at the end of the day the committees do not do the work for which they were constituted.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, districts are supposed to return money to lower government structures, but when it comes to LCI, in most cases - the minister reported here – those positions are vacant – (Member timed out_)

6.01
MRS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the job well done. 

I would like to mention something about the capacity of the local governments. The committee recommended that the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Public Service should urgently work together and fill the vacant posts. I feel that the committee left out a very important ministry, which is the Ministry of Finance. The ministries of local government and public service know what it means when there is a vacancy in any department and they are willing to fill these vacant posts but the problem is finances. Therefore, I would like to add that the Ministry of Finance should be in charge of this rather than the Ministry of Local Government.

Secondly, I would like to comment briefly on the recruitment of staff, which the committee is also leaving to the accounting officers. I would like to urge the Government on this issue; the problem is the welfare of the staff. The general recommendation should be that the Government should work towards providing attractive social services to the rural districts so that staff are attracted to the rural districts.

Finally, the problems with the district PAC start from the appointments. These people are appointed by the people they are supposed to monitor. You can find situations where all those appointed are either relatives or campaign agents of certain people and they have some kind of connection. To that extent, these people cannot do their work diligently. Secondly, they lack the knowledge of accounting and accounting procedures. I feel that this contributes to the failure of district PACs to do their work. (Member timed out_)

6.04
MS IRIAMA ROSE (Independent, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to take this opportunity to thank the committee for coming up with this report. 

I want to comment on the issue of the CAOs. The central Government has been handling issues of CAOs, but I also want to suggest that the chief finance officers be centralised because I believe these two offices work together. If this is done, we would stop hearing of cases of corruption. I think there would be less corruption in the districts.

The other issue I would like to comment about is personnel. In one section, they say that there is inadequate recruitment. In cases where a district does not have a district service commission, it can borrow from the other districts. So I do not understand the issue of saying that there were no personnel and the district was not able to recruit.

I would also like to comment on the issue of contractors, which is reflected in all the districts. Why should we keep having incompetent contractors in the districts? Why should there always be shoddy work and contracts are continuously given to the same contractors?

There is need for drastic action to be taken against those contractors who are not able to complete their work in time. Why would they keep on giving payment vouchers and certificates of completion when the contractor has not worked? I suggest that in cases where the chief finance officer and the CAO are not able to control finances in the district, where there is loss, their property must be confiscated- (Member timed out_)

6.06
MS VERONICA BABIRYE KADOGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the work well done. 

I would like to comment on a policy in local government. I think the policy of accounting officers making good the loss is not realistic. You may find that the accounting officers- (Interruption)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, I thought that-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I warned that anybody from the committee who tempts me will be suspended. Hon. Kadogo, please get out of the House. You are suspended for three sittings. Yes, I warned you since yesterday. No, rules are rules and I said it earlier. Hon. Kadogo, please, and I am warning any other Member; if you are a member of the committee, do not debate because this is your report and do not stand up. I have been warning you every day and I said it before this.

6.08
MR BAKER SSALI (NRM, Buikwe County West, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker -

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, we are aware that your ruling is very final, but the honourable colleague is a first time offender and I would heavily plead that you sincerely caution her and all the other Members of the House. Caution all of us so that we do not continue deliberating and provoking you when we know we have participated in the formulation of the reports. Madam Speaker, I beg to plead.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need examples. After the report was read, I saw members of the committee standing up today. Last night, I warned you. These are our rules and they must be respected. I warned you before this that nobody from that committee should stand up. I have made my ruling and that is the position.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: A second appeal, Madam Speaker. I want to appeal once again that this should act as a second warning. If anybody stands up after this suspension, then I think you could- I believe you can forgive the honourable member and let it take effect after this warning. Thank you.

MR SSALI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this voluminous report that they have read out to the House. This report will go a step further in streamlining the work of the local governments and the districts. I request that all the districts be given part of the recommendations and observations that have been reached in this report to help them step up their day-to-day work. 

On the issue of land at the local governments or at the districts, recently the President gave an order that land and other properties be given back to Buganda. Some districts like mine, Buikwe District, had just put up a big and very magnificent building. I do not know what will happen when the land is reverted back to the Kabaka. The other issue is that as we speak, there is another building which is coming up. So I request the minister to look into this issue – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: In view of the appeal, I am suspending her for this sitting. She can return tomorrow. (Applause) 

6.12
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank you, on behalf of my colleague, for having forgiven her and for being a leader who can punish and also forgive. Thank you very much.

My concern arises from point No. ix, district public accounts committee sittings. It is reported here that district PACs claim money without sitting. My concern is, if our accountability watchdogs in the districts are that corrupt, what should be our last resort? I recommend that we add to the committee’s recommendations that these officers should not only refund the money but they should be terminated from their positions. That is broad daylight theft. Refunding is easy; they may pick from the left hand side pocket to fill the pocket on the right hand side. So, they should be terminated to serve as a deterrent to other members who want to do the same. 

My other concern is from page 3 of the report, which is about the counsellors who have taken Pay-as-You-Earn money, nearly Shs 8 million. The recommendation says that the accounting officer should recover all the money, but we need an explanation from the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Finance. These counsellors receive a monthly retainer fee of Shs 100,000 and 30 per cent is deducted. Our tax threshold is Shs 230,000; why is the money for the counsellors deducted for Pay-as-You-Earn? If the accounting officer is compelled to recover this money, from whom and by what means will they do it?  (Member timed out).

6.14
REV. PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the members of this committee for this report. 

When you also read the report which was presented to us yesterday, you find that we are faced with a very big problem in our local governments. We urge the minister and Government to seriously look into these matters. These districts are supposed to deliver services to our communities but if we are performing at this rate, then it is very absurd. 

The problems we are looking at here cut across all districts - embezzlement, lack of funds and so forth. At times, you reach the district and they tell you, “The minister has rung us and has commanded this”. The accounting officer is also another big boss over there, giving instructions. That is why we have all these problems like money returning to the centre. 

Are we practicing decentralisation or we are still practising centralisation? My sister said rightly – is it decentralisation or are we just deceiving ourselves and the people? As we speak, we have many districts which have been created and some staff went with the new districts and they left the mother districts with no work done. In the department of works, for example, you find that those who could man graders and other such equipment – people with experience - were either laid off or they left and joined the new districts. So, there is a problem; most of the graders you sent recently do not have people to man them. They just handpick around. That is why we have breakdowns –(Member timed out_)

6.17
MS NAKATO KATUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to emphasise this point when the Minister of Local Government is around; I what to react to the issue of local governments losing land due to negligence in not acquiring titles. They do it deliberately to make it easy for them to steal that land. 

Madam Speaker, you remember we put the agricultural programmes on private individuals’ land because all the land had been taken up by sub county leaders, which is against the law. The moment the sub country chairpersons take up office, they first look for district land to take up. 

I want to inform you that I am in court with some venders trying to rescue a certain market which was taken by a revenue collector. This person had requested for a tender to develop the market but instead he connived with the then chairperson and took up ownership of the market, which they shared. So I recommend that the districts should rescue the pieces of land taken over by the leaders and individuals and later on acquire titles for that land. 

6.18
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few observations. I want to thank the committee for the tremendous work they did. 
My comment is on point vii, unvouched expenditure. There is Shs 4,704,862,000 but the vouchers which were availed were of Shs 1,000,000,000; what happened to the Shs 3,003,300,000? I do not see any recommendation. 

On page 171, Rakai District, there were doubtful deductions and allowances on the payroll. What happened? This is a lot of money – Shs 2.2 trillion! Was this fraud? Was the law followed? The recommendation here is that the query be dropped, but what happened? Were these ghost employees? Where did the money go?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I remember one time you said that Parliament should revisit the Public Finance and Accountability Act. Sometimes the money is released late and there are activities already committed in the districts. When this money goes to the centre, sometimes they say it does not go to the Treasury; it goes to individual people’s accounts. So it might be a trick to steal money. 

I propose that the Minister of Local Government checks his input. If this money is committed to do certain activities in the districts, if there is a delay in procurement, then this money should not first go to the centre –(Member timed out_)

6.21
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for this elaborate report. 

What I deduce from this report is that these recommendations will help us to achieve our social-economic transformation goals as a country. However, we have to look at the bottlenecks that have been identified in this report. Across the board, we find that in almost all districts there is need to carry out periodical training in internal financial control systems and accounting systems so that the training is continuously carried out for all the accounting officers and any other technical staff in the districts. With that we can have proper accounting systems for the monies that are disseminated to the districts. 

Secondly, it is also important that money remitted to districts should reach there on time. The districts have made their planning requirements and they need to be achieved within a certain timeframe. If the money comes late, the districts cannot fulfil that. I, therefore, urge the Minister for Finance in collaboration with the Minster for Local Government to ensure that money disseminated to districts reaches there on time. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to talk about performance bonds. Any contractor who wins a contract to do some work in the districts must sign a performance bond, stating in detail all the obligations that must be fulfilled by the contractor. On page 53 of this report, we read about the construction of Busedde Seed School; there was a timeframe within which this school should have been constructed, that is, from 6th April to 4th August but it was never realised. (Member timed out)     

 6.23
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like my colleagues, I want to thank the committee for finding time and producing this bulky and yet very comprehensive report.

I would like to draw your attention to point No. viii, the last paragraph; the committee noted that the most affected departments are health, education and finance. This is in relation to the capacity and competence of some local government staff. One of such positions is that of the district engineer. For one to become a district engineer they have to have at least served at principal level, and in most cases these are people who are already settled in their jobs somewhere. So, to attract and retain a district engineer is a nightmare in most of the districts like Amolatar, which is a hard-to-reach district. 

Ministry of Public Service should consider a waiver for some of these districts; otherwise, we shall continue having staff with low qualifications who use our districts as a stepping stone to seek career growth opportunities. 

Madam Speaker, most districts like Amolatar have exhausted possible avenues to enhance revenue. As a result, the 20 per cent locally generated revenue has proved to be inadequate for the district council work. The effect of this is that the district council cannot carry out its mandate as required by the Local Government Act. They cannot, for instance, meet frequently as required by the law. Recently, when we were approving the budget, we failed to get money for the office of the speaker. (Member timed out_)

6.25
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to express my appreciation to the committee for the comprehensive report. 

I will confine myself to two issues; one is about the non-utilisation of funds that are eventually returned to the centre. This point is not only about money lost or money returned to the centre but it also has political implications. This money would have otherwise been used to implement certain projects and activities, so the politicians at the district are being held responsible for not implementing these activities. This does not only affect the politicians at the district but even us; the local person does not know this kind of procedure and so eventually, we shall be the ones to pay by losing the vote.

I request, Madam Speaker, that this House requests or compels the front bench to make sure that we get this Public Finance and Accountability Act revised so that guidelines are changed and this money is retained by the relevant districts; otherwise, it is going to cost us a lot.

Two, I want to comment on the understaffing in districts. Madam Speaker, as you and honourable members know, Isingiro District is water stressed but we do not even have a water officer or an engineer. So, this money we appropriate here goes into the hands of people who cannot manage the money.   (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just realised that there seem to be no microphones on that row. I understand they are still repairing them, but it must be a fortnight now.    

6.28
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson and the committee members for their elaborate report. 

I want to re-echo the issue of the capacity of local government staff. This is a very big challenge, especially in new districts like the one I represent, Kiryandongo. The staffing levels are so low, even below 40 per cent, and this compromises and affects service delivery. We should stop deceiving ourselves saying that we are working hard or there is service delivery when these offices are vacant. I visited Buliisa District and in the whole district, there is no medical officer. Who will supervise the health centres III and II if they are there? 

I also want to talk about the issue of public land and lack of titles. Isn’t it possible for the ministry to help, especially the districts within the urban settings, to plant trees along their boundaries as they wait for these titles? –(Laughter)– Yes, because some of these are plots within the town and they are valued very highly. These are the plots the politicians are targeting. They are the ones which the politicians and other technical officers are distributing amongst themselves. I was just thinking aloud; if we could plant those trees as we process the land titles or even plant natural fences, this could help. Now we leave the land open with nothing, so it is prone to being distributed by –(Member timed out_)

6.30
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this work and for the commitment that they had to cover almost all the districts and come up with this report.

I want to restrict my submission to item No. vii, 1.6.4, incompletely vouched or unvouched expenditure. Madam Speaker, there is a need for this Parliament to have the Local Government Financial and Accounting Regulations revised. When we look at the type of audit that the office of the Auditor-General carries out, you realise that we need to get value-for-money audits other than looking at the papers. If one looked at a voucher, maybe accountability was made on the voucher but we need to make sure that the activities were carried out or reports were made such that at the end of the day, we ascertain the value for money.

I also want to comment on capacity building. Ministry of Local Government, together with the Ministry of Finance, has really tried to build capacity of local governments. However, we still need to give more money to the Ministry of Local Government so that our staff at the districts are really trained especially in voucher management and financial accountability. If you look at the stores and records in the districts, they leave a lot to be desired. (Member timed out_)

6.32
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. My first concern is from page 37 where it says that Ibanda District, in a desperate need to retain the doctors, went ahead to give them top-up allowance from their local revenue. The committee, in their recommendation, say that this CAO should recover all the funds. I find this contradictory to their observation in (b) where they note that it was a good strategy if the district could raise such local revenue but if it was from the Consolidated Fund, then this should be done legally by seeking permission. The council had given the CAO a go-ahead and therefore it is unfair to punish this CAO.

On page 52, the committee makes a commitment to make a follow-up. Let me read it verbatim: “The committee recommends that the query be dropped since it is a policy issue. The committee notes that this is a great concern and promised to follow it up with the concerned ministry”. I would like to hear from the committee when they intend to do this because saying that you will do it is one thing but actually doing it is another. What timeframe are you giving for this follow-up because we want to know whether you have actually followed up? I thank you.

3.34
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for the good report. 

I stand to give information on the deplorable state of Rakai Hospital. I want to inform this House that our NRM Government gave a very good ambulance to this hospital. This report has been long overdue, so I want to clear the air - we have a very good ambulance. However, a lot still needs to be done to equip Rakai Hospital and even the health centres III. They have no beds, no mattresses and some health centres II such as Kayonza Health Centre II get no drug consignments. 

Because there are no beds and mattresses in the health centres, this has attracted very many quack doctors who can afford to have mattresses in their clinics. Many patients have left these hospitals and health centres III, rendering even the ambulance useless because the ambulance has to pick the patients from the beds from within the wards not the compound. I thank you. 

3.36
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga East Constituency, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Rt. Hon. Speaker. Yesterday I did raise the issue about staffing and revenue. Today, I have heard many honourable members talking about districts having inadequate staff, some levels as low as 40 per cent, and lack of capacity. If you have the right person then you can build capacity but if you do not have the right person to begin with, then you have nobody whose capacity you can build.

The issue of inadequate revenue collection is affecting the performance of the districts. Some councils are unable to sit, unable to carry out monitoring activities and so forth. Given that these are fundamental issues, which come out in the report itself and even during the debate, I would like to request that the Minister of Local Government comes to Parliament and presents to Ugandans a plan for improving performance and addressing those fundamental issues of inadequate staffing and inadequate revenue collection in the local governments. Those are fundamental problems in local governments, which affect their performance, and if we continue with the current situation, even next year’s report will bring out the same issues. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.37
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work. 

I want to address myself to mainly three issues. One is the issue of locally raised revenue. In his 2011/2012 State of the Nation Address, the President promised this country that Shs 20 billion would be provided in the budget of the following year for councillors. So, I wonder what happened to this money, because the councillors are not getting the money and that is why they are failing to carry out their oversight duties. They are compromised by the CAOs whom they are supposed to supervise. This is a very serious issue because most districts which are far, such as Agago District, which is very poor, do not have enough resources to even raise revenue locally, out of which 20 per cent should be used to pay councillors.

Secondly, I am so worried about the failure to comply with requisite regulations of accounting. I wonder what the minister can say about this. What kind of accounting officers do you employ, who –(Member timed out)

6.39
MS FLORENCE IBI (FDC, Woman representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, and I thank the committee for the report. 

I go to page 15 of the report. Honourable minister, I do not know what you are going to do to protect the vulnerable accounts. When most of the districts face hardships, they resort to natural resources, women and youth, functional adult literacy; what measures are in place to guard against abuse of such accounts? I think you better take this issue up.

The other issue is on health centres. We have interfaced with the Ministry of Health a number of times; do you know what these people say? They say that health centres III and II are under the local government. As you go to the east, immediately you branch off from Nakalama in Iganga District and you go towards Kaberamaido District up to Abalang trading centre, all the health centres along the road are closed over the weekend. This explains why we have many more women dying during child birth. What is going to be done between the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Health? I think there is a very big problem here.

The other issue I would like to raise is from page 15, regarding an Arua officer who lost two motorcycles and they were stolen when they were under his custody. The committee gave a very weak recommendation, that the CID should follow up. I do not think this is strong enough. There is a lot of abuse at the local government level, so this officer should be held accountable and they should be made to replace such assets under their custody.

Lastly, on page 10 there is this issue of Apac District and the local revenue shortfall. You can imagine, they failed to raise Shs 152 million in a financial year because the district was under quarantine –(Member timed out_)
  
6.41
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Rt. Hon. Speaker. In a special way, I want to thank you for pardoning my neighbour, hon. Kadogo – (Laughter). She happens to be my neighbour and the same time my aunt, but she is also your neighbour. (Laughter)

My comment is from page 75, and that is on Kamuli District Local Government. Kamuli District is next to my district, Luuka. Although Luuka is not among the districts mentioned in this report, I have a few things to note.  

First, there is the issue of authorising Kamuli to retain the conditional grant amounting to Shs 359 million. There was a time when Luuka District wanted to recruit staff but it was coming to the end of the financial year and when we tried to write requesting them to allow us to retain the money so that we can recruit, we were not given the authority. So, I want to find out from the Minister for Local Government what criteria is used in authorising some districts to retain money and denying some the chance to have the money and use it for the purpose for which it was sent?

The second issue I would like to comment on is PAYE. The PAYE issue was highlighted here in the report as a non-deduction. I want to give some clear explanation on this. This was not a non-deduction; it was intentionally done. It is a culture in local governments. At times accounting officers do this intentionally and they share out the money with some unscrupulous local leaders. At times there used to be connivance between the accounting officers and some URA staff – (Member timed out_)

6.44
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on the audit on Kabale District. When the audit for Kabale as a district was done, I did not see where Kabale Municipality came in; the whole thing does not show anywhere in Kabale Municipality. I wrote a small chit to the chairman asking him about this and he said that municipalities may be handled later.  

However, I am concerned about the way procurements are being done in the whole district. At first I thought it was Kabale Municipality but now it is Kabale as a whole. There is a company called B&E Enterprises, which has been underpaying divisions in Kabale in as far as tax collections are concerned. They entered into an agreement to collect taxes on behalf of the division. Unfortunately, whenever the municipality is divided into divisions, they end up being underpaid by Shs 3.5 million every month.  The Ministry of Local Government knows about these procurement queries in Kabale; they have been coming to him.
  
Rt. Hon. Speaker, I would like you to permit me at one time to give a full report on Kabale as a municipality because things are going astray in as far as the local government accounts are concerned. Councillors believe that the auditors who go there are always bribed because they never come to ask them for anything. So, the auditors should also be questioned; why is it that whenever they get there, they do not go to the councillors to ask them what to do and – (Member timed out).

6.46
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I am only going to supply additional information to the minister and hopefully, they will take it up.

First, Madam Speaker, we have created many local governments; new districts have come on board and as you have heard from the report, they do not have the capacity to perform as district local governments. So honourable minister, it is important that you engage the whole country to review the creation of new districts and also the newly created districts that have proved to be unviable.

Secondly, local governments have also gone ahead to create new lower local governments, that is, sub counties. These sub counties are in existence but in terms of facilitation, manpower and capacity they are not doing anything and yet the communities really need the lower local governments.

Thirdly, many local governments have been returning money and this has got negative effects on the recurring financial year. In Arua, I was told that every time they return money, it is reflected in the next budget as a shortfall, so they are given less money because of that money that was returned to the centre.

Honourable members, these are three key areas which we should look into and work out; otherwise, districts are rolling over projects year in, year out and yet these projects are very vital for the development of these communities. Thank you.

6.48
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the chair and the committee for the nice report. Like I said yesterday, from the reports we received today and those we received yesterday, you will see that although they are for some time back, they still deal with the realities that are in our districts currently.

I will concentrate my contribution on the issue of the grabbing of land at the lower local governments. Madam Speaker, I do not know where the problem comes from. We have surveyors at the districts but most of the district land is not surveyed. This is the reason why the land does not have titles. We are getting into a scenario where each leader who comes on board decides to find a portion of land to take along with him or her. A case in point is what happened here in Kampala City Council. Ssebagala super-glued on council property and gave it to himself as a sitting tenant; congratulations to Jennifer Musisi who saved the situation. 
 
Tenderers in Owino Market super-glued on the market and termed it as their own and they called themselves the sitting tenants. Civil servants who are given government houses superglue on the houses and they do not leave. Chief Administrative Officers who are given council property superglue on the property and they do not leave. We are yet to see a situation, Madam Speaker, where since you are the presiding tenant of this property, you also say, “I am not leaving this property because I am the sitting tenant of Parliament.” (Laughter)

I want to know from the Minister the policy of his ministry is regarding –(Interruption)

MS KYABANGI: The information that I wanted to give is that even when they die, their relatives still claim the property.

MRS KIIZA: I would be happy, as we conclude debate on this motion, for the minister to come up with a directive to the lower local governments that –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MRS KIIZA: I would be happy if there is a directive from the ministry that all local governments should have their land surveyed and be assisted by the Minister for Lands to get titles so that this practice of portioning our land can stop forthwith. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Before the minister comes in, on the issue of land I want to propose, honourable minister, that we should budget for money and pay for these title deeds as a policy. I remember when we were still with Buyende, we were given an offer for the cattle market; it took us three years to get a title deed. Why? It was because there was no money in the sub county to pay for the process. This is government land; if we value it then we should budget for the money, go through the process and make sure the title deeds are got. 

6.52
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the chairman and the members of the committee for this effort and time they have put in coming up with this objective assessment and further scrutiny of the Auditor-General’s report on the local government accounts.

I cannot respond to every recommendation that the committee has made in the report because as you realise, Madam Speaker, it is a big report. However, I can pledge to go back to the ministry and look at the report, page by page and paragraph by paragraph, and study it seriously so that we can implement it. It is a well-studied report. It arises from the findings of the Auditor-General and there is no reason why the ministry and government should not follow it up.

There are policy recommendations, which will require Cabinet scrutiny. There are administrative recommendations, which the Permanent Secretary will work on. There are also issues of criminal nature, which should be referred to the CID and DPP for further handling.

Honourable members raised some issues on the Floor during the discussions. I would like to attempt to briefly respond to those issues. There was an issue on procurements in local governments. I would like to say that these delays are not entirely because of bribery alone. Yes, I know bribery influences procurements but there are other factors, which affect procurement. The system of sending money on a quarterly basis, for example, also affects procurements because contracts are procured in bulk but money is disbursed quarterly. So, sometimes, it complicates the implementation of the contract. However, this is something that we could sit and review with the Ministry of Finance and see how we can resolve that problem of delays.

It is true that lack of capacity in local governments is still a challenge. We had thought that by now we would have pushed the capacity of staffing in local governments to about 65 per cent. Most of them are operating at about 42 per cent on average. There are those operating at even lower and those operating at slightly higher than 40 per cent. Our target was to push them to about 65 per cent but because of the tight resource envelop that we are still facing, this has not been possible. So, we are trying to rationalise and see how best we can be efficient with the limited staff that we have and when funds are available, more staff will definitely be recruited.

The pledge of Shs 20 billion could not be achieved because of the realities we are facing now. We have explained this to Parliament. There are set up priorities and I have explained these priorities to the councillors. I have also explained to the councillors our inability as Government to pay the Shs 20 billion. As far as I know, the councillors understood the problem – (Interjections) – Yes, I met them through their forum called ULGA and explained to them that this financial year we will not be able to increase their allowances just like we have not been able to increase the salaries of teachers. 

I told them that we will consider availing this Shs 20 billion in the subsequent financial year and they understood and agreed to support us on the priorities of investing more money in energy, roads, education and other priorities. That has been agreed on with the councillors.

On the sale of land in the districts, I want to say that I am as concerned as honourable members are. I have issued a circular before, prohibiting district authorities from disposing of government land. I have evidence of many circulars which I have issued. We have even designed a statutory instrument, which prohibits local governments from disposing of land without clearance from the Ministry of Local Government and concurrent clearance from the Attorney-General but some of them have breached these guidelines. I must say – (Interruptions) – I am sorry, the Speaker has allowed me to continue –

THE SPEAKER: Let him first complete the response.

MR MWESIGE: Some of them have defied this but now that we have the support of Parliament as well, we will reinforce it. 

I would like to thank the Speaker for advising us further to make sure we allocate money for local governments to secure land titles. Part of the problem is that the lands are surveyed but the district land boards abuse these lands by allocating them to individuals. So, local governments have remained with limited or no land at all.

Madam Speaker, I do not think recentralization of some departments like the one that the honourable member proposed, CFOs, will reduce corruption in local governments because central government departments are not immune to corruption either. I think we need to adopt more measures, like what the Local Governments Accounts Committee has done in exposing all the problems in local governments, other than talking about recentralization. The Auditor-General also reports on central government departments and I do not think they have been completely clean.

On the return of unspent balances, I must report to this House that we have finally resolved this problem with the Ministry of Finance. We have agreed that effective this financial year, local governments will not return unspent balances, which are committed, until the 30th of October of every subsequent financial year. So, I am happy that has been resolved.

I will get a report from the Local Government Finance Commission so that I can be able update Parliament on the performance of revenues in local governments. I am not able now because this is a technical function, which the Local Government Finance Commission deals with on a routine basis.

Honourable members have talked about reviewing the creation of local governments. That is exactly what Government is doing, and that is why we recently came up with a moratorium on the creation of new local governments, especially districts. The minister has also engaged consultants to rationalize the entire decentralization process, to look at the local government structure in a more rational way - How many local governments can we afford? Which services can local governments share to minimize wastage and reduce on the costs of running local governments? Can districts in one region, for example, share the services of a public accounts committee? Can’t they share the services of a regional service commission? This would help to enhance decentralisation but also reduce the cost of running decentralisation. 

Madam Speaker, those are the issues that I managed to pick from the honourable members. I would like to promise that as a ministry, we are going to study this report and do our best to have it implemented because we think it is a good report. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We shall expect a Treasury Memorandum when you have finished considering the report. 

7.01
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Jack Sabiiti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister has touched on most issues. The committee did not come up with this recommendation but we had discussed it - we had thought that, like in other countries, budgeting for the Executive, Parliament, the Judiciary and local governments should take the form of percentages, so that each unit knows how much money they should get. Now local governments get just 16 per cent and it varies. If we came up with a law to say that in the national budget, Parliament should get two per cent, local governments seven per cent depending on how the policy is worked out, it would be better for the country. South Africa did it and even Kenya and some other countries have done it.

Madam Speaker, there is a tendency for district service commissions not to be in place in many districts. The reason is that the CAOs and the district chairpersons always want to take charge, so they do not encourage the creation of district service commissions. This allows them to influence the councils not to take certain decisions. 

On capacity, I want to say that tribalism has taken route in many districts. That is why capacity is actually wanting. Every district wants to employ their own people, and this is a dangerous thing. Unless we move look for competent people to go to these districts, the finances are going to be wasted in those districts. 

On budgets for councillors, if the first recommendation of giving a certain percentage to the districts is taken up as policy, this will be taken care of. 

On land, Madam Speaker, the Constitution is very clear on public land; you cannot take away public land. If you read that particular Article, I think it is Article 241, it is very clear. You cannot take public land. You can change user either by leasing the land or letting one department take over land from another, but you cannot take it completely. When these people take it, it becomes personal land forever and this is dangerous for the local government. 

Again on land, now that Buganda has got ebyaffe, we see a big problem in most of these districts. Unless the minister comes out with a policy, there is going to be a big conflict between the districts and the central Government. 

On the district public accounts committees, we feel that there should be an amendment in the law. The membership of the district PACs is five, and the chairman recommends to the council. Unless this particular area is revisited, the public accounts committees cannot do their work in the district. Most of them seem to be part of the executive and they cannot oversee what goes on in the districts. 

Madam Speaker, the Treasury Memorandum will come and you are expected, as the Executive, to respond to most of these issues that we have brought up. So, the Treasury Memorandum will address most of the issues raised by the members and we will report back to the House. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work done today. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.07 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26 September 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

