


Tuesday, 19 September 2017 

Parliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and I see all of you looking very fit. I think there was a call to the gym or something like that – we should all do the gym (Laughter) – but I do not think that we need the gym to do debate. We need gym to stay healthy. I also encourage you to hit the gym but not for the purposes of debate. Hit the gym for purposes of just staying healthy and physically fit. As for debate, just sharpen your argument. You do not need to go to the gym to sharpen your argument. Do you need to go there?

Honourable members, I received a notice yesterday from a Member requesting for a motion to be presented to this House. The motion was to move this Parliament to make some recommendations to Government. I talked to the Speaker yesterday morning about it. It was the only notice of motion I had received yesterday. Later in the day, I received a copy of the motion itself, signed by three Members and I also discussed it with the Speaker. 

Today morning, I received another notice of motion from another Member of this House, also seeking the authority of this House for some prayers that they intend the motion to seek. I have two notices of motion; a copy of a motion for one notice and the other one, I do not have a motion. I thought that the House should know that I have two notices of motions. However, none of these motions will come to this Floor until we have a discussion with the Speaker on Thursday morning about the two notices of motion. If it requires the Business Committee to sit and determine what happens, it will sit. But if by the authority of the Speaker and in the meeting that we will hold, if it is necessary that we schedule this for this business, then that business will be scheduled for Thursday afternoon; whichever way it will be decided.

In the event that the meeting of Thursday morning does not take place, none of these motions will come up on Thursday. Okay? So, honourable members there should be no pressure on anybody. These are matters we have discussed before. These are matters – if any of them should come, we shall have opportunity to discuss them, in a fair and open way. We will then take a decision as a House. I do not think that there should be any anxiety. 

I went to launch the report of the Committee on Equal Opportunities and the person who was introducing me said that the Speaker has to leave quickly because the House is going to be hot this afternoon. He is in a rush. I had to explain to the people there and said that in the House, I may ask the people there to turn down the AC because it is usually very cold. It is not that hot in the House and I presume and even this afternoon, it is not going to be that hot. The Speaker is never in a rush, they only have schedules that they must comply with. We, therefore, should stop exciting members of the public. There is nothing that this House cannot handle. There is nothing that you, honourable members, cannot discuss. There should be no reason why we are exciting the members of the public and causing tension. 

I believe this House has the competence to handle any matter for the good order of the country, as under Article 79 of the Constitution. We, therefore, need to deal with business that is before us. Whatever is not before us, it is not before us and whatever is before us, we will handle. For instance, today, I ran short of business and that is why I only have two items on the Order Paper. I cross-checked and I found out that the only businesses that were ready were two; a ministerial statement and a report of a committee. That is what we are discussing today and when we are done, we will adjourn and go home and wait for the next day.

2.14
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am aware that the Constitution of Uganda, Chapter 4 deals with issues regarding the protection of fundamental human rights – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, what is the urgent matter you are raising? 

MR OGUZU: Yes, it is an urgent matter and I really want to bring it up. The urgent matter is that a boy just died in police custody in my constituency. This youth was detained on Tuesday last week. He was detained for more than five days until he died on Sunday. While we made an effort to understand the circumstances under which he died, nobody is able to provide satisfactory answers. 

I know that the right to life is enshrined in the Constitution and I am here to make the following pleas; 

    i) We need Government to tell us under what conditions they now detain people in Uganda and I would also like to know if those conditions under which people were detained qualify per the international standards.
    ii) We would like Government to compensate the family of this gentleman because they detained him beyond the provisions in the law.
    iii) I am making an appeal to the Committee on Human Rights of this Parliament to investigate the circumstances under which this young man died under police custody. Thank you.

2.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to pass on our deepest condolences to the family of the boy – you called him a boy. You did not mention his name and that is why I am referring to him as a boy. 

Secondly, it is just proper that Government quickly finds out the circumstances regarding the arrest of this person and find out who of the police officers was on the wrong side of the law because the law is very clear. 

Therefore, I am going to task the Minister of Internal Affairs whom I am not seeing in the House right now, to get in touch with people on the ground and find out the circumstances around this case. As the law stipulates, one has the mandate to seek for damages, because in your plea, honourable colleague, you requested for compensation and this is in order if it is found out that there was ignorance of the procedure and laws, which caused the death of one of the people of Uganda. Government will have to compensate because this is what the law says.

However, this will be upon quick investigation into the case. I would like to commit my minister to bringing a report probably on Tuesday next week because he has to get in touch with the people on the ground. I beg to submit.

2.18
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedure I am raising is about the unusual heavy deployment around Parliament. We are actually scared –(Interjections)- when you are not on my side, you can take things for granted but for us - there is heavy deployment; some of our colleagues have been arrested like hon. Kasibante. Yesterday, hon. Allan Ssewanyana was arrested and he slept in the cells.

There are other Members - hon. Muhammad Nsereko is also in Kibuli right now. He was summoned; we do not know whether he will leave that place or whether he will be arrested.

Mr Speaker, I am happy that after your communication, my heart relaxed because that is why some of us are seeing what is happening. However, now that you have communicated, let us wait. However, we want to hear from the Government why our colleagues are in cells. Thank you. 

MS AMODING: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am aware that as this House is sitting, the practice has been that the public that we represent follows the proceedings on television. We are told that all TV stations have all been disconnected especially the one that relays this debate out there. Can it be explained? Is it procedurally right that we are proceeding without the cover of the public that we represent? Is there something that we are going to debate here today that is not for the public to know?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We have a law that governs the way we do business here and a law that protects the immunity and privileges of Members; that is why in the business that we transact here, you have protection. You cannot be prosecuted for what you have said. You cannot suffer civil liabilities because of what you have said in the House or its committees.

However, those immunities do not extend to things that happen far away from the precincts of Parliament. Therefore, if something happens outside the precincts of Parliament, these rules do not apply; the immunities and privileges that are here do not apply.

There are laws for arrest; three circumstances; somebody has committed an offence, somebody is committing an offense or somebody is about to commit an offense. Under those three circumstances, any person can be arrested. I do not know the circumstances under which the arrests were conducted. Therefore, I am unable to say anything about them. However, anybody can be arrested under those circumstances.

On the issue of notices or summons that are issued, it is not the first time where police through the Speaker’s Office has notified Members that they are required to make some clarification on some issues that probably they have knowledge of. Those notices are sent through the Speaker’s Office and forwarded to the Members concerned. I think in the case of hon. Nsereko and two other Members, that is what happened. I think they went and whatever they are doing with the police, I am not aware but they needed to give some information to the police.

On the issue of deployment, I think we should ask ourselves first and challenge ourselves - what have we as Members of Parliament been doing in the last few days on television and radio stations? (Applause) I have watched a clip on social media where an honourable member of this House is calling for war in this House and they are saying there is going to be war like it has never been seen in this House.

Now when you make those public statements like that, you make this House become a possible scene of crime. (Laughter) When you do that, how do you stop the police from deploying? You tell me how? As Speaker, I do not even have to call the IGP and say, I have a problem in Parliament, they have their own ways, they watch television and they hear us.

Therefore, if you are threatening violence and at the same time you expect the police to stay very far away from where you are proposing to execute your violence; from that scene where you have publicly declared will be the scene where you will execute violence; but at the same time you are saying the police should be very away from there, really honourable members, I think let us do things properly.

If we do things properly, the way we are supposed to do them, nobody will be around. People are just doing their jobs. I also passed there the other day and I saw some vehicles which never used to park in those places but I saw them there. We caused them to be there. Therefore, let us not come here and again start passing blame on other people when we know exactly what has been happening in the last few days.

2.34
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. As we sit in this House, in the New Vision of yesterday, 18th September 2017, there was a headline saying “Land Bill Fiasco” and they said there is a new rebel group, which has emerged in the north, specifically in Acholi and Lango. We hail from the north and we represent those people. When we see or hear of such things and also aware of the situation we underwent, our people live in fear. Who are this new rebel group in the north? Where are they situated? What is their mission in the north? 

Is it procedurally right for us to ignore this? It is my humble opinion that the Minister of Internal Affairs or Minister of Security clarifies this new rebel group to this House so that wherever they are, they should be away from the north. That is my concern, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if it was a statement from the Government, you would ask them to explain. However, this is a newspaper article. Therefore, what I would have loved to hear from you was if you said there is this article in the newspaper and we have not had any response from the Government about it. Is it true? We would have stopped it there.

MS JOY ATIM: Mr Speaker, you have made it. We would like a clarification from Government. Is it true we have a new rebel group in the north? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it true?

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (COL. ENGOLA OKELLO): Mr Speaker, the honourable Member of Parliament has stated that it is from the newspaper but for us in Defence we are not yet aware of what she is talking of. However, we have to send intelligence on the ground to find out if it is there. We would also need Members of Parliament from those areas to crosscheck and help the intelligence in what to do. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On many occasions when issues are in the newspapers, we do not take them for granted. On an issue of security, the minister has to be serious and should not tell us it is just mere newspaper information. Above all, he is saying the honourable members should be there as security. We are not part of it. We have the Minister of Security, the police and the army. 
Is he in order to say it is the duty of the Members of Parliament when actually he is in charge of that docket? We need an answer as to whether we have a new rebel group in the north.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the minister has said they are not aware but they are going to crosscheck and he asked Members of Parliament from that area also to help them with the information if they have it. That is what he said I thought. Therefore, is he out of order to say that? The answer is no.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF BLOOD COLLECTION AND CAUSES OF BLOOD SHORTAGE IN THE COUNTRY

2.39
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, the ministers of Health are not present in the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, can you call them to come and deal with this?

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMITTEE ON THE 18TH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, I hope you have extracted a summary of the report so that you do not read the whole report. It is big.

2.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Mr Speaker, I rise in accordance with our Rules of Procedure to present to this House the report of the Human Rights Committee on the 18th Annual Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission covering the year 2015. I beg to lay the report before I read it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture the full text of the report.

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, I would also like to lay the minutes of the committee as they deliberated on this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture the minutes of the committee.

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, in accordance with Article 52(2) of the Constitution, the Uganda Human Rights Commission has to publish periodic reports on its findings and submit annual reports on the state of human rights and freedoms in the country. The 18th Uganda Human Rights Commission annual report, 2015 was laid before the House on 10 August 2016 and referred to the Committee on Human Rights for scrutiny in accordance with 174(c) of the Rules of Procedure.

The committee has considered the report and now wishes to report.

The committee examined Government departments as listed on page 5 and the Government departments gave updates of their performance on the recommendations of the Uganda Human Rights Commission.

Mr Speaker, the Uganda Human Rights Commission inspected 896 detention facilities of which 173 were prisons, 205 police stations and 509 police posts, four military detention facilities and five remand homes.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission reported marked positive development as well as both structural and administrative challenges which included cases of long arbitrary detention, children detained with imprisoned primary caregivers and inappropriate accommodation and sanitation facilities.

The commission noted human rights concerns such as detainees pending ministerial orders, torture and solitary confinement, juveniles detained with adult offenders, children detained with caregivers and inadequate staff accommodation.

Emerging human rights challenges

Uganda Human Rights Commission noted positive development as it has been mentioned. However, there were human rights concerns including discrimination of persons living with albinism, exploitation, harassment and abuse of domestic and migrant workers, inadequate measures to prevent, mitigate and remedy human rights abuses by businesses and the inadequate protection of digital rights.

Preparedness for the 2016 General Election
The commission carried out civic education, monitored detention facilities to locate missing persons reportedly detained on account of election related incidents and put into place a special complaints handling mechanism to specifically document and handle election related complaints.

Despite the peaceful nomination of presidential candidates and progress made in updating the Voters’ Register, the commission noted some challenges and these included; inadequate voter and civic education, lack of or inadequate internal democratic processes in political parties; inadequate electoral reforms; and subjective interpretation and selective application of the law and election guidelines.

Government adherence to the recommendations of the commission
The commission reported that in 2015, there was 8.33 per cent full compliance, 68.33 per cent partial compliance and 23.33 per cent non-compliance with its recommendations. 

The commission also reported Government compliance with the Universal Periodic Review recommendations in addition to the status of Treaty Body reporting to the various human rights mechanisms like the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the African Commission on Human and Peoples Rights.	

A data base and search engine have also been developed so as to fast track the implementation of recommendations.

The commission faced the following challenges;

    1. Irregular attendance of the Commission Tribunal by state attorneys leading to frequent adjournments or outright non-appearance, leading to case backlog at Commission Tribunal.
    2. Inadequate cooperation from some state agencies and institutions that were indicated as respondents to enable the Uganda Human Rights Commission effectively implement its investigations mandate and fight impunity in the country;
    3. Delayed payment of tribunal awards and settlement of matters adjourned for amicable settlement; 
    4. Absence of a witness protection law, national legal aid scheme and inadequate resources.
    5. Poor attitude of some community members towards attending public meetings which affects the commission’s mobilisation efforts. 

The committee noted that the commission was able to undertake its mandate within the financial resources at their disposal. 

However, the committee recommends that Government adequately funds the commission to enable it undertake its civic education mandate to raise the level of human rights awareness and reduce dependency on external financial support as it comes along with its own challenges and is not reliable.

The committee also recommended that Government of Uganda should comply with the provisions of the Paris Principles, which call upon governments to adequately fund human rights commissions so as to enable them perform their mandate independently.

Specific recommendations on the specific government departments beginning with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and we begin with condition in places of detention.

The continued detention of juveniles with adults at Police stations and in prisons remained an outstanding concern for the commission. In 2015, the commission found 42 juveniles incarcerated with adults compared to 26 in 2014.

The commission recommended that juveniles should be separated from adult offenders.   

The committee observed that this has been a constant concern in the commission reports and little has been done. 

The committee also observed from its oversight visits to prisons and police stations countrywide that, many police stations lack reception centres for juveniles hence children in conflict with the law are kept in the same cells as adults. Such incarceration of children with adults makes them vulnerable to physical and sexual violence and other forms of inhuman and exploitative treatment.

The Committee recommends that;

    1) The Government should, as a matter of urgency, provide sufficient resources in the next financial year to the police force to establish reception centres for juveniles country wide.
    2) That Uganda Police Force should ensure that officers always separate juvenile offenders from adults and officers found holding juveniles and adults together should be held personally liable.
    3) Government should adequately equip and facilitate rehabilitation centres and remand homes under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

On torture and solitary confinement

The commission recommended that the Uganda Prisons Service together with the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces should enforce the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act (2012) in order to hold perpetrators of torture in places of detention accountable.

The committee observed that despite the coming into effect of the law, cases of torture by the Uganda Police Force are still rampant, an indication that intervention by the Uganda Police Force of training of officers is not achieving its desired results of eradication of torture in the Police cells.

This is strengthened by the fact that at the time of writing this report, issues of torture were dominating the media and were also being raised on the Floor leading to the Speaker directing the committee to investigate these allegations. 

The committee submitted a report on its findings and among the cases of torture was that of Mr Geoffrey Byamukama, the LC III Chairperson of Kamwenge Town Council, as we all know.

During the same visit, the committee, did not interface or come across any tortured suspects. However, medical records at the health centre indicated that there could have been cases of torture.

The committee recommends that;

    1. The Uganda Police Force enforces disciplinary measures against errant officers for violations of the Police Code of Conduct and the Anti-Torture Act.
    2. Government should commit resources to training of the Police and other security agencies on internationally recognised methods of investigation that are free from torture and on handling people professionally and in a humane manner. 
    3. Individuals found to be in violation of human rights of detainees should be investigated and held personally liable.

Phasing out the bucket system

The commission reported that efforts were still underway in phasing out the bucket system. Of the 896 detention facilities visited 61 had completely phased it out, 165 had eliminated day bucket use system while 107 facilities were still using the bucket system during day and night.

The committee recommends that the bucket system should be completely phased out in all places of detention. 

The committee observed that the issue of the bucket system has been recurring in every Uganda Human Rights Commission report and deserves immediate intervention.

The committee further observed from its visits to detention centres in the West Nile region and South Western Uganda, that there was overcrowding in places of detention yet sanitation facilities in many prisons are inadequate.  

In Adjumani prison, it was established that although the wards had waterborne toilets, these were not functioning and the women’s wing and had been blocked. They could not even collect water to flush them.

The committee reiterates its recommendations that;

    1. Appropriate measures should be taken to provide adequate water and waterborne sanitation facilities to detention centres and the bucket system should be completely eliminated in all detention centres.
    2. The Ministry of Internal Affairs should provide to Parliament a complete report with statistics of detention centres where the bucket system has been completely eliminated and those still pending.

The Right to work 

The Uganda Human Rights Commission reported that the rights of detainees to access meaningful remunerated work remained abused in 2015. 

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that the Uganda Prisons Service should improve on the daily wage given to inmates for hiring out of their labour services.

The committee observed from its visits to detention centres in the West Nile and South Western regions, that inmates are subjected to hard compulsory labour beyond the minimum six working hours a day, as well as exploitation by officials. 
In addition, they are hired to work on Government and private farms without any pay while prison officers are profiting illegally from the work done by the detainees. 

It is also alleged that prisons officers swindle the profits from the sweat of the inmates. 

The committee further observed that many of these inmates have not been convicted, but are on remand and are locked up awaiting hearing of their cases, sometimes even for years. 

The committee recommends that;

    1. Government should examine the law and determine possible areas for amendments to improve on the inmates’ remuneration.

    2. All work done by the prisoners – Mr Speaker, we are told that this amount is fixed and that they are supposed to get Shs 500 and it is in the law. 

Therefore, we would like the law to be amended. All work done by the prisoners and proceeds should be properly recorded and commensurate remuneration given.

    3. Government should prosecute prison officials profiting from or abusing prisoners, ensure adequate medical treatment and cut down on the length of time suspects spend in pre-trial detention.

Emerging human rights concerns

Recommendations on the plight of domestic workers

The commission reported the rising number of complaints about abuses of the rights of domestic workers.

The commission recommended that the Uganda Police Force should put into place measures to ensure effective protection of the rights of migrant domestic workers, particularly raising employers’ awareness of their obligations, instituting sanctions in case of violation, securing access of domestic workers to complaint mechanisms and enhance their ability to pursue legal, civil and criminal remedies.

The police submitted that through its Prevention of Trafficking of Persons Unit at the Ministry of Internal Affairs, pre-departure briefs are conducted for workers leaving the country. 

However, challenges arise due to the different categories of migrants who include self-job seekers, persons recruited by unlicensed companies. Only those from the licensed companies get proper pre-departure briefing.

The committee noted the explanation made and observed as follows;

    1. Various media reports indicated that domestic workers are exposed to human rights violation brought about by absence of enforcement mechanisms to ensure respect and protection of the rights of domestic workers. 
    2. Recruitment agencies promise domestic workers decent working conditions abroad and many sign contracts anticipating good salaries and or wages before leaving their home countries. 

However, upon arrival, sometimes travel documents are taken away from them and many find that they have to work for less pay than promised and under worse conditions.

    3. Several workers as reported in the media described working conditions that amount to forced labour, withholding their salaries, denial of meals, sexual exploitation, threats to life, falsely accusing them of crimes when they sought to leave, or beating them for trying to escape the abuse.

The committee recommends that;

    1. Government should initiate a Bill on Externalisation of Labour as a matter of urgency and ensure signing of bilateral agreements with the receiving countries.
    2.  Government strengthens legal aid services and ensures that the aggrieved domestic workers access timely justice;
    3. Government ensures massive sensitisation of workers on the work ethics, rights and responsibilities of domestic workers and the employer in general.
    4. Government strengthens its reporting mechanisms so that abused migrant workers can easily report cases of abuse. In addition, the Police should liaise with Interpol to intensify investigations on cases of abuse of migrant workers.
 
Complaints management

The commission reported that the Uganda Police Force remained the top respondent in 2015, with 385 (50.65 per cent) out of 760 respondents. 

The commission recommended that:
State agencies and institutions implicated as respondents should fully cooperate with commission to enable it implement its mandate effectively.

The committee observed that the Uganda Police Force has consistently been a top respondent because of the decaying relationship between the Police and the public. This is attributed to the fact that most complaints arise out of violations of the right to personal liberty (detention beyond 48 hours), torture while extracting information from suspects and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. 

The committee also observed that there are so many people who are bundled up and cases trumped on them, especially regarding issues of land. 

The committee reiterates its recommendation that;

    1. The Uganda Police Force should ensure individuals found to be in violation of human rights of detainees, should be investigated and held personally liable.
    2. The Uganda Police Force carries out public education and sensitisation on their different roles, in order to change the attitude of the public towards the Police.

The Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces

Recommendations on vulnerable persons

The commission reported dilapidated structures and homes for staff and combatants that needed renovation. 

It further recommended that the UPDF should allocate sufficient funds to the Chieftaincy of Mubende Rehabilitation Centre to enable it effectively carry out its mandate, especially rehabilitating the centre so as to reduce on the congestion, as well as repairing dilapidated structures.

The Chief of Defence Forces explained that the Chieftaincy is provided with a budget line for food allocation and other administrative facilitation enabling the unit to be run like any other unit of the UPDF. 

The Chieftaincy, however, faces a challenge of inadequate funds to run the projects.

The committee noted the efforts of the Chieftaincy in rehabilitating ex-combatants with physical disabilities and recommends that Government adequately funds the UPDF to enable it adequately cater for the needs of ex-officers with physical disabilities.

Equal Opportunities Commission:

The human rights situation of ethnic minorities

The commission recommended that the Equal Opportunities Commission Should build the capacity of the public servants to ensure protection of the identity of ethnic minority groups and refrain from designing laws and policies that have the purpose or effect of assimilating minorities into the culture of dominant ethnicities.

The committee noted that the mandate of Equal Opportunities Commission is quite wide and appreciated its endeavours in curbing down discrimination and inequalities against any individual or group of persons on different grounds such as sex, age, race and colour among others. 

However, the committee observes that;
    (i) The commission is unable to fully perform its mandate due to inadequate funding.
    (ii) Discrimination against albinos is still a major factor that needs to be addressed. From the time of birth, most children with albinism, particularly those impoverished and in rural areas, face discrimination from their own families hence exposed to inhumane treatment from an early age, which has lasting effects. 
    (iii) Persons With Disability including persons living with albinism who are given the opportunity to go to school face additional forms of discrimination and are prevented from equal access to education, either directly or indirectly, from both peers and teachers. 

The lack of sensitisation about the condition of albinism and the prevalence of myths and misconceptions creates an environment of fear and discrimination. 

Physical accessibility on the side of the People with Disabilities is still a major challenge that needs to be addressed, especially in the justice centres like the Police and the courts of law.

The committee recommends that:
    1. Government adequately funds the Equal Opportunities Commission to enable it effectively perform its mandate.
    2. That the Equal Opportunities Commission should, when undertaking its monitoring role, ensure the provisions of the People with Disabilities Act especially, Part IV of the Act which provides for accessibility is adhered to. 

This shall enhance accessibility to the premises by People with Disabilities through establishment of ramps or elevators, safe and well-dimensioned staircases among others.
    3. There is need for pubic sensitisation to change the attitude of the public towards albinism and People with Disabilities to promote equal opportunities for them.

The Uganda Law Reform Commission 

Assessment of conditions in detention facilities

Detention over civil debts

The commission reported 30 cases of civil debtors in some of the detention facilities inspected including Tororo Farm and others. 

The Uganda Law Reform Commission (ULRC) submitted that it had made progress in addressing the issue of continued detention of civil debtors. They undertook a study. 

However, the committee was informed that the Civil Procedure Rules S1 (subsidiary instrument) 71-1 emphasised imprisonment of people who refuse to pay but not those who are unable to pay. 

The committee observed that the Uganda Law Reform Commission study has been on-going for quite too long and yet there are many ordinary Ugandans languishing in prison for failure to pay debts. 

The committee further observes that Article 11 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) clearly stipulates that, “No one shall be imprisoned merely on the grounds of inability to fulfil a contractual obligation.” 

The committee noted the argument that the Civil Procedure Rules emphasised imprisonment of people who refuse to pay and not those who are unable to. 

The committee recommends that the relevant laws are fast tracked and handled expeditiously to ensure that our laws are compatible with the international human rights obligations.

Cases pending ministerial orders 

The Uganda Law Reform Commission found 12 detainees awaiting ministerial orders in Fort Portal, Mbale and Arua Government prisons. That these were found in only one prison is an indicator that there are many others.  

The commission recommended that Uganda Law Reform Commission puts into place a law to shift the mandate on ministerial orders from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to the judicial officers.

The committee observed that the issue of cases pending ministerial orders is still a serious problem. However, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs informed the committee that the issue was dealt with and the mandate currently lies with the judiciary. 

Additionally, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs informed the committee that cases of ministerial orders have been disposed of by the ministry hence none are pending.

The committee further observed that this could not be the entire truth, as it found some pending cases in Arua during a field visit, and so recommends that;

The judiciary clears all pending cases as in the case of Eric Bushoborozi against Uganda. 

The committee also recommends that the Uganda Law Reform Commission together with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs ensure that the Bill is presented before Parliament hence ensure that courts’ decision in the case of Eric Bushoborozi against Uganda HCT-01-CV-MC-0011 of 2015,  which shifted the mandate to the judiciary is adhered to. 

Emerging human rights concerns

Recommendations on the plight of domestic workers

This is not a repetition as such. The commission reported that that domestic workers in Uganda carry low value, as it is neither defined as work nor as of value. Thus they are subjected to various abuses and violations of their rights.

The commission recommended the need to review the existing legislations to specifically recognise domestic workers and advocate for regulation of domestic work.

The Uganda Law Reform Commission submitted that at the 100th Session of the International Labour Conference, in June 2011, the International Labour Organisation (ILO) adopted Convention No. 189, which regulates the terms and conditions of work for domestic workers. 

The commission further submitted that Uganda has not ratified this convention on decent work for domestic workers to enable its domestication. 

The committee observed that the Minimum Wage Bill, 2015 was tabled before Parliament for the first reading and is yet to be scrutinised. 

The Bill, if passed into law, will deal with issues of domestic workers by addressing the gaps in the existing laws governing workers. 

Many domestic employees do not have a voice simply because they are often times, from disadvantaged families or communities hence vulnerable to discrimination in respect to conditions of employment of work and to other human rights abuses.

The committee recommends that the consideration of the Minimum Wage Bill by Parliament is fast tracked in order to ensure protection of the rights of domestic workers. 

Recommendations on the impact of digital technology on personal data safety, human rights and responsibilities

The commission recommended that Uganda Law Reform Commission should review the Regulation of Interception of Communications Act, 2013 and the Anti-Pornography Act, 2014 to address the overly restrictive provisions affecting the freedom of speech and expression.

The commission submitted that the review of the regulations had not been handled as it was not in the work plan for the Financial Year 2014/2015 because they lacked funding and they hoped that they would do it in the year 2015.  

The committee noted the explanation and recommends that this matter should be treated with urgency and considered in the subsequent year. 

Ministry of ICT and National Guidance

Human rights education and awareness programmes

The commission recommended that the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance should continue to emphasise to the general public the importance of attending Government programmes and receiving information that is crucial for the effective participation in matters of their governance.

The ministry explained that they have these programmes including “Ask Your Minister”, a 24 hour interactive programme with 900 free tolls and then a programme on “Ask Your Government.” 

The committee observed that despite the fact that the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance is in charge of facilitating interaction between Ugandan citizens, the general public and Government through the various available channels and also facilitate citizen led service delivery and monitoring by providing avenues for feedback with the ordinary citizen, they have not been satisfactory on this mandate. For example, people are not aware that the “Ask Your Government” programme exists. 

The committee recommends that:

    1. Government provides the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance adequate funds to enable it perform its mandate. 
    2. Massive sensitisation is done in order to inform the public about the different Government programmes that are being run on these different platforms, as this will enhance the levels of human rights awareness and a culture that promotes respect of the rights of others. The UHRC, while carrying out civic and human rights education and awareness programmes, takes into consideration the people at the grass root levels, by devising means and ways of reaching out to them in tune with the Access to Information Act and the UN Convention on the Rights of PWDs.

Uganda Communications Commission

Recommendations on the impact of digital technology on personal data safety; the UHRC recommended that there should be increase in public awareness in respect to digital technology, which should cover rights and responsibilities in the use of digital technology.

The committee observed that Uganda citizens face the potential risk of violation of their rights, such as the right to privacy, freedom of expression and freedom from discrimination related to the use of the Internet and other digital technology. An individual’s knowledge about the kind of data collected about them - digital technology and rights thereof as well as knowledge of redress mechanisms of data violations is still inadequate, despite the good initiative in place.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that UCC together with the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance and NITA-U should:

    1. Establish and support a national multi-stakeholder dialogue on digital technology and related rights and obligations. 
    2. Collaborate and strongly undertake campaigns and events directed at increasing the public’s general digital literacy and awareness, including related human rights.

Gender based violence 

The UHRC established that abuse against women, especially through the Internet is increasing and is not reported. The UHRC, therefore, recommended that Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) together with the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology and National Information Technology Authority (NITA-U) should develop a policy to articulate and address issues of online violence against women.

The committee noted that reasonable measures had been taken to address online violence against women. However, it was noted that the problem still persists, not only locally but also globally due to, among others, the porous nature of today’s Internet age which hinders effective legal and social control of cyber violence.

The committee recommends that UCC together with the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance should:

    1. Collaborate with law enforcement agencies and courts to enforce compliance and sanctions for perpetrators. 
    2. Put in place additional safeguards such as help-lines for victims and work with Internet platforms such as Facebook and Twitter, to remove messages in breach of national laws and ensure that what is out is of desirable content.
    3. Prioritise sensitisation of communities, including children, parents, law enforcement and judicial officers on the challenge of cyber violence against women and the need for the public to actively report any instances of cyber abuse and also be aware of the rights of all persons in the online environment.

Blockage of digital services

UHRC recommended that UCC ensures that any blockage of digital services is done in accordance with national and international human rights standards. The committee agreed with the findings of the UHRC - that indeed there were instances of uncalled for restrictions of online freedom of expression and privacy during the reporting period. The committee therefore recommends that:

    i) UCC ensures that restrictions of online freedom of expression and privacy if in public interest are; clearly publicised, non-discriminative and done in conformity with the law. In addition, such limitations shouldn’t go beyond what is ‘acceptable and demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society’, or what is provided for in the Constitution under Article 43(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

    ii) Adherence by communication companies to the Right to Privacy: the commission reported that the lack of a law on data protection and privacy has had negative effects. The commission recommended that the Ministry of Information, and Communication Technology should expeditiously table the Data Protection and Privacy Bill in parliament for consideration, so that it is passed as an Act of Parliament.

Observations 

The committee observed that the existing legal provisions criminalising interception and disclosure of personal information of customers are not adequately implemented. It was noted that several reports point to cases of leakage of personal data to third parties by telecommunication companies as well as illegal interception of communication and surveillance by security agencies.

The committee further observed that the right to privacy has been abused following the leakage of personal data to third parties. Concerns have been raised about how individuals’ private information, held by mobile phone companies, has ended up in the possession of third parties, leading to unsolicited calls or messages from organisations advertising their products.

The committee noted that new technologies continue to be exploited by different users and the phenomenon is becoming intrinsically linked to organised crime on the Internet that take advantage of weaknesses within information systems. Other threats to information security include breaches of personal privacy, e-mail spam, piracy and computer viruses. Any of these can spread worldwide in an instant through information networks and they could have harmful consequences.

The committee recommends that:

    1. UCC adequately monitors telecommunication service providers to ensure that they comply with data protection and privacy contractual obligations.
    2. UCC ensures that licences to telecommunication companies clearly provide for data protection and privacy obligations. 
    3. The Data Protection Bill be fast-tracked and handled expeditiously in order to ensure protection of individuals’ data and privacy.
    4. There is need for enforcement on the existing laws and policies in order to ensure safety in the information systems, prevent unlawful access, abuse or misuse of information systems, among others.

Preparedness for the 2016 General Elections

The commission recommended that the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology should enforce the constitutional requirement for the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, as a public broadcaster, to provide equal access of all its outlets to all political parties, to present their programmes to the citizenry. You could read the “Mbabazi” case.

Unequal use of State-owned Media:

Court stated in the election petition no. O1 of 2016, Amama Mbabazi V Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and The Electoral Commission, that both the Constitution in Article 67(3) and the Presidential Election Act section 24 (1) provide that all presidential candidates shall be given equal time and space on state-owned media to present their programmes to the people. We found that UBC had failed in this duty. We recommend that the electoral law should be amended to provide for sanctions against any state organ or officer who violates this constitutional duty. The ministry submitted that this would be implemented in the subsequent general elections.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed that the broadcast regulators often times attempted to block the appearance of controversial political personalities at several media outlets, and ordered radio stations to cease negative coverage of certain political figures, despite the provisions in the Constitution which provides for freedoms of expression and of the press. 

The committee recommends that government through the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology should ensure that all the media centres provide equal access to all political parties to present their views and restrain them from unbalanced coverage.

The Commission also recommended that the Ministry of Information and Communications Technology should enforce regulations on the media’s compliance with their professional responsibility to stem irresponsible media reports. These institutions should also monitor and regulate the use of social media platforms.

The committee observed that the right of the public to free media is indisputable. However, while both print media and social media platforms provide space for getting feedback from the citizens on policy actions, generating awareness and education on national issues and social interaction, such platforms are sometimes misused. 

The committee recommends that UCC and the Ministry of Information, Communication, Technology and National Guidance collaborate with the press and journalists’ body to ensure that members of the profession abide by their Code of Ethics and the law.

Ministry of Information, Communication, Technology, and National Guidance together with UCC should establish systems and processes to appropriately monitor and respond to and control social media channels bearing in mind that such limits are justifiable and democratically acceptable.

Other human rights concerns included switching off community radios. The committee recommends that UCC develops guidelines that can streamline the sector and bring community radios on board.

Sim-card Registration Process and Deadline
UCC in collaboration with the National Identification and Registration Authority should put in place measures to regulate the amount of personal data – there was a big concern here.

The committee observed that UCC’s seven-day ultimatum had been unfair. UCC explained that the law required that the name and address of each applicant be captured. 

The fact that the national identity cards were not in place, the Minister by virtue of the Interception of Communications Regulation S.I – people were concerned that there was so much information – their personal data was being given to these Internet providers.

The committee recommends that UCC in collaboration with the National Identification and Registration Authority should put in place measures to regulate the amount of personal data of subscribers that telecom service providers can access. 

Access should be restricted to basic data such as the name, identification number and sim-card number of the subscriber but no other details.

Emerging Human Rights Concerns

The Commission recommended that Ministry of Health should categorise the skin drugs – this is to do with albinos. 

The Commission reported that persons living with albinism have eyesight problems that are not correctable with eyeglasses rendering them legally blind. 

The Commission recommended that Ministry of Health should categorise the skin drugs, lotions, sunglasses and hats that are appropriate for persons living with albinism as essential drugs, and provide them free of charge.

The committee observed that persons living with albinism suffer from widespread discrimination, thus falling victims of human rights violations in the communities such as assaults and witchcraft. Very few cases of persons with albinism come out to report such acts due to their “officially” ignored status. 

The committee further observed that in schools, teachers are typically inexperienced with the condition of albinism

The committee recommends that government provides comprehensive statistics to Parliament on the number of persons living with albinism and their location.

Sensitisation is done to the public to change the attitude of the public towards the people living with albinism and that government comes up with a Bill on albinism.

The Commission recommended that Ministry of Health reviews the National Cancer Policy to specifically include the prevention, early detection, diagnosis and treatment of skin cancer, especially for persons with albinism.

The Minister of Health submitted that the review of cancer policy had not been done but through Uganda Cancer Institute (UCI), it has established a clinic for the people living with albinism, which is operational once a week;

They have developed community programmes for the creation of awareness on the cancer risk factor and they have provided limited number of sunglasses.

The committee observed that the issue of cancer in general is rising tremendously, leading to high death rates. When it comes to persons living with albinism, the threat doubles because the skin lacks the ability to create its own safety mechanism.  

The committee recommends that UCI in collaboration with Ministry of Health carries out sensitisation of the public on the causes, treatment, and prevention of cancer and cancer-related diseases. 

In addition, encourage Ugandans to visit Uganda Cancer Institute for routine check-ups.

The Ministry of Public Service

The Commission recommends that Ministry of Public Service together with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should ensure that the various ethnic, linguistic and religious communities have equal access to employment opportunities in the public and private sector.

The committee observed that the Ministry of Public Service has diverted from its basic principles of recruitment as listed above. The committee noted that there are many staffing gaps in the Public Service that are caused by inability of the different ministries to vigilantly fill the positions. This is also attributed to inadequate funds. 

Unemployment is one of the most challenging social and economic problems in Uganda. It is, however, characterised with corruption and nepotism, which is a demoralising factor to the unemployed. 

Many unemployed youth believe that their employment prospects are compromised by corruption. This perception is borne out by the jobs-for-pay scandal in the Public Service, leakage of interviews and by the consistent reports of nepotism in appointments that are received.

The “Principle of meritocracy” puts the Commission in a difficult position in situations where they have to choose between, for instance, the disabled and the able-bodied, the ethnic minority versus majority as the one left out will be discriminated, thus the need to develop a clear policy and guideline on its operation.  

The committee disagrees with UHRC recommendation of considering religious communities in recruitment. The committee observes that merit should be the major determinant.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service should provide statistical data indicating balanced and fair recruitment. 

The committee also recommends that government reviews the relevant laws and develops a policy on quota recruitments in the Public Service to ensure regional balance in the job industry.

Ministry Of Gender, Labour and Social Development

Absence of Government-led Efforts to Manage Babies’/Children’s Homes 

The committee recommended that the ministry should strengthen its implementation of laws and policies governing the provision of alternative care to children, especially the regulation of institutions providing alternative care. 

Mr Speaker, it was revealed recently that there are about 1,000 homes and they are not regulated.

The committee observed that although there are laws and policies in place to facilitate and guide implementation of activities and programmes related to alternative care, these have not been effectively implemented. There is an increase in the number of children homes set up to provide alternative care yet many do not provide the expected or minimum standards of care.

The committee recommends that the ministry rigorously monitors alternative care institutions to ensure that the care provided to the children is adequate and does not increase their vulnerability. 

Government should increase budgetary allocation to child protection services managed by state institutions.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should develop guidelines to ensure that admission of any child to an alternative care home is based on a careful assessment of the fact that the child does not have any opportunity of being in a family-based care. The ministry should follow up on such assessments.

Limited Financial and Human Resource Capacity

The commission recommended the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should centralise its probation and social welfare function for effective functionality and coordination.

The committee agreed with the fact that Probation and Social Welfare Officers in majority of the districts lack offices and facilities to enable them effectively carry out their monitoring role. Hence, recentralisation would undermine the ability to handle the very many cases that are committed at the local level.

Mr Speaker, what is being said here is that these officers lack the facilities and offices and recentralisation would not be the solution. 

The committee recommends that:

    1. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development takes reasonable steps to ensure that both the human and financial capacity of the Department of Community Services at the local government level is strengthened in particular to enable the ministry send probation officers to sub-county level close to the communities where abuses of children take place;

    2. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development ensures that the welfare of probation and welfare staff is improved by providing the required resources.

The Roll-out of the Senior Citizens Grant for Empowerment to all Older Persons

The commission reported that between 2010 and 2015, the SAGE programme was implemented in 14 districts. However, with a population of 1.2 million people in Uganda aged 65 years and above that qualify for the programme, only 123,260 were benefiting.

The committee commended government for introducing a programme aimed at improving the way of life of older persons. However, it was observed that the SAGE programme should have taken into consideration the most disadvantaged and hard-to-reach districts in the initial roll-out. 

The committee recommends that all older persons deserve to be taken care of and there is need for a re-examination of the programme to ensure comprehensive coverage of all older persons.

The Plight of Domestic Workers 

That was already covered.

The committee recommends that:

    1. Government of Uganda signs bi-lateral agreements with the receiving countries in the Middle East because this is the major destination for majority of Ugandans seeking employment abroad. These agreements should be shared with Parliament;

    2. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should put in place a system to follow up on Ugandans that leave to work abroad. This can include requirements to report on arrival to a Uganda Mission in the destination country and also put in place a system to track them;

    3. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should blacklist companies that violate the conditions for recruitment and proper settlement of workers in destination countries;

    4. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should strengthen its collaboration with key stakeholders like the immigration offices and the police to enhance identification of cases of human trafficking and response to such cases;

    5. Government should put in place a specific Bill on externalisation of labour as a matter of urgency.

Human Rights Situation of Ethnic Minorities

The commission recommended that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development develops specific affirmative action programmes targeting ethnic minority groups, including their access to higher education and participation in decision-making; designs a national policy that seeks to recognise the rights of ethnic minorities and complies with international reporting obligations on status of protection of ethnic minorities. Further, together with the Ministry of Public Service, the ministry should ensure equal access of ethnic minorities to employment opportunities and build the capacity of public servants to ensure protection of the identity of ethnic minority groups.

The committee observed that progress has been made towards redressing imbalances and promoting equal opportunities for ethnic minority groups, for instance through their participation in decision-making processes. 

The committee further observed that while the above efforts are commendable, a number of issues affect the enjoyment of rights by ethnic minorities. Many ethnic minorities still live in remote areas with limited infrastructure, rendering access to basic services difficult. Political participation at national and district level is still limited. Violation of their property rights through eviction from ancestral land – as in the eviction of the Batwa from Bwindi Forest to create a national park – is one such case of the alleged violations.

The committee recommends that the ministry strengthens its interventions and puts other measures in place to ensure and enhance the protection and promotion of the rights of ethnic minorities, specifically regarding their identity and recognition, safeguarding their cultural heritage and property rights, ensuring their participation in political processes and decision-making and improving their access to education and other basic services.

Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

Cooperation with UHRC in complaints management

The commission reported that some state agencies do not fully cooperate with UHRC to enable it effectively carry out investigations. The commission also noted irregular attendance of its tribunal, particularly in the central region, by state attorneys. The commission, therefore, recommended that state agencies and institutions implicated as respondents should fully cooperate with the commission to enable it implement its mandate effectively.

The committee observed that the cooperation between the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the different state agencies is still inadequate given the high number of complaints before the tribunal that remain unresolved. 

The committee further noted that the Uganda Human Rights Commission is an important part of the national human rights machinery but it is only one part. Uganda Human Rights Commission’s overall mandate in promoting and protecting human rights is broad, hence cannot be attained without the active cooperation and engagement of duty bearers and state actors.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs enhances its coordination with state agencies and institutions to ensure that they actively engage with the Uganda Human Rights Commission during investigations and resolution of complaints before the tribunal.

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should fully facilitate state attorneys to attend Uganda Human Rights Commission Tribunal hearing and also take strict disciplinary action against those that absentee themselves without justifiable reasons from the tribunal hearings.

Payment of all outstanding Uganda Human Rights Commission Tribunal Awards

The commission reported that respondents, particularly the Attorney-General, take long to pay tribunal awards, majorly due to bureaucratic processes within the office.

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs submitted that it has always given human rights awards priority depending on availability of funds.

The committee observed that the issue of delayed payment of awards has consistently been raised by the commission in its previous annual reports, implying that not much has been done to address the problem. The committee further noted concerns that awards for recently concluded cases get paid before those concluded and awarded much before.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should ring-fence the settlement of tribunal awards so that payments are done in an orderly and systematic manner.

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should submit a list of all monetary compensatory awards that have been settled and those that are pending. The list should clearly indicate individuals compensated, the dates when the Uganda Human Rights Commission Tribunal made the awards and the dates when the payments were done.

Matters pending amicable settlement 

The commission reported delayed settlement of matters adjourned for amicable settlement and there were 77 complaints.

The committee observed that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs’ submission on the issues - the ministry submitted that they have always assessed the matters pending amicable settlements - was insufficient.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs expeditiously clears and approves matters adjourned for amicable settlement in order to enhance the Justice, Law and Order Sector Alternative Dispute Resolution mechanism that would consequently and greatly contribute to reduction of commission’s case backlog.

Assessment of conditions in places of detention

Cases pending ministerial orders - you had mentioned them but since the honourable minister is here – the Uganda Human Rights Commission found that in Fort portal there were 109 cases and 12 detainees awaiting ministerial orders.  

The 	Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs submitted that following Court’s decision in the case of Eric Bushoborozi against Uganda HCT-01-CV-MC-0011 of 2015, they no longer have the mandate to grant ministerial orders in respect of persons to whom a special finding of not guilty by reason of insanity is made. 

Additionally, the ministry explained that other cases of ministerial orders have been disposed of by the ministry hence none are pending. 


The committee observed that the issue of cases pending ministerial orders is still a serious problem as ascertained from the committee’s visits. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should liaise with the Uganda Prisons Service and the Judiciary to establish the cases pending ministerial orders and ensure that they are handled expeditiously.

Shifting the mandate on ministerial orders to judicial officers: 
The commission recommended - with the Uganda Law Reform Commission - that Judiciary and Parliament should put in place a law to shift the mandate on ministerial orders from the Minister of Justice to Judicial officers. The ministry submitted that the Uganda Law Reform Commission was in the process of reviewing this.

The committee observed that the proposal to shift the mandate on ministerial orders to judicial officers is a step in the right direction and would go a long way in disposing off pending cases.

The committee recommends that Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs works closely with the Uganda Law Reform Commission to review the relevant laws and come up with the necessary reforms.

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should urgently initiate a Bill or amendments to existing laws in order to address the matter and consequently move Parliament to consider the proposals contained therein.

National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) (Fast tracking environmental law and preform process to address evident gaps)

The commission recommended that NEMA, together with the Uganda Law Reform Commission, fast tracks the environmental law and policy reform process to address evident gaps.

The committee commended NEMA for developing policies and regulations to address different environmental concerns but noted that generally Government has been quite slow in developing adequate environmental policies and implementing regulations. For instance, regulations to guide implementation of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 have not been formulated. Also the Tree Fund, as established under Section 40 of the Act, has not been operationalised.

The committee recommends as follows:

    1. NEMA in consultation with the Uganda Law Reform Commission should ensure that the reforms to the policies and laws address the harmonisation of the roles and mandates of the different environment and natural resources sector agencies in order to avoid overlap of their mandates; 
    2. Further, the reforms should also aim at increasing penalties for the different environment and natural resource related crimes and illegal activities; and
    3. Government urgently formulates regulations to guide the implementation of existing environmental laws.

Participatory and consultative policy and law reform process 

The commission recommended that NEMA should ensure that the policy and law reform process is done in a participatory and consultative manner. Uganda Law Reform Commission was also cited as a stakeholder in ensuring the implementation of this recommendation.

The committee observed that NEMA’s sensitisation and dialogue activities are majorly done at the national level and with the academia. Therefore, there is limited engagement with grassroots communities to enable them understand issues regarding effects of environmental degradation.

The committee recommends that NEMA, together with the Ministry of Water and Environment should, in implementation of programs, undertake the sensitisation of communities at not only the national level but also the grassroots level on critical environment concerns including sustainable use of wetlands, tree planting, waste management.

In addition, NEMA together with other lead agencies should inform and educate the public of their right to lay complaints against persons and corporate bodies that cause ecological harm.

NEMA should organize specialised sessions on the cross-cutting nature of environmental issues. 

NEMA in collaboration with key stakeholders such as Uganda Law Reform Commission should carry out wide consultations on the proposed amendment Bill to the National Environmental Act, Cap 153 and related regulations hence ensure that the views of all people are considered. 

Strengthen the capacity of environmental inspectors on new and emerging issues

The commission recommended that NEMA, together with other line agencies, should strengthen the capacity of inspectors on new and emerging issues including the use of economic instruments and tax administration for environmental management at national, sector and local levels.

The committee observed that despite the training of environmental inspectors to enhance their monitoring role, the work of the inspectors is not evident on the ground and monitoring remains weak. As a consequence, there is an increase in crimes and illegalities in the environment sector throughout the country such as encroachment on wetlands and forest reserves, illegal gazetting of forest reserves and illegal timber trade among others. 

The committee recommends as follows:

    1. NEMA consistently makes follow-up on what environmental inspectors do on the ground to ensure an effective inspection and monitoring system. Inspections are an indispensable link in the regulatory chain hence an effective tool to contribute to more consistent implementation and enforcement of laws.
    2. NEMA should furnish Parliament with a list of approved inspectors to enable Members of Parliament follow up on inspections done in their respective Constituencies.

Future training modules should incorporate aspects of economic instruments and tax administration to ensure that inspectors acquire diverse knowledge and skills critical to their monitoring role. 

Building the capacity of environment inspectors to better appreciate and implement UN guiding principles on business and human rights. 

The commission reported that there is poor appreciation by businesses and some state actors of the linkage between business operations and human rights. 
The committee observed that NEMA’s efforts so far undertaken to build the capacity of inspectors on land restoration management were a step in the right direction. The committee however noted that the number of inspectors trained annually is still low. 

The committee recommends that NEMA, in collaboration with the Ministry of Water and Environment and other lead agencies should, through their collaboration with academic and other training institutions, train inspectors specifically on business and human rights standards so that inspectors are guided better on obligations of businesses particularly with regard to human rights and the environment. 

Payment of deposit bonds by businesses that produce dangerous or toxic substances

The commission recommended that there is need to ensure that performance deposit bonds are paid.
The committee recommends that NEMA, together with the line ministry and other lead agencies ensure that the proposed standards in the Bill are human rights compliant.

In addition, the proposed standards should make it mandatory for every business engaged in the production of dangerous and/or toxic substances, to submit an environmental impact assessment detailing a project’s possible harm. Consequently, the performance bond paid for should be equivalent to the harm of the worst case scenario that could occur.

Public awareness on the effects of business operations 

The commission reported that awareness by the public on their role in promotion and protection of environmental rights and proper management of environmental resources was inadequate thus the need for massive public awareness programmes.

The committee observed that the major challenge is the general attitude of the public on the environment. More or so, a number of high profile personalities including Government officials and politicians also operate or support businesses that contribute to environment abuse.

The Committee recommends that NEMA, together with other lead agencies, should enhance their public awareness and education campaigns at all levels, including the sensitisation of communities at the grassroots level on the environment and the need for its protection by all, including businesses.

Ministry of Education and Sports

The human rights situation of ethnic minorities

The commission recommended that the Ministry of Education and Sports, in conjunction with the National Curriculum Development Centre, should review the curricula to be consistent with Article 29 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, which provides that education should develop each child’s personality and talents to the full, and encourage children to respect their parents and their cultures. 

The committee observed that the use of local language has led to deterioration in the general performance of pupils, because of the mode of communication, which is done in the local languages, while the pupils are eventually examined in English during the Primary Leaving Examinations. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports, reviews the education policy, ensures that teachers are adequately trained to deliver in the different local languages as the policy in place came at a time when the teachers had already been trained to deliver in the English language. 

In addition, Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Education should provide sufficient teaching aids.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the committee on Human Rights notes that there are still gaps in the promotion and protection of the fundamental human rights and freedoms envisaged in Chapter Four of our Constitution. This is partly due to the underfunding, enforcement of the existing laws and institutional weaknesses.

It is our considered view that the recommendations contained in this report will go a long way in addressing some of the pertinent human rights concerns affecting the people of Uganda.

I, therefore, pray that the report of the Human Rights committee on the 18th Annual Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission be considered by this House and recommendations therein adopted.
I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you chair and Members of the committee. The report from the Human Rights Commission was received in August 2016 and today we should finish it. This same report from the committee was read sometime back. Congratulations to the chair and Members of this committee who were able to compile this.

When we do this, it energises those institutions that are charged with these responsibilities to do more because they know are aware that whatever they do and recommendations they make will be discussed by Parliament like the Constitution says.

Honourable members, this report can be debated. I would like to propose the motion for your debate. The motion, I propose for your debate is for adoption of the report of the committee on Human Rights on the 18th Annual Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, 2015 and debate starts now.

4.00
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Chairperson of Human Rights Committee for the elaborated report we have just heard. I would like to comment on the issues concerning the prisons department. 

The conditions in the prisons are still very poor, especially when it comes to the sick inmates. They always delay to take them for medical attention at various health facilities. Colleagues can bear me witness - we have seen several cases - the inmates are taken to seek medical attention when it is too late or when they are in critical conditions. 

Therefore, I would like to understand the systems used in the department, in terms of giving first aid treatment to those with minor ailments and also the referral systems in the prisons departments. 

Last year, during Christmas season, I visited one of our prison centres in Bundibugyo; Obukwanga Prison. I had gone there to examine the situation in that prison during the festive season but I realised that the Government could only provide meat and posho for Christmas. When I entered the office of the officer who was in charge, I realised that there was poor storage of drugs. The tins containing drugs had been piled on top of books in a corner, which was full of dust.

When I checked, the drugs were still useful but the storage was very poor. I asked whether they had a nurse a round who would administer first aid to the inmates in case of sickness but there was none. So, I wondered about the health condition of the inmates when they fall sick.

Mr Speaker, we still have a lot to do on the health concerns in the prison department to help our inmates live a health life while they serve their sentences. 
I also would like to implore the Ministry of Health to find mechanisms of working it out and checking on the various centres so as to understand all the procedures they follow when inmates fall sick. I thank you so much.
    
4.04
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Human Rights Committee for the extensive and elaborate report on the marginalised people, and abuse of rights of our people. This is because it is the marginalised people whose rights are abused always. 

We have the probation officers who are supposed to take care of the issues of families and children who are mistreated. However, these officers are not deployed in all the districts and the ones that are there are not well facilitated so they cannot follow up children’s issues right to their families. They do not even have motorcycles for transportation yet the children are abused in their homes. Therefore, we need these probation welfare officers to be well facilitated and recruited and deployed to all the districts. 

There used to be a rehabilitation officer who would take care of the issues of people with disabilities. This office is no longer in existence and so there is no one to attend to the issues of people with disability. The issues of disability now fall under the office of the community development officer, who is already overloaded with so many issues such as community and women issues. As a result, issues of people with disabilities are neglected. 

The children are dying without any treatment. They don’t have wheelchairs and so they keep crawling on the ground yet it is the right of people with disabilities to move if facilitated. A cost of a wheel chair is now over Shs 1,000,000 and ordinary people cannot afford it. 

People even do not know where to get the metallic clutches. If a person placed an order in Mulago Hospital, it can take time, let alone the huge amount of money required. People with disabilities are abused because they cannot do anything because they cannot move and so the facilities for persons with disabilities are very important. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about the elderly who are also marginalised. The Government came up with a programme of supporting the elderly with Shs 20,000 per month. That is a lot of money for a person who does not have any money and never receives any money in a year. 

The programme started well but it stopped in only 44 districts. The older persons really need the money and so I urge Government to spread this allowance throughout the districts. Let all the districts benefit from this. How can you help the same people on one side yet those in other districts are not getting it? The people are even accusing Members of Parliament, of not doing anything because the elderly people in our constituencies do not receive this money. Many MPs have lost their seats because of this. 

Therefore, I would like to see the programme rolled all over the all districts in the next financial year. Even if it means increasing the age, let it be done for the older persons to receive that money. To our amazement, this financial year, some older persons are not receiving the money at all. I urge Government to bring a supplementary so that at least those who have already tasted this money can continue. We have seen how much this can enhance the older persons’ lives and so we really want this programme to spread all over the country so that all our older persons can benefit from it. There are many other issues I would love to talk about but let me allow my colleagues to also contribute. Thank you very much. 

4.08
MS STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and chairperson for this good report. I reiterate on one of the issues that you raised on your findings, which is inadequate staff accommodation. My point goes to the Minister of Internal Affairs in regard to the housing conditions of the Uganda Police, mainly in the middle of the city in places like Nsambya and Naguru police barracks. 

The human rights of these policemen residing in those houses have been trampled upon. Something must be done. When we are passing around Kiyembe and you see the living conditions of our policemen, no wonder they are behaving the way they are behaving in Kampala; something needs to be done.
 
During the budget time, I asked a question about this matter but I was told that the Internal Affairs Committee had scheduled money to handle the housing conditions. At least, let us uplift the face of the city by reconstructing the housing units in those two barracks - because they are now standing out amidst very good surroundings; we wonder what has gone wrong. It is a pity when all other surrounding areas are developing but a big chunk of land with shackles remains undeveloped. Minister of Internal Affairs, I need to know how fast you are thinking about uplifting the conditions of Naguru and Nsambya barracks. I beg to submit. 

4.10
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, this matter that concerns the human rights of our people is a very pertinent issue. From the submission made by the chairperson, she has attempted to cite the prisons and many others. However, I would like to go straight to the living conditions of the UPDF in this country. When one looks at the accommodation in the barracks where these soldiers stay, it is appalling. I think while we look at others, these specific one should be looked at with a serious caution. 

In my district, particularly my constituency, Kapelebyong County, I have a few detaches of the police, army and prisons in Amuria. However, I am disturbed by the military and the police because the floods have washed away even the Manyatas in which they have been staying. Okoboi Police Post, Achinga, between Amuria and Abim (Napak) - all those detaches are soaked with water yet we expect these people to give a service to the nation. I think it goes further beyond violation of their rights. 

I would like to appeal to the Minister of Internal Affairs; the life in the prison cells in Amuria is very horrible. I think these problems can only be solved if the Government in power pays attention to the issues in these areas squarely. 

The enforcement is a challenge - decisions are taken - there are respective ministries or departments that have been marginalised. It appears like they just milk the service from these units and do not take account their living conditions. If you want to see a nation, which is capable of adhering to respect of the rights of the people, then there must be strong systems put in place to guide governance in that country. These are part of the institutions that are charged with responsibility of ensuring that the governance aspect is achieved in totality. When the agencies of Government are not conforming to their work, you then know that there is a problem of governance in that country. That is what we exactly want to we see in Uganda.

When you look at the police stations and the barracks around, they were all taken over and nobody minds about them. Mr Speaker, these are problems that we have. My own appeal to this Parliament is that the report that has been presented to this House has brought quite strong recommendations and it is my prayer that the ministry concerned and others adhere to these recommendations and follow the recommendations with resources, to ensure that these recommendations are brought to full realisation in our country. If we don’t, there will be a problem and that is where the problem is.

We pass the laws but when it comes to the parent ministries appropriating resources, it turns out to be a major problem. That is where we have a problem. You cannot run away from it and it is only my prayer that this Parliament becomes tougher on these ministries when we take recommendations. This is to ensure that resources during the budget are appropriated to ensure that what we pass is achieved. This is what I wanted to submit. I thank you

4.16
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute South County, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the members of the committee for making very good observations on the report of the UHRC. This committee is such an important one and I would like to encourage them to stand firm in executing their mandate. I would like to add two things to the recommendations. The observations have been with us year in and year out; this report does not change much from the UHRC. It is almost the same thing.

I have seen that when you have problems in the end you have to look at the structures and in this case, I think that the Uganda Police Force needs to be re-modeled. The current police force needs to be disbanded and to be re-modeled in order to respond to our challenges. This is a force that was founded way back from the colonial administrative principles. It is expected to respond to the current challenges that this country has, in terms of democracy, in terms of dimension, around issues of gender and land. If you look at the functioning of the police council, the police authority and even the police standards unit, you know that they cannot discipline their own. This is because there is chain of command.

In other countries, those oversight organs are not part of the system and that is why year in and out, we cannot have any proper sanctions on violations happening or resulting from Uganda Police Force. The second model I would like to recommend for our prisons, they are congested because of the number of cases that we have in backlog. However, if you visit prisons, many of those people under detention deserve to be out.

In Ghana, there is a programme by the Chief Justice that visits prisons and holds special sitting inside the prisons and files are called. This is because if these prisoners are taken before court, some of their files cannot be traced and the magistrate or the judge has only one option of taking them back, but since the Chief Justice sits at the highest level, they can order for the immediate release of some. This has saved Ghana a lot of money because maintaining prisoners inside is very costly. For those that do not have serious matters, those that have been detained on trivial matters, those detained on failure to pay their debts, should be released. 

The issue of detaining children with adults – it is not only children that are being detained by adults. Many of you know that the police outposts in the villages, women are detained with men. Some women are detained over night by the police officers and they are brought in the morning. It is also there and we have seen it. Resources must be provided before police posts are opened in the villages, confirmation must be done to ensure that they have the detention facilities. Short of that, a police out-post should not be opened. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.19
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli North County, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will only look at three areas and I would like to begin with the Uganda Police Force. I worked with it for some time. Their actions and inactions are not new to me. I want to make this honest observation that there is over decentralisation of state powers in the Uganda Police Force. When it comes to determination of ownership of land, it is the Uganda Police Force; the land department. Evictions are done by none other than the Uganda Police Force. They have even created a group of prisoners known as lodgers. They have powers to shift a suspect from one detention centre to another until such a time when they are satisfied that they have duly exercised their coercive power. All this is done by the police. We have received regular reports that Uganda Police Force, interchangeably share either the first or second position in terms of corruption with our judiciary. I do not know what Government has exactly done to circumvent and thwart this kind of conduct.

Secondly, I would also like to hear from Government and the committee chairperson the efficacy and probably the quality of our criminal justice system. I will give you an example of the famous case of Yawe, who was convicted and sentenced to suffer death when in the actual reality, he was innocent. I think it caused the intervention of our brother Gen. Otafiire for such people to be released.

I do not know whether or not, the prosecution side of Government had taken into consideration of what is required before files are sanctioned. Probably this one leaves me now still to the criminal prosecution system of this country. That is where we experience gross violations, where criminal matters are not taken as criminal and civil matters are the ones that are taken to be criminal in nature. Criminalisation of civil matters is also another trend within our criminal justice system. 

As I wind up, I wanted also to look at the famous case you have cited of John Patrick Mbabazi v. Museveni Yoweri Kaguta. You talked about one element, but there were also several recommendations that were made there under. I do not know whether you had the opportunity to synchronise all these recommendations, and if so, do you think that as Government, they are effectively following up the recommendations made under that decision?

Lastly, you talked about the juvenile detention centres. I would like to inform you that as we talk, Naguru Remand Home has already been donated to one of the local investors here and where possible -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we - because they need even the video so you need to stop a bit. Please proceed.

MR MUGOYA:  Thank you very much. As I wind up, I was on Naguru Remand Home and I wanted to inform you that much as we are fighting for detention spaces for the juveniles, some of these centres have already been donated by Government agencies to local investors or even the “so called” foreign investors. You will need to crosscheck with Uganda Land Commission where the title of 	Naguru Remand Home is.

4.25
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start from where hon. Baba Diri ended. This issue of the elderly getting money is getting out of hand and it is a right to every elderly person in this country.

The Constitution stipulates it very well; it states that we all have equal rights before the law. Therefore, we should be treated equally. Therefore, when you find some districts benefiting and others not, it brings confusion in the mind of the elderly Ugandans who are still surviving.

How can somebody who is 70 or 65 years get this money and somebody who is 90 is not getting it! It is not fair. Mr Speaker, I really request that this financial year, we come together and hold hands and make sure that this programme is rolled out throughout this country. Otherwise, this is not fair and our people are not appreciating. 

If you go to places where they are getting this little money, you cannot believe the wonders there. For instance, I visited one of the areas, we found out that in the whole parish, the elderly had come together and were giving this money to one person or two per month. Those people would buy for example a cow hence availability of milk in that village even where someone did not have hope before. This is a very good programme.

Much as the money is little, it is doing a great job. For that matter, we have to make sure that we roll it out. If it means like what hon. Baba Diri has said, we reduce the years to maybe 70 or 75 but at least we roll it out.

Mr Speaker, I also want to request the ministry and NEMA; I do not know which job they are doing a part from when the drought came in and I saw them trying to move here and there. However, we are not happy with their work. When you look around Kampala, all the swamps have been reclaimed, serious buildings constructed, when you go up country, people took swamps, reclaimed them and put farms and gardens. In Kanungu, you know we have been hit by drought, when we were moving around we found out that Kanungu has many eucalyptus trees.

Those trees were planted in valleys, swamps and everywhere because they have factories, which they must supply with those trees so that they get good quality timber. 

Therefore, I would like to urge NEMA to also be very serious. We are not happy. Let them do enough research, go to all areas and see which trees we can plant where so that at least our country gets good environment like it is called the Switzerland of Africa and it remains so. Otherwise, we do not appreciate the work of NEMA because they are not showing us that they are serious.

However, the ministry of land is also granting land tittles to these people - imagine granting a land title to somebody on a land, you see that it is a swamp and thus not supposed to be tampered with. Everybody is much aware that a swamp is like a granary of water. Therefore, these ministries have to be more serious so that at least we show that this country is responsible.

If you grant that title, you show that you are not responsible. Of recent, I have been thinking that maybe we need to amend some of these laws and make these officers personally responsible. If you sit in your office, sign a land title and give it to some rich person somewhere and then feel comfortable, are you being patriotic, do you love your country, do you see us going anywhere after allowing somebody to remove that swamp? It is terrible.

I have been thinking like that and I think in future, we need to do something about it because I have seen some Ugandans are very careless about whatever happens. We are supposed to protect all these goods for our future, our children and for the future of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs - there is a big issue there. When somebody wins a case, they never pay the money. Many people are claiming a lot of money; hon. Kahinda Otafiire, I do not know why you are not paying, at least show us that this year I have paid a quarter. You cannot say we do not have money. Uganda is rich; it has money because I see most of the money going in things that are not so important.

I have seen one parson develop pressure because he had a claim of Shs 21 million. The man went on waiting for that money up to when he developed pressure, died, and left the money. I think we need to look at Ugandans and put these things into consideration. If there are cases of that nature, let us get to report that maybe this year, we paid such and such people and expecting in the next financial year to pay these kinds of people so that we can also be patient and encourage them to wait.

Otherwise, Ugandans are not happy in some of those areas. Similarly, I would like to request the ministry because most of our Ugandans do not know some of their rights and in case they have matters or cases to be brought to court how to go about it. I would love to request the ministry to look into that area, we inform our people -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, let us share the time.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am now going to impose time of three minutes.

4.35
MS JACQUELINE AMONGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the chairperson of the Committee of Human Rights for the report well presented. I would like to highlight the fact that Uganda is one of the signatories to the African Union Protocol on human and peoples’ rights. It, therefore, should implement most of the issues highlighted in its national framework.

Mr Speaker, recently, I read a report that indicated the poverty levels in Uganda and it showed the two regions seriously lagging behind: the eastern and northern regions. Actually, they are not improving but deteriorating in terms of the economic status of the people.

I would have appreciated if that report could address the issues of human rights and equity in the country but also look at the methodologies on how deliverables can be channeled for those particular regions in order to uplift the people in those areas.

Mr Speaker, the other issue that some Members have already raised is SAGE. In the previous and even this Parliament, there was a war. I would have appreciated the report if the committee recommended that SAGE should be wiped away if we cannot implement it throughout the country so that there is no discrimination in terms of the elderly in Uganda.
 
What reason do I give as a Member of Parliament for Ngora to the elderly people there on why the people in Kabale and Katakwi are getting a stipend every month when the ones of Ngora, Kitgum or Bushenyi cannot have access to this money?

Mr Speaker, the other issue regards the inmates. The situation in Luzira Prison alone is very wanting. They cook posho and keep it somewhere; then, in the evening, they prepare beans so that the inmates can have a meal. The sanitation in the prisons is extremely wanting. Remember, not everyone who is in jail is there by choice. Therefore, we really need to look at the sanitation situation in the country especially in areas where we are detained because all of us are potential inmates in future depending -

Lastly, are the women inmates- In the previous Parliament, we focused on the provision of sanitary towels in the remand homes. However, when we visited the inmates, the women showed that they do not receive some of these –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate my honourable colleague for giving me way. Concerning sanitation of our inmates, the information I would like to give is that there are other prisons whereby inmates are sleeping in the toilets. For example, when we visited Luzira Prison, the inmates told us that when time comes to use the toilet, they have to remove their blankets and create way for their colleagues to jump, enter the toilet, use it and move out. Therefore, the situation is so alarming that it needs very serious Government concern. That is the information, honourable colleague.

MS AMONGIN: Therefore, Mr Speaker, as I conclude –(Member timed out.)

4.38
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson and the committee for the elaborate report and the good research they have done.
	
Also, Mr Speaker, I would like to note the following: when you get to the detention centres of the juveniles, there is a question about the wardens or matrons because two weeks ago, there was a very unfortunate occurrence in Mbale Remand Home where a matron beat an inmate to death. The mother of this child is my friend and maybe because she is a pastor, she has decided to forgive the matron. However, something has to be done. Otherwise, if these people are not trained and do not know how to handle these juveniles, it is quite unfortunate. We will realise that these centres have become death traps for our children. This is a mother who wanted her child to be rehabilitated but eventually, the child ended up dead.

Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate when you visit the cells and find people from 18 years of age mixed with inmates of 90 years old. How I pray there could be detention centres for the elderly so that they can be handled in a different way because they are quite vulnerable.

Mr Speaker, when you visit all the barracks and I will specifically talk about the ones in Mbale: Bugema Barracks, the Military Police Barracks, Prisons Barracks and the Police Barracks; they are in a sorry state. In fact, most of their roofs are leaking and their walls are cracked.

All the barracks in the country need refurbishment –(Member timed out.)

4.40
MR DONONZIO MUGABE (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy to be back in the House at the time we are discussing the rights of the prisoners. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I would start by adding my point on the issue of sanitation. I would like to inform this House that it is unfortunate that in our country we still have prisons where prisoners use night bucket system at night to ease themselves.

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Internal Affairs and Government at large should do something. It violates the rights of the inmates using the system and those affected especially when an inmate is using that system.
	
Mr Speaker, in our country, we have 40 inmates who are on minister’s order. Those are inmates found by courts of law to be mentally challenged. They are in prisons pending minister’s order. Now that we have the minister concerned in the House, maybe he can update us on how far - recently in Jinja, where I was, one prisoner died after serving nine years pending minister’s order. Other prisoners have been in prison for more than ten years pending minister’s order. Maybe the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs can throw light on that issue. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker –(Member timed out.)

4.43
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also applaud the chairperson of the committee for the detailed report. I have just two concerns. The absence of service delivery in our community amounts to violation of human rights. We do not only look at the bill of rights in Chapter 4 of the Constitution. The absence of good roads, health care systems and clear justice systems amounts to human rights violation.

I would like to focus on a more serious issue, which is corruption. I did not hear the extent to which corruption has contributed to human rights violation. However, failure in service delivery is largely because we have serious corruption cases in this country.

We know that there is this common statement that if “you are poor, you cannot win a case”. It is very well articulated in vernacular. The biggest challenge within our judicial service system is that you must be well connected and empowered in terms of money to win a case. 

Therefore, the Government should look at this serious issue of corruption and bring it down to controllable levels, if we are true human rights observers. You go to police; you will find a very big mess. 

Lastly-(Member timed out.)

4.46
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first appreciate Government for promoting human rights in the country. That is why we have such a powerful committee in Parliament.

However, let us look at the example of prison life. What do we understand by uniform? Personally, I urge Government to ensure that the prison uniform includes even shoes. It happens in London - Britain.  How can you allow a person to walk bare footed to go and dig and be punished in the garden? 

We should also look at social rights; how can a person be imprisoned for life or 20 years, and they go without seeing their family? The other time, I was arguing for conjugal rights of prisoners, where we have guest houses within prison and a prisoner can be allowed to meet his or her spouse for at least 40 minutes -(Interjection)- this is a fundamental right. Government should look at these serious issues as real human rights. 

There are also human rights that we have kept silent, yet they are very loud. That is about remuneration of the personnel in these sensitive areas. Look at the salary of a police officer and a judge. All these issues must be addressed and we see how to remunerate them well to ensure that their minds are cleared from corruption. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to draw this to a close. The ministries that have been mentioned of health, internal affairs, public service, justice, ICT, gender and labour may make some responses.

Can I have the Leader of the Opposition representative making a comment briefly?

4.48
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I saw that very many Members were still up and thought that you would give us more time to continue commenting on this since it is a very crucial issue.

When we talk about human rights abuse, it is very important; we are happy with the report that there is a bit of progress, but we will be very happy to see that we continue to improve more and reach a point of success in prisons. We need to see the backlog cleared.

The security organisations in this country are still a big problem in terms of torture. Our Constitution prohibits torture.  I am wondering what we should do especially since we still have up to 40 per cent complaints from people suffering torture.

I would like to give an example of where a police officer shot at random and hurt some people. However, they only paid the hospital bills. That happened in Lacor Hospital; hospital bills only, and no compensation for the damages done. We also had a case of Rubangakene and others. 

Another is the Nalufenya police cells where NRM LC III chairperson suffered such cruel and degrading treatment. Imagine what the Opposition goes through; if such a person can go through that, it means torture in our detentions is now an everyday thing. Even right now, some other people have been detained. Yesterday, we saw some brutal arrests. These things need improvement.

When we talk about Muslims, even their children were allegedly arrested and detained. A three year old child - can that child participate in planning to kill somebody? All these should be addressed.

Therefore, our Constitution of 1995 is against arbitrary arrests; respects our people. It is illegal to detain a person for over 48 hours, but now that is the order of the day. 

Sometimes you find people are arrested, detained and not attended to. There are some people who stay in prison for years under detention. This is very unfortunate and unlawful. This should be dealt with. 

When we looked at the OCs and DPCs, most of these people are NRM cadres; I do not mean all, but we need to do research. To a greater extent, they are biased.

Let us always be straight, if we want to help this country and we are people of integrity. We should not hide things which are crystal clear. I am sure, if we begin to recruit people accordingly - we put people on a levelled weighing scale and not about supporting a given political party and maybe we will also go in the right direction and stop detaining our people anyhow.

That means that when we talk about detention without trial - some of the kangaroo laws that we make here need to be reviewed. For example –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to withdraw that. We never make kangaroo laws here?

MS AOL: The Public Order Management Act was not a very good law for the people of Uganda.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is an Act of Parliament, but not a kangaroo law. We do not have kangaroos in this Parliament. 

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, I am sorry for calling it a kangaroo law and I withdraw my statement. However, we should make laws, which are not blind -(Interjections) - thank you, Mr Speaker.

The issue of juveniles being mixing with adults is a big issue and this encourages criminal activities. When you mix juveniles with adults, the young learn more criminal activities. Therefore, this should be looked at and we need to improve on it.

There are a lot of human rights issues, which I am sure have not been touched - like compensation. The people who went through court and were promised to be compensated, many of them have not yet been compensated and this should be handled. 

Let us treat Ugandans well. As Ugandans, we have a good motor, which says “For God and My country”. When we say the above, it means you should love your God and neighbour as you love yourself. If we practice this, we will improve on all our systems and our systems will work towards protecting all Ugandans. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. From the onset, I would like to say that the report of Human Rights Commission is a helpful tool to us in Ministry of Internal Affairs. Good enough, we happen to be in the same sector of Government that is the Justice, Law and Order Sector. Since this report came out, we have shared quite a lot with them and we have benefited from their report.

Secondly, there are some issues in this report, which will be of a policy nature and some of practical nature. For example, the police have been quoted for violating the 48 hours rule. I would like to comment about this because many times the police are forced by the circumstances in a particular nature of a crime to violate the 48 hour rule. In case, of a murder and the suspect has been apprehended and investigations are ongoing, the police often find themselves constrained to adhere to the 48 hours rule to release the suspect.

However, at the same time, if you release that person, you may jeopardize investigations. I am not saying that –(Interruption)-         

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I had restrained myself to make comments because I was following the proceedings very keenly. A complaint has been made and a report of the committee of Parliament has been presented. This is a violation of not a statutory right but a constitutional right.
 
The reason the minister is given an opportunity to speak last, my understanding is that he makes comments, which includes giving an assurance to Parliament about the steps taken to improve the situation.

The minister started well by saying that because we are in JLOS as a sector, we have shared information. My expectation was that the minister would tell us the progress made by the security organisations, one of which he represents.

However, instead of doing that, he is going ahead to justify the abuses as if asking us to amend the Constitution, which I am aware we have rejected before. Is he, therefore, in order to make a justification instead of taking us forward on the steps taken to stop violating the rights of Ugandans?

Indeed, an accusation made by the report is that Government has not taken steps to assist in improving the situation; for example, the poor funding to these organs. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Constitution is the Constitution. You never explain it away, but you only enforce it. However, where there are challenges of enforcement, there is no way you can stand here and justify them and give reasons why you are going to continue to violate the provisions of the Constitution. You cannot explain it, but can only say it is unfortunate and you will take steps to correct those things so that no further record will show that such violations will ever occur. 

Therefore, you are completely out of order honourable minister – (Applause) 

MR OBIGA: Mr Speaker most obliged for that ruling. I have my way of presenting the issue. I have said yes, human rights have been violated in that respect, the circumstances were the following, but before I could say what we are proposing and what we have been doing, the issue of order was raised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe that is the only thing you should have said.

MR OBIGA: I will not say anything about that since you have already ruled. 

Secondly, all the other issues about violation of human rights in prisons, police barracks and all those other places where we even use buckets at night are very well known to all of us. We come here every year and ask for money. You are all aware that the budget is allocated from this Parliament and that it is not adequate to cater for everything. We regret that situation, but that is the budget arbitration.

We, therefore, hope that in the next budget cycle, we will re-table this issue; you will be the biggest allies of the Ministry of Internal Affairs in addressing these issues in prisons and police. I thank you very much.

5.03
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, ICT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My ministry and agencies under got an opportunity to interact with the committee of human rights and we had good conversations on a number of issues.

I would like to thank the chair for recommending that the sector needs adequate support to carry out awareness. National guidance is such a broad mandate. You have to guide, Mr Speaker, from A to Z, explain the known and the unknown. You have to invest in research and content generation. Therefore, I really want to thank the committee for understanding our constraints. 

There are two or three issues I would like to respond to; one is that the Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that the Ministry of ICT should expeditiously table the data Protection Privacy Bill in Parliament for consideration so that it is passed as an Act of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to report that this was done and the Bill is with the Committee of ICT. We will wait for them to do their work. 

The other issue of the committee is protection of online users and freedom. In particular, the report reads, “Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) ensures that restriction of online freedom of expression and privacy, if in public interests, are clearly publicised, non-discriminatory and done in conformity with the law.” 

This is what we have tried to explain. There is a difference between fighting cybercrime or people abusing online platforms and misunderstanding UCC to constrain or to supress people’s freedom. It is your right to share anything. It is not your right to vend pornography or record audios promising to kill someone; so the commission is tough on that. It is doing its work in conformity with the law passed by this Parliament and I request for the support of this House- (Interruption)

MR OGUZU LEE: Honourable minister, I sit on the Committee of ICT and the Committee of Human Rights clearly indicates that UCC has over stepped its mandate in some cases and has ended up violating people’s rights. 

I am aware a tribunal is supposed to be instituted to resolve any complaints that people may have with the operations of UCC and that has not happened since you took over. Would you want to clarify to the House how you will provide an enabling environment for UCC to be able to have their issues with the public sorted out? Thank you. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, honourable colleague. The UCC has not overstepped its mandate but it operates within the law. Due to the fact that it is a body corporate, if UCC oversteps its mandate, it can be sued so they are aware of where their limits end. 

In this Parliament, for example, you remember I was put to task to explain why a certain TV station was not being sanctioned over some talk that was defamatory to Members of Parliament. I gave a report on the steps UCC was taking, which was in accordance with the law, and it required writing to the station to hear them out. Therefore, the law is elaborate and UCC follows it. 

The work of the communications tribunal in the law is for receiving complaints specifically for the telecommunications industry. I agree with you that since 2013 when the UCC Act came into force, the communications tribunal has never been formed because of budgetary constraints. However, I am glad to inform this House that the law requires us together with the Judicial Service Commission to consult and have this body put in place. I am glad to report that a process has already started. Mr Speaker, we have worked on most of these issues. 

The other point I would like to conclude with is on digital technology. The committee challenges us to create awareness. I concede on that because technologies are evolving every day. Everything is going on live in the field of commerce, health and in the courts. This rules out the practitioners who are not ICT professionals but we must adopt these digital skills. 

Mr Speaker, we are encouraging different MDAs to adopt digital literacy. I would like to thank Parliament for taking the lead because now you get your work on your iPads. You are not all ICT professionals but you have taken trouble to adopt and learn those simple skills of using an iPad. We are also trying to persuade Cabinet and the court to go online. 

If you do not embrace digital skills, there is what they call digital interruption whereby technologies will disrupt you. If you are used to signing a cheque, a point will come when the banks will phase out cheques and you must transact everything online –(Interruption) 

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank you, honourable minister, for giving way and for accepting to clarify. When you talked about Cabinet among others, I had expected you to confirm the steps you have taken to assist our colleagues and train them but you are saying you have encouraged them. 

When I look around, I see some ministers who I am sure are not in position to operate some of these gadgets. My assurance would only come in if you told me that you have put in place a training mechanism. 

You have talked about a very important ministry, that of national guidance but you are also not telling us about the guidance tools that you are using because there is no law for your national guidance. The scope is not known on what you guide us on. With respect, on the face, some of our ministers may not be able to operate these gadgets and you have not assisted them. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Okay, you see with digital empowerment, different MDAs operate their IT budgets. However, there is an authority that was created by this Parliament, which is under our sector called the National IT Authority of Uganda (NITA-U). 

Therefore, NITA-U in liaison with the IT department of various agencies, including this Parliament, already has a link. NITA audits all the systems that the different MDAs use and trains the professionals. Hence, the advice we give to different MDAs, because they operate their IT budgets, is that they should plan for digital skills empowerment- (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Sir. As I wind up; if we had all the money, we would train Members of Parliament, Cabinet and permanent secretaries. However, because this money resides in the different MDAs, we issue policy guidance that you should prioritise giving digital literacy to your officers or else they will be incompatible with the current time.

5.11
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson of the Human Rights Committee for her report. There are two issues that she raised in the report; that is on commodities for albinos and sensitising the public on cancers that the Ministry of Health already took up. 

However, there was another issue raised on the delay to take prisoners for medical attention. We acknowledge that and we acknowledge the challenges that are taking place in the prisons. 

Allow me first of all to state here that the health facilitates in the prisons, which are very small, are clinics like outpatient are not directly under the Ministry of Health. The Ministry of Health is only directly responsible for the regional referral hospitals. These health facilitates are directly under the Ministry of Local Government and the Uganda Prisons. Our responsibility is limited to guidelines, policies, supportive supervision and we do make recommendations to them. We have visited these areas severally and noted these problems and made recommendations for change. 

Mr Speaker, we will again take this up and link up with the prisons to ensure that they take the prisoners early for treatment. We shall also ensure that proper storage of drugs is undertaken. However, we also acknowledge that they do have challenges of human resources - (Interruption) 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether we are proceeding well when certain ministers are making reference to other ministries while the docket holders are not here. Moreover, we do not have the Leader of Government Business here. At the end of the day, we are going to make recommendations that will not be coordinated from the Cabinet side. Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali was here and left unceremoniously. Are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, we are. Honourable minister -

DR ACENG: Mr Speaker, I was concluding that we shall link up again with the prison facility. They have challenges of human resources but they have a registered nurse, a clinical officer and one enrolled nurse. These may not be in position to identify all the conditions that may need referral at the appropriate time. However, we shall link up with them and make sure that they are trained further to identify these conditions and report them accordingly. I thank you.

5.15
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin with the question of minister’s orders and assure this House that whatever case has been reported to us for appropriate handling has been handled. I think the problem could be miscommunication. If there are mental patients in Jinja prison who have not been transferred to a mental asylum, I am going to liaise with the Chief Justice and get all those cases referred to us so that we can remove them from the criminal prison to mental rehabilitation. 

There is nobody that has been brought to our attention that has not been appropriately handled. On the question of –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, when the committee visited Luzira, we met more than 10 inmates who said they had spent more than 10 years under minister’s orders. What we would like to find out from you is, why should it take someone to take that long under minister’s orders? Why should one person take more than 10 years under minister’s orders? They are not being attended to and they do not know what is going on. This is the clarification I would like to seek. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the minister that not everyone who is pending ministerial orders is actually a mental case. Originally, it was people who were mentally challenged that were supposed to be referred by the minister to these places of detention. As it is now, not everyone who is pending minister’s orders is mentally challenged.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: The next category of those pending minister’s orders are juveniles. Like I said before, I think there is miscommunication between the courts of law and the Ministry of Justice. Juveniles who are brought to us are appropriately handled by putting them in appropriate places for juvenile rehabilitation. Those that are mentally challenged are put in the appropriate places. I think it is a question of communication and I am sorry that people have been on minister’s orders for 10 years. This is regrettable and undesirable and we are going to work on it.

Regarding the issue of attorneys attending court, it is desirable that attorneys should address issues raised by the Human Rights Commission. However, Mr Speaker, we are challenged with the number of attorneys at our disposal. We do not have enough and even the few that we have are overstretched. As you know, court attendance by attorneys is by order of priority. When the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal and the High Court are sitting, lower courts take second place because we do not have enough people. Sometimes, human rights tribunals do not get the attention they deserve – (Interruption)

MR SSEGOONA: I would like to thank the honourable minister for accepting to give clarification. I have sat on the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for the last six years and we scrutinise the budget for the ministry. I have never seen a budget proposal from the ministry seeking to increase the number of attorneys.

Secondly, I have never seen a budget proposal for increasing the salaries of these attorneys so that we can attract more of their brains.

The other element of clarification that I would like to seek from the minister is that an honourable member raised the issue of Naguru Remand Home, which is one of the biggest in the country, if not the only one, as having been donated. The minister has concluded the issue of juvenile justice without giving us an answer to this. 

I speak as a person who has been previously detained with a juvenile in police cells for some days. This juvenile would go to court and be remanded again in the police station in Kyenjojo simply because there is no facility for juveniles in that area. Can I seek clarification on the steps taken by the ministry to increase the budget to recruit more attorneys as well as on Naguru Remand Home being donated by Government?

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the shadow minister for bringing up this issue. However, the question of increasing numbers of attorneys and their salaries is in realm of the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We make our requests but there is this ‘animal’ called the MTEF, which limits us. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tells us that they do not have enough resources, which is true because our resource envelope is small and inadequate to cover all the needs of the country.

Regarding Naguru Remand Home, that is within the docket of Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Please address this question to the relevant minister. However, since the Deputy Prime Minister was not here and I was in charge of his portfolio, I will ask the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to come and report to Parliament. I thank you.

On the question of payment of human rights awards, the problem is the same. We have got a lot of court awards and the demand on our resources is exorbitant. From the ordinary awards to tribunal awards and these other costs that Government incurs, we cannot handle; we are paying gradually. 

As for prioritisation of payment, I will look into that because it should be first in, first out. If there is any wrong doing in that respect, we shall look into it.

Regarding the question of civil debtors, the Uganda Law Reform Commission is studying the law with a view to recommending to Parliament redress in the law. 

As for observance of human rights recommendations, we do our level best to observe them within our means. This is because most of them have financial implications and these implications are a constraint on our full mandate. However, we shall do whatever is possible, within our capacity, to ensure that we observe and recognise the recommendations of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chair, do you want to ask us to adopt your recommendations? Your presentation was clear; I am giving you one minute to do that.

5.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving us the opportunity to discuss this report for the entire afternoon and address human rights issues that concern Ugandans deeply.

I would like to thank honourable ministers who are here and have attempted to respond to the issues, although we know that a lot more needs to be done. We are hoping that the honourable ministers will take the recommendations in this report very seriously, go and implement them and be able to come back and report on the progress.

I would like to thank the honourable members for raising the issues that they raised. I would also like to thank the members of the committee and the committee staff. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Human Rights on the 18th annual report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, 2015 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, you are instructed to extract the sector-based recommendations and transmit them to the responsible sectors for assessment or implementation. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF BLOOD COLLECTION AND CAUSES OF BLOOD SHORTAGE IN THE COUNTRY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you will start with an apology and then proceed.

5.26
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I apologise that at the time when this item came up, I was not in the House. I was far away in Entebbe attending two international meetings. I beg to be forgiven.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

DR ACENG: This is a statement on the status of blood collection and causes of blood shortage in the country. Mr Speaker, Uganda Blood Transfusion Service (UBTS) is a semi-autonomous national blood service responsible for all blood collection, transfusion and safety activities for the entire country.

The UBTS has a network of seven regional blood banks in Arua, Fort Portal, Gulu, Kitovu, Mbale, Mbarara and Nakasero. Important to note here is that Arua and Masaka are not yet purpose built. In other words, they do not have infrastructure for this. Eight collection centres exist in Hoima, Masaka, Kabale, Rukungiri, Jinja, Lira, Angal and Soroti. There are 22 mobile blood collection teams attached to the regional blood banks.

The mission of UBTS is to achieve a safe, efficient and sustainable national blood service, based on healthy volunteer blood donors and able to meet the needs of Uganda's health care system while promoting good blood transfusion systems.

In pursuit of this mission, the main objective of UBTS is to make available adequate quantities of safe blood and blood products, free of charge, to all hospitals for the treatment of all patients in need.

Unfortunately, UBTS is unable to achieve this objective due to human resource, infrastructure and funding challenges. 

Mr Speaker, the objectives of the blood transfusion safety programme are:
    i) To expand blood collection capacity to operate adequately within a decentralised healthcare delivery system.

    ii) To increase the annual blood collection necessary to meet the blood requirements of all patients in the transfusing health care units throughout the country.

    iii) To improve the quality of blood available for transfusion.
    iv) To improve transfusion practices in hospitals.

    v) To implement a plan for sustainability of the blood safety programme.

I gave a table indicating blood collection in the country over the past six financial years. The number of blood units that we have been collecting has progressively increased albeit minimally. I have also indicated the funding that has been provided to the blood transfusion units over the years and in some cases, where we got supplementary funding like in FY 2013/2014, 2014/2015, 2015/2016 and 2016/2017. I would also like to indicate that this particular financial year, there was a cut in the budget.

I have given explanatory notes that in FY 2014/2015, we received funding from the Joint Population Programme through the World Health Organisation (WHO) of Shs 2.5 billion. That gave a total funding to UBTS of Shs 19.9 billion and two blood collection teams of Lira and Nebbi were brought on board at that time.

In FY 2014/2015, UBTS received medical supplies from National Medical Stores (NMS) worth Shs 1.96 billion, making a total funding of Shs 19.74 billion. This was Government of Uganda funding.

In FY 2015/2016, the supplies from NMS increased by Shs 5.4 billion, making a total of Shs 24.4 billion.

1n FY 2016/2017, a supplementary was provided worth Shs 7 billion increasing the funding to Shs 23.79 billion.

However, there was a budget cut of Shs 0.197 billion thereby reducing the allocation to Shs 17.3 billion.

Mr Speaker, I have also given a table showing the blood collection trends and corresponding expenditure. From that table, you will realise that every time the budget is increased, whether by way of supplementary or the normal increase, the blood collection went up. However, where the money was reduced, the collection also went down.

In setting annual blood collection targets, we follow the WHO recommendation, which states that any developing country is supposed to collect blood equivalent to one per cent of its total population. Our current population, as estimated by Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS), is 35 million. However, in our programme, we realised that the numbers are more than that. Therefore, we would require to collect 400,000 units blood annually as our target to meet our transfusion requirements in our health care facilities.

As you are aware, Uganda’s health sector is also readying itself to provide super specialised medical surgeries and cancer treatment and these will require increased blood supply to meet the national blood demand.

The UBTS has progressively set the blood collection annual target based on 10 per cent annual blood collection increment of the previous financial year so as to attain the one per cent WHO recommendation. However, the trend was interrupted by a close partner; PEPFAR that was giving us additional funding. Since then, there has been no alternate funding hence setting a lower annual target. However, even the lower annual target of 240,000 units cannot be met due to insufficient funding.

Mr Speaker, on average it costs about $40 to collect, process and issue a unit of blood. Therefore, UBTS would need a budget of about Shs 39.5 billion to meet our FY 2017/2018 target of collecting and processing 240 units of blood. 

Again, I have given a table indicating the current status of blood collection in the country from each of the regional blood banks and the collection points. 

Mr Speaker, to comment on the current blood collection performance, UBTS is taking measure to fit within the approved budget. In doing that, there has been a reduction in the daily blood collection sessions from 22 days to 15 days per month. 

Secondly, there has been a reduction in the number of blood collection teams. The teams that are listed for closure include Arua, one team; that is Nebbi, Fort Portal; Mbarara, one team that includes Rukungiri; Gulu, one team and that is Lira.

Regarding the closure of the blood collection centres, whereas it is true that Uganda Blood Transfusion Services intends to close some blood collection centres, it is not true that six blood collection centres have been closed. Those listed for closure are Rukungiri, Lira, Nebbi and Nakasero; that is the Ambassador House Blood Donating Centre in downtown Kampala. The reason is lack of adequate funds. 

As I mentioned before, the UBTS has been co-funded by CDC-PEPFAR for the last 15 years. The funding supported infrastructure, blood collection, clinical interface, procurement of blood collection vehicles, equipment, laboratory equipment and wages for the contract staff. Unfortunately, CDC-PEPFAR funding to UBTS ended in March 2016 and we have not received additional funding to cater for the gap left by CDC-PEPFAR.

The UBTS underfunding challenge has been discussed during the budgeting process with various stakeholders. Mr Speaker, this has also been brought to the attention of this Parliament by the various committees. 

Second is the inadequate wage provision. The UBTS staff establishment was recently revised and restructured to cater for institutional growth to meet its mandate of providing adequate and safe blood across the country. This revision resulted in an increased wage bill of Shs 3.6 billion of which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has, this financial year, allocated only Shs 2.7 billion. There is, therefore, a funding gap of Shs 0.87 billion.

Third is the lack of funds to support blood collection operations. The non-wage allocation to the blood transfusion services is inadequate and cannot support blood collection operations. The UBTS requires Shs 15 billion to complement this FY 2017/2018. Therefore, UBTS needs to receive an allocation of Shs 17.5 billion.

Fourthly, there are the supplies that go to UBTS through National Medical Stores.  The UBTS annual procurement plan for medical supplies is Shs 24 billion to collect and test 240,000 units of blood. The allocation for the FY 2017/2018 is Shs 7.9 billion. The updated statement from National Medical Stores, as per the budget, shows that the annual budget allocation is already exhausted. This means we shall have challenges in the subsequent quarters.

Mr Speaker, I have also given a table summarising the wage, non-wage and capital development allocation to UBTS and also the allocation for procurement of commodities that pass through National Medical Stores.

Lastly, the causes of shortage in the country include:
    1. The blood collection targets are set below the World Health Organisation minimum recommended one per cent because of funding constraints. As such, the supply cannot meet our demands fully.

    2. There is inappropriate clinical use of blood in some hospitals. Through our routine supervision, we have observed that sometimes, blood is wrongly prescribed. What I mean by that is, people who may be anaemic but could survive without blood are given the blood, leaving those who critically need it.

    3. Sometimes, there is unethical conduct by some health workers who, even in the face of availability of blood, go ahead and say it is unavailable. Sometimes, we have also learnt that it is offered for sale.

    4. Unnecessary transfusion, coupled with poor storage, due to challenges that may be related to power.

    5. Inadequate staffing necessary for blood collection as many vacancies were created by withdrawal of partners that were supporting the UBTS.

I thank you for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this arose from a question without notice based on its urgency under rule 39 and the answer could not be obtained immediately. Therefore, if the Member who raised this matter has a supplementary question - The specific issue that was raised was on the closure and that was urgent. That is why the minister had to make this statement.

I think the answer is clear and comprehensive and we will halt it here. It is only a supplementary question; it is not a debating matter. Let us follow the rules. No comments; the rules are clear on supplementary questions and you are not the Member who raised the issue.

Honourable members, the remainder of the issues will be referred to our Committee on Health to look at and report back to the House. If the Member who raised this matter does not have a supplementary question to raise, we will pause this matter here. Thank you.

Honourable members, this is what is going to happen tomorrow and I need the Government Chief Whip to take note. I would like statements on:

    a) the disease attack on eucalyptus plantations in Kyenjojo;
    b) advertisements that are injurious to public health.

All these arise from urgent matters. Therefore, we will treat them the same way.

In addition, we will require statements on:

    a) the sale of plots of land in Namanve Industrial Park by private individuals; 
    b) the mismanagement of the women and youth fund by community development officers; 
    c) price discrimination of Hima Cement prices in Kasese District; 
    d) delayed payment of tobacco farmers from West Nile region;
    e)  resumption of vaccination of children in private health facilities. 

They are not actually statements; they are responses to questions. Therefore, I would like all of them tomorrow and they should be termed responses, not ministerial statements because they are not ministerial statements. 

From the Committee on Education and Sports, tomorrow I need the report on the closure of private schools by the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

From the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I need the status report on the petition to Parliament moved under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda for the following companies’ payment of these people who supplied things to South Sudan: Ake-Jo Company, Ahmos Investments, Absolute Homes Ltd - All those ones, which are on item 9; business to follow. I would like a status report on that tomorrow.

Honourable members, that means that the Order Paper is determined in your presence. Do not go and start speculating what is not on the Order Paper. The House stands adjourned to tomorrow 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.44 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 September 2017 at 2.00 p.m.)  
