

Wednesday, 30 September 2020

Parliament met at 3.17 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I welcome you members to this afternoon sitting. I have two issues to communicate. 

This morning, I received a delegation of youth leaders from Kaliro District. Among many things, they had come to find out when the Government would respond to their request to repair the Saka Bridge which is the main artery between Pallisa and Kaliro. A lot of people have died there and it is still not passable. They would like to know from the Government when Saka Bridge is going to be rehabilitated so that people can move and do their business.

Secondly, I also had a meeting with the Judicial Service Commission. One of their difficulties is that we have not provided enough money for them to recruit the necessary judicial officers making it difficult for Ugandans to access justice. 

At the moment, there are 420 positions where there are no officers. There are districts with no magistrates. Their request is that during the new budget cycle, Government considers providing sufficient funds to enable them improve on the recruitment and the numbers so that more people can have access to justice. 

I would like to call on the Committee on Budget and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to take an interest in this issue for budget purposes for 2020/2021.

We also have a few matters of national interest. May I invite hon. Ababiku to present.

3.20
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, that is, looming famine in my district as a result of effects of continued floods which have affected the crops. 

I am requesting Government to support my district. My specific request is that seeds should be provided as it is still raining. That is going to avert the looming famine. My interest is specifically in beans and sorghum. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yes, the rainy season is coming to an end but there are areas which have been flooded for some time. We request the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to respond urgently to the issues in Adjumani and ensure that they have some seeds for the second planting season. 

3.22
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, National Representative, Workers): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance in relation to the mismanagement and micromanagement of Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) by the current director, Dr Ben Manyindo. 

The executive director mentioned above does not seem to embrace the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Chapter 4 of the Constitution talks about protection and promotion of the fundamental and other human rights. 

Article 29(e) talks about freedom of association, which shall include the freedom to form and join associations or unions including trade unions. 

It is very embarrassing that at the time when the ED joined UNBS, he found that the Uganda Science Research and Allied Workers’ Union had registered within that organization, 117 staff, but as we talk right now, they are only 50. The others have been wrongfully or unfairly dismissed without justifiable reasons and without due process as per the established laws under the principles of natural justice.

There is a gross abuse of authority at UNBS, Madam Speaker, as well as court processes to the extent that whenever the management is summoned to meet the labour officers or to go to court, they always find excuses not to appear. In the end, they continue ensuring that justice is not dispensed to the people concerned. 

There are several managerial issues that should be unearthed. To that end, I have a document which needs to be scrutinised giving all the details I am talking about. I request to lay it on the Table as I wind up.

It should be noted that in April 2019, the Committee on Tourism was mandated and given an assignment by you, Madam Speaker, to investigate and come up with a report on the allegations raised against the executive director. No report has been presented till now.

My prayer is that you should, Madam Speaker, institute an independent committee to investigate all the cases of wrongful dismissal as it was requested at that time, and that justice should prevail. 

The same committee should also investigate the abuse of authority and the pending court processes.

I also pray that the reappointment of the executive director of UNBS should be halted – because I know that his time is up – until a proper report is brought to this House for discussion, and a clear way forward established.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a petition that was presented to you in April 2019 by the officers or workers who were suffering in that organisation. Also, a letter that was written in March 2020, inviting the general secretary of the union I am talking about; that is Uganda Science, Research and Allied Workers Union. However, up to now, we have not received a report in this House.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I want the Clerk to establish what has transpired in this Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry; how far they have gone with the matter because it seems the honourable member is bringing back the same matter.

Let us first find out what happened and then we can follow up with the reminder, which is in this petition. Clerk, give us an answer tomorrow because we are all here. Give us an answer so that we know how to proceed with this matter. Thank you.

3.28
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, concerning the situation of COVID-19 in Abim District.

Following the confirmation of 28 COVID-19 cases in one single test in Abim District, most of whom are healthcare workers, the technical team in the health department advised that the services in Abim Hospital and Morulem Health Centre III be suspended with effect from Monday, 28 September.

Madam Speaker, as we speak now, the hospital is closed. The health centre III of Morulem Sub-County is closed and it is only open to immunisation and other emergency services. Even Moroto Regional Referral Hospital, where the 28 cases would have been transferred for proper management is full to capacity.
The health department technical team have, therefore, taken a decision to have the 28 cases managed from the isolation unit at Abim Hospital.

Madam Speaker, the greatest challenge in the hospital is lack of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) for the health workers. There is no food for the patients. Abim District Hospital does not have an ambulance. The surveillance team is walking on foot; no vehicle! The community is scared; Government promised masks, which never arrived.

My prayer is that Government considers providing Abim District Hospital with an ambulance from among the donations that they have so far received. The Minister of Health has even gone ahead to tell the country that there are very many pick-ups and each district is going to receive two. I think now is the time for districts to be given, starting with Abim.

The other prayer is for Government to provide transport means for the surveillance team, so that they continue monitoring the situation in all parts of the country, including Abim.

The other prayer, Madam Speaker, is to support Abim Hospital with food for patients because it is a hospital which was not designated to host the COVID-10 patients. However, because of the circumstances, it is now hosting these patients.

The last prayer is for Government to avail PPEs to the health workers and also ensure that the masks, which we have been waiting to receive for almost four or five months, reach some of these places.

I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR MWIJUKYE: Madam Speaker, apart from hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who is seated on the other side - she is seated there because the space is empty, there is no Government representative. We are raising matters of national importance but we are speaking to ourselves.

My concern, Madam Speaker, is how do we proceed, when we are speaking to ourselves? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the matters be raised. They will go on the Hansard and the Clerk is going to transmit them to the ministers. We have little time, so we should try and do as much as possible.

With relation to the issue in Abim Hospital, the Minister of Health is urged to address the situation on food, medication and the PPEs, as requested by hon. Okori-Moe and report back to us at the first sitting after the recess. Thank you very much.

3.33
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, concerning the Office of the Electoral Commission.

The Electoral Commission recruited sub-county and parish supervisors. Unfortunately, up to now, the Office of the Electoral Commission has not yet given the contract agreements to those parish and sub-county supervisors.

I remember in the previous election; the contract agreements were given to those people one year before the election. However, up to now, we are left with a few months to the general elections, they have never received the contract agreements.

More so, Madam Speaker, those people were paid in the month of March. Payment for April, May and July are not yet effected; they have never received any payment. The absence of the contract agreements puts those supervisors in a very tricky situation.

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is – Let me pick information and then I rise again for the prayers -(Interruption)

MR ABALA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. I would like to thank you for raising this very important piece of information. That matter is a very critical one. By the way, what you are saying is true. 

For the case of Ngora District, where I come from, the parish supervisors, together with the sub-county supervisors have not been paid. I am only giving you information on that because I know that some people might assume that it is only the other side. Even in Ngora, they have not been given the appointments.

Two; they have not been paid for the month of April, May and June and yet they do not have contracts. All of us know that when you do not have a contract, for you, there will be no way you are going to follow up those matters that concern the issue of your rights and duties, as far as the work is concerned. I thank you very much.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, my brother. Madam Speaker, let the Office of the Electoral Commission really pay the parish and sub-county supervisors because the absence of that may lead to compromise. The forthcoming election may not be organised properly, as it is supposed to be because any candidate with money may be tempted to compromise the sub-county and parish supervisors. Hence, it may disorganise our forthcoming elections.

Madam Speaker, I pray that the Office of the Electoral Commission should immediately give the contract agreement to the sub-county and the parish supervisors so that they work when they are calm, well aware that their money shall be paid. 

Lastly, the EC should pay the sub-county and the parish supervisors for the months that they did not receive payment, given the COVID-19 situation. 

This problem is national. It is not only in Amuru District, but I am very sure it affects all the districts across the board. I so pray.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of the sub-county and parish supervisors is very crucial at this time as we prepare to go for the general elections. We, therefore, require the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to come and update the House and the country on this issue as soon as we return from the Independence recess. 

3.38
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the funding of political parties that are represented in Parliament. As chairman of IPOD, I have been approached by the NRM, FDC, DP, UPC and JEEMA that have not received funding for the last two years. 

That money has been appropriated by this Parliament, but up to now, Government has not released it to the political parties. Yet one of its purposes, which are in the law, is to facilitate political parties in their electoral processes. We are now in election period, and the money has not come. The Government has not given any explanation as to why, for the last two years, political parties with representation here are not receiving their money.

My prayer is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is directed to immediately release that money because it was actually appropriated by this Parliament. I so pray. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. That is a very important issue because definitely, we appropriated the money. We would like to know why it has not been handed over. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should update this House at the first sitting after the Independence recess. 

3.40
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent importance. On 05 September 2020, I faced the wrath of the Uganda Police. On that day, I had gone to the regional block where there was a meeting because our results for the NRM party primary elections had not been declared. This meeting was at the RDC’s office. 

When we reached there, they told us that we were not supposed to be part of that meeting, and we got out. So, we sat outside the regional block. It was very surprising that when we were seated without doing anything, the police came and the OC of Mbale Police Station in the name of Kato ordered the police to teargas us; actually me in particular. The police fired teargas at me. Whoever saw that clip can bear witness to that. On top of the teargas, I was brutally beaten.

While I was growing up, they taught us that the work of the police is to keep law and order. I do not know whether that changed, but of late, I have been witnessing brutality, which I had never known would get close to me. It is very sad because even when I recorded a statement at the police station, nothing has been done to that effect.

One of my supporters was beaten badly and his phone was crushed by the police. Therefore, I pray that the policeman who made the order and his team should be brought to book so that justice prevails. It is because they trampled over my fundamental human rights and the rights of my supporters. 

It did not stop there. They went on beating people on the streets the whole day just because they wanted us to run away so that they could declare the results, which they wanted. 

I pray that this OC of Mbale Police Station in the name of Kato is brought to book. I also pray that the phone of one of my supporters in the name of Yusuf Nsubuga be replaced. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have complained about impunity by the armed forces. This is no exception. The Minister of Internal Affairs is directed to examine that issue and explain to us why no action has been taken, but in any event, to take sanctions against and prosecute this person, who in broad daylight went and attacked citizens at a tally centre in the city of Mbale. We would like a response at the first sitting after the Independence recess. Thank you. 

Honourable members, we shall not waste time with Items 3 (I) to (IX). Let me invite the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to present the report on Item 7. Isn’t he here? Can we go to Item 11?

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING APPROVAL OF PARLIAMENT TO AMEND THE SECOND SCHEDULE TO THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING ACT, 2013

THE SPEAKER: The Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not here. Is the vice-chairperson here? Go to Item 11. Before that, let us have Item 3(I).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ALLEGED CONSIDERATION BY THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION NOT TO NOMINATE PERSONS WHOSE NAMES ON THE NATIONAL IDS DIFFER FROM THOSE ON THEIR ACADEMIC TRANSCRIPTS

3.47
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, we had a special Cabinet sitting this morning, in which we discussed this matter and we have taken a decision. However, I have not had time to prepare a comprehensive report. If it pleases you, Madam Speaker, I would request that you allow me to present a report to state the recommendations of Cabinet tomorrow with a Bill attached. 

THE SPEAKER: What did you do in the Cabinet? Okay remove the mask and talk.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I presented the matter before Cabinet today. We had a discussion over it and came to an understanding. However, I have not had enough time to prepare a comprehensive report. If it pleases you, Madam Speaker, I can present a report attached with a Bill to Parliament tomorrow. 

What I can say for now is that Cabinet gave us a go ahead to amend only in as far as Section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act, which affects married women, is concerned. Therefore, the Bill and the statement I intend to present to Parliament will be to amend only Section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act to allow married women to add a name and prove the same using a statutory declaration.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Attorney-General for the response. Yesterday or the day before, the Attorney-General convinced us that he would come in this session with a decision from Cabinet. What we were expecting was that decision.

Madam Speaker, there is a behaviour of ministers coming here to buy time after failing to do their work. This business of talking about a report, “I will come with a comprehensive report”; every time it comes - people fail to answer the questions.

My friend, hon. Jackson Kafuuzi, should take this matter seriously. This behaviour of saying that -you convinced us yesterday that you would come with a solution today. People have different names and that is for a fact. It is not only women. Other people too, have different names appearing on their academic papers and on national identity cards. 

This matter was not pronounced upon by Government at the time registration for national identity cards started. If Government had taken a decision then, we wouldn’t be pushing it to work on this. 

Therefore, at this moment in time, this business of buying time when people are being nominated and other people failing to be nominated - we desire that you take us seriously and take this matter with the seriousness it deserves.

I hope that the honourable Attorney-General will not come back here tomorrow only to tell us that he is still preparing for next week. Tomorrow is 1st October 2020 and according to the parliamentary programme, we are breaking off. 

Madam Speaker, I am worried because I thought that today we will be processing this matter. If anything fails, we finish with it tomorrow. Otherwise, the Attorney-General is buying time because he knows that tomorrow we are breaking off for recess. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.52
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are addressing this matter with the assumption that the affected nominations are only for Members of Parliament. However, there are other people who are contesting for different positions whose nominations end tomorrow. 

People who are contesting to become mayors, LCV chairpersons and many other different positions are suffering and are going through the same scenario. Therefore, it is not correct for us to address this matter as if it is only affecting Members of Parliament whose nominations are scheduled for 12 and 13 October 2020. We need to have that in mind; there are nominations that will end tomorrow.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, today as we requested the Attorney-General, we do not need a very comprehensive report. We just need to have a small report on what Cabinet has decided. If Cabinet has agreed that we amend, we are here to amend and we can amend now and have this solved.

Lastly, when the Attorney-General comes here saying the amendment will be only to allow women - there are people with pet names and if we are amending a law to serve only the interest of women alone, then that cannot be a law. The law should cross cut to take care of everybody irrespective of gender.

Therefore, let us be clear and amend a law that favours everybody. Assuming it rains tomorrow from midday to midnight, what happens when we are going for recess? Or assuming the Attorney-General or supposing the Attorney-General and the rest of the ministers do not appear tomorrow, what happens?

Therefore, we cannot work on the deadline of tomorrow; let us have this solved today and for all. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you cannot amend a law without a Bill.

3.54
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very serious matter and you correctly guided yesterday that the Attorney-General takes a serious stand and comes up with something to have this problem solved amicably.

People change names for different reasons and it is allowed. When the Attorney-General says that they have considered only married women, supposing I want to adopt my father’s name? Why didn’t you consider that? Or supposing I decided to become a Muslim tomorrow and I am given another name, did you consider all such? 

Therefore, what was the basis for you to say, it should consider only women who are married to have a leeway to have their names changed? Attorney-General, you need to consider these things very seriously; mark you we are going to an election and there is no time. People are going to miss getting elected because of some matter that we can solve in this House. Attorney-General, we would like you to up your game and make sure these issues are brought to table.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are arguing in a vacuum. Let us urge the Attorney-General to bring the Bill very early tomorrow morning so that we have it by lunch time or midday.

3.56
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The faith and spirit I see the Attorney-General with shows clearly that Government has no political goodwill in amending this law for the benefit of the women and men who have challenges with their names. Yesterday, the Attorney-General left knowing very well that we are going for recess tomorrow. He has enough manpower in both his chambers and at the ministry. Therefore, before the Attorney-General leaves, he should commit himself on the Government’s political goodwill on this matter that is affecting the entire country.

Many people who were supposed to go for nominations are waiting for this message today. Therefore, for the Attorney-General to give excuses today, does not help to build the confidence of Ugandans who are waiting for nominations but have challenges with their names.

Madam Speaker, through you, I would like the country to know the political goodwill of this law.

3.57
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): I am concerned about why we are talking about making this law. The procedures of amending a law in Parliament are clear and defined. I see a bit of a kangaroo arrangement here; I am sorry for using those words.

I would also like to ask: Are we making this law for convenience or to favour ourselves? It seems we are only doing this for political purposes, from the way I understand it. That is why I would like him to help us understand. He said that he was in a Cabinet meeting and he did not complete the whole process. He now says he is going to bring a comprehensive report. However, tomorrow, you will be shocked that he might bring almost the same thing that he is carrying here and he will tell us that it is a comprehensive report. 

I would like him, as he comes up, to know that we are having campaigns now. On the other hand, I would like to also advise my colleagues elsewhere; why do we want to have so many unnecessary names? Thank you.

3.58
Mr abdu katuntu (FDC, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I heard the Attorney-General well, he did say that he is bringing a comprehensive report tomorrow. The report per se, will not sort out this problem. What sorts out the problem is the amendment to the law. 

Therefore, I thought that we would be more interested in when the Bill is coming to the Floor of the House. We can then even amend the Bill and cater for the areas, which honourable colleagues are raising. However, the clarification I would like to seek from the learned Attorney-General is that if you are bringing the report tomorrow when we might close, when do you intend to bring the Bill? 

What is the mischief to be cured? The mischief is to amend the law and cater for, for example, the married women who have changed their names and added the names of their spouses. That is one category of people, but there could be other concerns. Tell us when the Bill is coming, rather than the said report.    

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Attorney-General told us that he is bringing the Bill tomorrow. Will you bring it?

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Speaker, I have said it on record and I would like to clarify it to my senior colleague, hon. Katuntu. I intend to bring the report with the Bill attached to it tomorrow. That, I can assure you. I was not able to do that today because I am just coming out of a Cabinet meeting. 

In preparing a Bill, we need to harmonise with the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA), which is responsible for registration, the Electoral Commission, which has been enforcing this, together with our First Parliamentary Counsel (FPC), so that we do not produce a haphazard and questionable document for this august House. Madam Speaker, I am therefore requesting that you allow us to present the Bill tomorrow and we proceed from there. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is a Government assurance. The Bill is coming tomorrow.

The leader of the opposition (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, while the Bill is to be brought tomorrow, councillors are ending their nominations tomorrow. After yesterday’s amendment, some people were able to go back and nominate those who are 28 or 26 years old as chairpersons of subcounties. Now, tomorrow’s amendment will not help the women councillors, many of whom are married and are facing a lot of challenges. Are you going to consider also extending the days of nomination for the honourable councillors? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, councillors do not need qualifications, so they are not required to take their academic documents to the registrar.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE NATIONAL LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2020 AS RETURNED BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3) (B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE




4.02
Mr Patrick Nsamba (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the country and the House that His Excellency the President returned the Bill to the House citing matters to do with the East African Community (EAC).

This House passed the Local Content Bill with a desire to increase the level of participation of local companies within Government procurements and expenditures. Although this matter was returned, we desire that the House reconsiders the Bill entitled, “The Local Content Bill, 2020.” Thank you 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES ON GOVERNMENT’S PROPOSAL TO CONSTRUCT A HYDROPOWER GENERATION PLANT OVER MURCHISON FALLS

THE SPEAKER: We were supposed to have a fully-fledged debate under this item. We had expected the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to come and respond to some issues, but I think that we should adopt our report. Nevertheless, we shall require the minister to come back and answer those questions.

I would like to put the question that this House do adopt the report of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources on Government’s proposal to construct a hydro-power generation plant over Murchison Falls. I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the House adopts the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk will extract the issues we want the minister to answer and she will still have to answer them.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE PETITION BY THE UGANDA ASSOCIATION OF ARTISANAL AND SMALL SCALE MINERS, THE ECOLOGICAL CHRISTIAN ORGANISATION, TRANSPARENCY INTERNATIONAL AND THE AFRICA CENTRE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL POLICY [ACEMP] OVER UNLAWFUL EVICTION, EXPLOITATION, ABUSE, NEGLECT AND MISTREATMENT

THE SPEAKER: Where has the Chairperson of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources gone to? Hon. Keefa is not here. 





MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE FAILURE TO ADHERE TO THE BUY UGANDA, BUILD UGANDA POLICY IN THE PROCUREMENT OF BUSES FROM INDIA BY KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY 
AUTHORITY (KCCA)

THE SPEAKER: The Chairperson for the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry is not. Is the vice-chairperson here? - Let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE RECONSIDERATION OF THE EXCISE DUTY TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

THE SPEAKER: Where is the chairperson or vice-chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development? - That means items 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 cannot be handled. 

I do not see hon. Keefa, for item No. 18. I was with him a bit earlier. He is the same chairperson for item No. 19. We shall not consider item No. 20 because we have not yet heard from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the issues of the South Sudan money. Let us go to item No. 21. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE EVICTIONS AND DISPLACEMENT OF THE PEOPLE OF APAA COMMUNITY

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ameede is not here. Let us go to item No. 22.

STATUS REPORT ON THE INQUIRY INTO THE EVICTION OF PEOPLE NEIGHBORING KYANGWALI REFUGEE SETTLEMENT

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. 

4.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I would like to apologise to the House. With your intervention, we are now at the drafting stage. 

The honourable Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has promised to make submissions this week but we are already drafting the report. We believe when the next session begins, the report shall be ready. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item 23. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORTS ON 122 DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, 42 MUNICIPAL COUNCILS, 1042 SUB-COUNTIES, AND 355 SECONDARY SCHOOLS AND TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

THE SPEAKER: The Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) is not here. Where is the vice-chairperson?

4.09
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the committee in charge of local government public accounts, our report is ready. I request that you give us until tomorrow so that I consult with the chairperson and we present the report. By tomorrow, we shall be ready because we are done and the report has been compiled properly by our clerks. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it will appear on the Order Paper tomorrow. Let us go to item No. 24.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE DIRECTIVES OF THE HOUSE TO INVESTIGATE ALLEGATIONS OF SEXUAL ABUSE ON STUDENTS BY MEN AND WOMEN IN UNIFORM AND THE MISMANAGEMENT AND ABDICATION OF DUTY BY UNIVERSITY MANAGEMENT

THE SPEAKER: The Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports is not there. Let us go to item No. 25.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, these are times of politicking and most of the political leaders in this country are busy soliciting for votes in their respective areas of representation, and we are also in COVID times. However, that is not an excuse for the key leaders, majorly the ministers and chairpersons of committees, to leave the agenda of Parliament. One of our key roles as legislators is to attend to the work of legislation in this country. 

As I talk now, the only senior member from Cabinet in this august House is the Deputy Attorney-General. We do not have even one chairperson of a committee of Parliament. I do not know whether we are proceeding well when the leaders do not take full responsibility to carry out their cardinal role in representing their dockets. They know very well that since yesterday, they were supposed to appear on the Order Paper to come and give submissions on the Floor of Parliament. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I do not know whether we are really proceeding well.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated earlier, let us salvage what we can; whatever we can do today, let us do it because after tomorrow, we shall have to go for a recess. Let us reduce the number of items on the Order Paper. I understand the Attorney-General is able to handle item No. 3 (v). 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, when you intimate that Parliament is running and the Speaker and Members of Parliament are around, this Government appoints a chief whip who would be answerable to some of these things. However, here is a scenario where the Government Chief Whip and her deputy, the Leader of Government Business and the others that deputise the Leader of Government Business are not around. 

We need to have answers from Government whether they feel we are running Parliament as they are also running other business elsewhere, or we are both serving the interests of this country. Otherwise, we shall continue operating like this. After hearing that tomorrow you are sending Parliament on recess, you will see what will happen here. Therefore, we need answers from this Government, more so, since the Attorney-General is here. We are not happy with the way the Government is treating Parliament. 

4.15
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, allow me respond to my brother, hon. Kibalya’s assertion.

It is a known fact that we usually have Cabinet meetings on Monday, so that the ministers are free to attend Parliament on Tuesday and the other days. However, today, there was a special sitting of Cabinet; the Leader of Government Business, who is the Prime Minister, and all the other ministers are in attendance. 

I left that Cabinet meeting because I had committed myself to making a statement on the Floor. Therefore, I would like to state that the other ministers are not here specifically because Cabinet is sitting in Entebbe right now. Thank you. 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to applaud my learned friend, the Deputy Attorney-General, for being honest to this House. However, the colleagues you were with yesterday also committed that they would be here today. Hon. Bahati, for example, from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, committed to these honourable members in this august House that he would come today and present the position of the finance ministry regarding the matter of taxation on materials and apparels. 

We clearly stated that every single day that passes, people accrue a lot of costs and bills. However, Madam Speaker, hon. Bahati is not here and he has not delegated anybody, like the Deputy Attorney-General. This is looking down upon honourable members. 

Honourable members, we need to safeguard the integrity of this House. As long as the public perceives that this House is for jokers, then no one will take us seriously. How is it possible that the Speaker gives a directive and a Member of this House turns down the response to that directive? It is abuse and disregard of this Chair and a vote of no confidence in the Legislature. 

If you allow this to go on, then we shall all be useless, not only in the eyes of the public but also the electorate. We are sent here as representatives of the entire nation. We vet these ministers through our committee. For them to become ministers, they seek approval of this august House. Why do they, afterwards, look down upon the Rt Hon. Speaker? Why do they look down upon this House? 

Who is going to respect the Legislature if we do not hold ourselves high to the standards of our integrity? When we state that we shall be present, we do not turn up! Why should these ministers be re-elected to this august House if they cannot perform their duties of being here to account? –(Interruption)

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that some of the ministers are actually within the parliamentary buildings. Before I came here, I was with the Minister of State for Education and Sports but he is not here. Some of the chairpersons, who are supposed to report, are actually within this building but they are not here. 

Maybe there could be a directive from somewhere that they should not report, because some of these ministers are not attending Cabinet as the learned Deputy Attorney-General said. Possibly, there is a directive that they should not show up as a technique to frustrate the work of Parliament. That is the information I wanted to give you. 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, our rules are very clear - your ruling is final. You ruled yesterday that these ministers should be here. Why should they look down upon your ruling? How are we going to promote the democracy they talk about as Government, that you are here on four pillars - patriotism, democracy, among others? You are not upholding the first pillar that you fought for – democracy. 

We must call these ministers to order. I think the problem is that now that they are aware that this House may go on recess on 1 October, they are buying time. Madam Speaker, it is within your prerogative to even extend the date, so that they are aware. 

Our voters must also know that they vote for us to come here and present their issues so that Government responds here in the Legislature. If these ministers do not turn up in the House, why should you vote for them? They do not attend plenary. They should come back to you and answer for what they do. They are never in Parliament; they are never with you on the ground; they are nowhere to be seen. Why then should they be coming to you to ask for votes? You should ask them this fundamental question. - (Interruption) 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whatever the honourable member is saying is right. If we are to go by our Order Paper, there are a number of issues that are supposed to be answered by ministers in this House but I think they have been pending on the Order Paper for more than six months.

The Government Chief Whip is supposed to inform these ministers and they are aware that they are on the Order Paper, but they do it deliberately. What the House is pushing for is that these ministers should be accountable to this Parliament. Otherwise, the House shall be rendered useless. Thank you.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, this is a very pertinent issue and I would like to thank you for the time you have given us. 

To our voters, you vote for us to come here and represent you and that is why we seek your mandate. Most of the ministers are Members of Parliament; they are here to serve for and on behalf of the people of this republic. As long as they cannot attend Parliament, I think we should be strong and come up with a position to refer them to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, so that they face disciplinary action. 

Madam Speaker, there is no way we shall be in the House and let some people look down upon your rulings day after day. This must be deliberate and we must stop this. The people of this country are looking up to this Parliament and when we render it useless, then they will not resort to democratic means of passing on whatsoever hurts them as people of this nation. That is my submission, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall examine the rules and see how to proceed on that matter, and I will give my ruling on it. Deputy Attorney-General, I understand you are ready for item 3(v).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CLOSURE OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE (GBV) SHELTERS IN KAMULI AND NAMUTUMBA DISTRICTS

4.23
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I have been asked by my colleague, hon. Florence Nakiwala, to present a statement to Parliament on the closure of the gender-based violence shelters in Kamuli and Namutumba districts upon the withdrawal of funding by donors.

Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to the 23rd Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Parliament of Uganda, held on Tuesday, 10 March 2020. In that sitting, you directed the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to address the situation about the closure of gender-based violence shelters in Namutumba and Kamuli districts after the withdrawal of funding by donors.

Gender-based violence remains a crucial issue for the state to address, considering its devastating effects on survivors in Uganda. Available data indicates that 22 per cent of women and eight per cent of men have ever experienced sexual violence, 51 per cent of women have ever experienced physical violence since the age of l5 years, and 56 per cent of ever married women and 44 per cent of married men have experienced spousal violence. 

In 2006, Busoga sub-region had the highest levels of gender-based violence in Uganda, at 75 per cent. In response to the gender-based violence in the country, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development with the support of Irish Aid designed the Government of Uganda-Irish Aid Joint Programme to combat gender-based violence with a special focus on Busoga sub region.

The overall aim of the programme was to reduce the vulnerability of women and girls in Busoga sub region to gender-based violence. The programme covered eight districts - Bugiri, Buyende, Jinja, Iganga, Kaliro, Kamuli, Mayuge and Namutumba. The programme was implemented over a period of eight years starting from 2010/11 to the year ending 2017/18.

Madam Speaker, the implementation of the programme in phase one was a success. Community awareness on gender-based violence increased and the number of reported cases also improved greatly. It was, therefore, plausible for the joint programme to support the establishment of gender-based violence shelters in Namutumba and Kamuli to support case management.

The shelters, which were commissioned in 2014, were managed by the Uganda Women Network (UWONET), under the supervision of Kamuli and Namutumba districts, with support from Irish Aid. The local governments provided the land where the shelters were built. 

The UK Government, through the Support to Uganda’s Response to Gender Equality (SURGE) Programme financed the establishment of 13 shelters in selected districts in the country. The 13 shelters are currently managed by Action Aid International and Mifumi as part of the efforts to prevent and respond to gender-based violence.

Madam Speaker, at the time of the design and establishment of the local shelters, the exit strategy and sustainability plans were drawn. The following were the key areas of focus:

    1. Local governments’ contribution of land to guarantee ownership of the shelter.
    2. Seconding local government staff (Community Development Officers) to work closely with the management of the gender-based violence shelters, with the aim of building their capacity to manage the shelters thereafter.
    3. Strengthening the local government GBV coordination committee.
    4. Strengthening the case management referral pathway to reduce on cases reported.
    5. Strengthening the community structures like male champions, community activists, churches and mosques.
    6. Handover of the GBV shelter management to the local governments.

Madam Speaker, it was also expected that Government would provide funding to sustain the services of the shelters. Unfortunately, by the time the Irish Aid support wound up in December 2018, Government had not provided funds to retain functional shelters as a priority. The local governments of Namutumba and Kamuli were unable to continue with the provision of services in these shelters.

The DFID funding for the 13 shelters wound up on 31 August 2020 and management of these shelters was handed over to the respective local governments, namely Amuru, Gulu, Lira, Mubende, Nebbi, Kampala-Bwaise, Katakwi, Kamuli, Kween, Pallisa, Masaka, Moroto, Mbarara and Tororo districts. It is important to note that these districts are at different levels of readiness to take over the management of their respective shelters. For instance, only three district local governments have earmarked funds towards the functionality of their respective shelters. Kween has allocated Shs 20 million; Nebbi, Shs 5 million; Kumi, Shs 10 million; and Mbarara, Shs 1 million per year. 

Concerns with the Management and Sustainability of the Existing Shelters
The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, with the support of DFID, conducted an evaluation of the shelters on prevention and response to gender-based violence, including development of monthly costs of running of the shelters. 

It is important to note and acknowledge that the shelters have been key in supporting the delivery of gender-based violence prevention and response services in Uganda. Failure of the Government of Uganda to sustain the functionality of the gender-based violence shelters will greatly undermine our efforts towards the prevention and response to gender-based violence. Our experience under the COVID-19 lockdown, during which we have witnessed escalating cases of gender-based violence, is a wake-up call to take deliberate efforts to mainstream gender-based violence in national development, including sustaining the functionality of the shelters. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, after realising the centrality of the shelters in prevention of gender-based violence, incorporated their management into the draft Social Sector Development Plan and the National Development Plan III (NDP III). 

The ministry has also engaged development partners, for example United Nations (UN) agencies, to support the functionality of the gender-based violence shelters. The UN agencies have approved a total of US$ 400,000 for the shelters for six months only, that is, September 2020 to January 2021. This support will be executed following an agreed approach of full-scale operation and scaled down operation mechanisms, considering the intensity of the gender-based violence cases and the resource envelop. 

The districts under full scale operation include Kween, Gulu, Nebbi, Moroto, Kampala, Tororo, Mbarara and Mubende. Those under scaled down operations are Pallisa, Kumi, Katakwi, Namutumba, Kamuli, Lira, Masaka and Amuru.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has also embarked on the development of a project proposal on gender-based violence shelters, which will be presented to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for discussion. 

I, therefore, call upon the House to support the allocation of adequate resources towards maintaining and mainstreaming gender-based violence in the national programmes, including the sustainability of the shelters across the country.

Thank you very much for your attention.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, you have heard the report comments. 

4.36
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue we are talking about is Gender-Based Violence shelters (GBV). 

This House is aware of the rate and magnitude of the violence that women and girls are experiencing in this country. There is a high need for shelters to be there, which shelters were there but it seems Government was simply banking on donors and the GBV shelters did not have enough funding.
Madam Speaker, if we are to investigate the rate of violence on the women and girls, most especially in this time of COVID-19, it is enormous. A situation, where a girl child is being sexually abused by the father or relative in the house and she is kept in that same house and there is nowhere the child is taken to be counselled is not acceptable.

I feel that this House should take the issue of GBV shelters as a matter of priority. Men and women are killing each other in their homes but when they are taken outside for shelter, counselled, talked to, educated and the rest of it and also given protection, then their safety is guaranteed.

Therefore, I feel that the ministry should have in their ministerial policy statements issues of GBV shelter, where funds should be allocated for it and this House shall approve, so that local Governments are helped.

Madam Speaker, most of these local Governments do not have money, especially local resources from markets and the rest of it and are depending on resources from the centre. Allocating funds for the GBV shelter is a big challenge.

Therefore, let the centre and this House allocate funds for the GBV shelters to take care of our girls and women so that their welfare is taken care of. Thank you.

4.38
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, thank you. For those regions, which have suffered wars for some time; when you have suffered with wars for five years, recovery may take over 20 years. We can still ably say that the northern part of Uganda is still in the aftermath. In the aftermath, you expect a lot of this GBV.

COVID-19 has also worsened the situation. If we love Uganda and if we say we are patriotic, it is important for us to take this seriously. We are also still in a patriarchal society and much as they say the men also suffer, it is mostly the women and girls.

If the United Nations or United Kingdom do not come to our rescue, then these shelters –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, with all due respect to you and the Leader of the Opposition, I keep studying the running of Parliaments within Africa. I am also a student of the British parliamentary system. 

I see, in most cases, leaders of opposition speaking last. Since it is in the guidelines that the Leader of the Opposition is the leader of the opposition side, I do not know whether in Uganda - I am a student sometimes of procedure – we are proceeding well by the Leader of the Opposition coming to talk any time before other legislators.

I really need to be guided on whether we are proceeding well.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should focus on real work. This is not the State of the Nation Address; it is not the Budget. The Leader of the Opposition is responding to a report brought to this House. Please, proceed.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Parliament and Government of Uganda should come up to budget for GBV and the shelters should not be closed.

Otherwise, shelters are going to be closed if we do not prioritise and bank only on donations. We need to plan for sustainability of those shelters, if all we value them. We know that we are still in a patriarchal society.

If we know that after wars, we have a lot of domestic violence, then we should know that these shelters are very important to our societies. Even when we say the population is now highly learned with a quality population, violence is still a problem.

Therefore, we need to prioritise and give it attention and also the budget that this very intervention deserves. Shelters are very important. As long as we still have problems with our education, the shelters must be prioritised. Thank you.

4.43
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2018, when I was still on the Committee on National Economy, the minister had a loan, which was to fight gender-based violence. We rejected it and it died a natural death. I wonder whether they will resurrect it in the next Parliament. However, Government was fighting to see that the loan goes through.

We have a situation where donor agencies set up something that we only need to sustain. They have shown us direction and the danger that would come from some situations. They began shelters and our obligation was to sustain them. After these people starting something for us, we are not even prepared to take over at a time when they are handing over. 

We have several agencies; National Planning Authority, ministries, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; we have Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; as well as Ministry of Internal Affairs. Everybody is there in his own capacity. However, we cannot sit to plan and say, “These people have helped us here. We need to help our people and take over”. 

Madam Speaker, cases of gender-based violence, more especially in some of the districts where we come from, are very high. However, Government cannot really take it as a priority. We cannot plan for our people when we do not have shelters for those who have been abused.

Every day, we have murder cases resulting from gender-based violence. People are going to prison. We are in position to provide a budget to give the Prisons so that they keep these inmates who are coming in because of gender-based violence cases.

Therefore, it is high time Government focused on some of these areas. If the donor agency has come in to show you direction and we have these agencies that can take over from there, let us also plan and pick up from there. Otherwise, we shall wake up tomorrow and prioritise other things that sometimes do not help the nation and we ignore cases that are important. 

Even in the report from the minister, you heard that areas that have not been prioritised include Namutumba, Kamuli and others. However, they have prioritised Kampala and yet in some of these districts that have not been prioritised, cases are high and money cannot be budgeted for those areas. The minister comes here to say the donors have made it a priority to continue funding them until January or February next year and still Government has not prioritised –

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should wake up. If we have a serious Government that plans for its people and helps this nation, we need to see some of these things prioritised so that we save the lives of our people. We should have these shelters set up. Otherwise, ladies have suffered –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. The minister said, towards the end, that if we do not provide shelters, then we will have failed. I wondered why the minister cannot take these issues to Cabinet so that they budget for them and come to us rather than lamenting.

Donors and Non-Government Organisations do not impose programmes on Government. We work in partnership with them to alleviate the sufferings of our people. We work together with them for the wellbeing of our people and to improve social services. Therefore, Government plans together with the Civil Society Organisations when they are starting these programmes and we should know when the funding of these partners is ending. It is the responsibility of Government to ensure that these programmes are budgeted for and there is continuity. 

Members of Parliament participated in the establishment of these shelters because they were very important. It is surprising that they can be closed because of lack of funding. It is as if we are totally relying on donors and Government did not see the importance of these shelters. This has to change. As we work in partnership with the donors and the Civil Society Organisations, we should plan and budget for sustainability of these programmes. 

We are all aware of the importance of these shelters. We are still trying to sensitise our people to exercise their rights. Even if there is a fight between a husband and a wife or family members, one can go to court to get redress. While this is happening, one of the parties can be in the shelter until the other party is made to accept responsibility. Thereafter, they can continue as a family unit.

Like my colleagues have said, closing the shelters is unacceptable. I would like to appeal to the minister to bring a budget here to ensure that these shelters continue operating. As a country, we should make sure that more shelters are established because we need them all over the country. I beg to submit. 

4.51
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to have a slightly different opinion from what has been expressed by my colleagues. We have to be careful about copycatting programmes that we get from donors. I thought we are now mature enough. Next week or so, we will be celebrating 57 years since Independence but still, we are expecting that the donors should drive our Gender-Based Violence programme. That takes me backward. We have to be very careful.
What the country needs to do - we have a ministry for this, which is the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development – is to diagnose our unique problems. What are the challenges and causes of gender-based violence? This will allow us deal with them. What has been happening now, however, is that the shelters are created and because they have been created on the concept of the donors, we have to accept and drive it as it is. Government does not have its own programme. For a programme to succeed, it must be home driven and owned by the indigenous people. We must appreciate why it is there. 

We have a very strong clan system all across the country. There is no clan in Uganda that does not have a system that manages cases of gender-based violence. How can we empower our cultural systems? How can we empower the girl child? How can we even empower the boy child? What is happening now is that it is no longer violence against women only; there is also violence against men. How are we going to deal with it? Are we going to have shelters for men and shelters for women so that when women face violence, they run to the women shelters and when men face violence, they run to the men shelters? Where are we going to end?

Madam Speaker, we need to rethink this concept –(Interjections)– I will give you a chance later. We need to plan how we are going to manage. We need to diagnose our problem. We need to find prescription on how we are going to deal with those problems. We need to find the best way of empowering the women so that they can deal with their own unique problems when it comes to gender-based violence. (Interruption)

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, I would like to get clarification from the honourable member about getting the minds of these donors and planting them into our situation without our involvement. The way I understood it is as if we have not been consulted or involved but we are to take this concept from the donors since they brought it. As a result, it is now not sustainable. Is that so or it is just a problem of prioritisation? 

In my opinion, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has been involved in gender issues and trying to get the way forward to respond to the violent situations, which face the country. Therefore, can you clarify this if it is just a plan of the donors and not with the people of Uganda? Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that the comment is coming from the Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter) I have been very clear here that the Government must have a programme that must be people-driven, indigenous-driven, properly defined and our challenges or the problems that we want to deal with properly analysed. Then, we work out the cost of managing those programmes.

Now, where do we have that programme? When you talk about shelter, it is not a Ugandan indigenous people-driven concept. This is what we got from DANIDA and I know all –(Interjections). Please, listen. I attend international women fora and these are donor-driven programmes and they are about to collapse with them.

Therefore, can we have domesticated programmes? If it is shelter, let it be owned by us so that the Government budgets and puts in money. This is where I differ from the concept we are driving now.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you listened to the report, the local Governments gave in the land and are part of this programme. Do not distort.

MR KAFUUZI: I have just been informed that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development always captures the issues of gender-based violence shelters in its ministerial policy statements. In 2019, a loan of $40 million from the World Bank was not approved by this House. The intention was to domesticate this whole idea just like my senior colleague, hon. Ogwal, is saying - to domesticate the idea and see how best to apply it to our locality. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: You domesticate by providing a budget.

4.58
MS SANDRA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to pick up from where the Attorney-General has stopped. If there is $40 million, I would expect that the Government should come up with a budget to implement.

We have a serious problem not only in these pilot districts that the donors had started but throughout the country. A case in point is in my district where we have a lot of gender-based violence that is not only limited to women and girls but even children. Whenever we have a case, we have to run to Lira.

Sometimes, some victims of these cases cannot reach Lira and I would like to ask the minister who has presented this that, the donors started with few districts, when are we going to see that these programmes reach all the districts throughout the country? It is not only limited to these districts but there are very many cases across the country.

Madam Speaker, it is also true that gender-based violence has spiked amidst this pandemic and I feel very sad to hear that the shelters are being closed. I would like to understand how Government prioritises and plans for this country, yet, we have many laws that we have passed. We have Vision 2040 and when you read it well, it touches some of these things.

Social Development Action Plan - we have the Domestic Violence Act, 2010, which was passed by this Parliament. All these laws are supposed to help us in planning and making priorities. We are not only planning but we have a problem at hand.

I would like to end by saying that as the minister comes to give information, I would like to say that this problem has severe consequences on the future of this country. These are the children, women and men some of whom are young and are supposed to be the future leaders of this country. (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable member. The honourable minister said that we turned down the loan of $40 million. Madam Speaker, there are reasons why Parliament will turn down a loan. We are not satisfied and not given sufficient reasons for us to approve a particular loan.

First of all, we all know that domestic violence is mainly as a result of poverty. Therefore, when you just establish shelters without addressing the causes with this $40 million, those are some of the reasons we turned down the loan.

Once you satisfy us and we see that you are addressing the causes of domestic violence, there is no reason we would not pass the loan. I thought I would mention that.

MS ALUM: Thank you, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, I would like to end by saying that donors will always come with various programmes or projects. However, time will come when they will pack their bags and go. This is not only limited to this topic but there are many other programmes. For example, we had to struggle with Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment. Even the HIV Trust Fund, the country is struggling.

Therefore, this afternoon’s problem should open the eyes of the Government to make sure that when donors come to help us, we should not sit back and fold our hands. Instead, it should be like an eye-opener and we should even plan faster than we had thought. I beg to submit.

5.03
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue here is majorly relating to the ownership of what we are talking about. I remember raising a similar issue like this in one of our meetings directly to the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) officials.

Much as we are talking about decentralisation, the OPM seems to quietly be centralising all programmes relating to local Governments; going to the extent of signing on behalf of local Governments. Unless local Governments are allowed to sign their Memoranda of Understanding, with either these donors or NGOs, the ownership will always be in confusion. 

Once a programme is brought, local Governments do not own or dream about its continuity. There would be no sustainability. Otherwise, ask yourselves, local Governments have money because they make budgets, why should they not own this and think about continuity? They are left out and even do not know the contents of what is going on.


It always takes local Governments by surprise. They are doing their own things while the NGOs or donors are left to do theirs. This is done by those few individuals who sit in the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM). They have selfish interests in doing all this.

Otherwise, the argument should be to ask OPM to leave NGOs to sign their Memoranda of Understanding with local Governments. Once that is done, there will be an understanding between the two. That particular local Government and the NGO or the donor will always come to a compromise to the extent that when the time for the donors to pull out, the local Governments will conveniently take it up. Otherwise, however much we talk, we will not realise sustainability of programmes. In fact, all that we are talking about is only addressing the symptoms of what is happening. The best thing is that we should sit down and find out; When we talk about gender-based violence, what is it? What is its origin? Where is it coming from? Once those are realised, we will be treating the real sickness and not the symptoms. I beg to submit.

5.06
Mr david abala (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, when we talk about domestic violence, we need to know this is a very big challenge. I would like the Government to know that it is the full duty of Government to make sure that people live in peace and harmony.

It is unfortunate that domestic violence is on the increase and yet, all the systems are in place and we are wondering why this is so. For example, the Police already has an established department in charge of this is. We have community development officers and other departments of Government that are supposed to be helping us in addressing some of these matters. Unfortunately, everything is on the increase.

I would like to mention some two key issues here. There are about 13 shelters in Uganda as per the report presented to the House by the Deputy Attorney-General. Some of them have got money for six months. However, they are at the same time saying there are those, which are going to have total support while others are going to scale down. According to the heading, the issue is about Namutumba and Kamuli. Therefore, why is the report saying they are going to scale down in Kamuli but fully maintain those in Kampala?

If you looked at the poverty levels and indices in this country, you would realise that Kampala is around number one. They are better off compared to these other districts. Talk about Katwaki, Kumi and other places where they are going to scale down. This is where I have a problem.

The report says they will scale down in the districts of Pallisa in Bekedi, Kumi and Katakwi in Teso, Namutumba and Kamuli in Busoga; Lira, in northern Uganda, Masaka and Amuru. I am wondering, why do that, when those are the areas with high poverty levels leading to increased cases of domestic violence, yet, it is where they are planning to scale the services down.  I wish the full Cabinet minister was here. Anyhow, I would like my brother to know that this is the number one problem. 

Secondly, I would like Government to tell us what plan they have about addressing these matters after the six months have ended. What is its plan in operationalising and running these centres? I am asking that because I do not see Government’s plan in that regard. I am only seeing the approach of NGOs still on.

Finally, I am also wondering why we are still dragging our feet and not addressing these matters like my brother, hon. Mark Dulu was saying. Why are we not tackling the problem of domestic violence head on? All the time, we seem to be glorifying it, baptising and –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable members. We do not have to take a decision on this because it was just information.

However, I would like to draw your attention to three districts that have done a good job. Kween allocated Shs 20 million to their shelter, Nebbi allocated five million shillings, Kumi, Shs 10 million and Mbarara allocated one million shillings. We should encourage the local Governments to make a provision. 

Otherwise, it is also our responsibility, now that the new budget cycle is starting, to address the funding of these shelters if we acknowledge their importance in our society. Let us carry out our responsibility but the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should also come and we work together to handle this issue. Thank you for the response to our queries.

Did I see hon. Dr Keefa Kiwanuka back? Let us have item 18. Did I read item 11 - he told me he is ready.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE PETITION BY THE UGANDA ASSOCIATION OF ARTISANAL AND SMALL SCALE MINERS, THE ECOLOGICAL CHRISTIAN ORGANISATION, TRANSPARENCY INTERNATIONAL AND THE AFRICA CENTRE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL POLICY [ACEMP] OVER UNLAWFUL EVICTION, EXPLOITATION, ABUSE, NEGLECT AND MISTREATMENT

5.13
THE Chairperson, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources (Dr Keefa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My sincere apology for not being here at the time you called this item. I am here to present a report of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources on the Petition by the Uganda Association of Artisanal and Small Scale Miners.

Basically, it is about the eviction of artisanal and small scale miners from Buhweju. The report has been uploaded on the Intranet. By last week when it was uploaded, it had been signed by 10 members but now they are 14.

This petition was presented to the House by the hon. Francis Mwijukye.

The petitioners complained that on 30 August 2019, police officers, under the command of the Mineral Police Protection Unit (MPPU) and without any prior sensitisation or warning, raided the mining sites in Buhweju and ordered the artisanal and small scale miners to vacate their lands and mining areas. Thereafter, the police, claiming that they had orders from "authorities” that they did not disclose, arbitrarily closed and secured the mines. As a result, the previously artisanal miners in those areas have been suffering. 

I will just do the highlights in the report. I will not read the whole report verbatim. 

The petitioners said that they have been mining in this area since 1918 and this is their main activity in the area. The other activity they had was tea, which had suffered for some time. Therefore, the only source of livelihood in the area was artisan mining. Out of this activity, they were employing over 20,000 people. Each one of them was earning about Shs 300,000 a month. From these earnings, they were able to get food, clothes, shelter, pay tuition for their children and be able to do other activities that helped them to set up health facilities in the area. 

They mentioned that they were the owners and proprietors of the mining sites located on their privately owned land. They had made several attempts to try to get licenses for these areas but their efforts had been frustrated by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; Directorate of Geological Surveys and Mines. 

The petitioners also emphasised that they did not have any prior warning that they were going to be evicted. Even their leaders, the LCV – we will come back to this later – even the LCV, LCIII and LCI did not know about these evictions. I think the only person who knew about it was the Resident District Commissioner. 

They said, as a result of this, they have suffered as they have been deprived of their properties, land, right to a livelihood; although, this has been handed down to them generation to generation.

They said the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development was discriminative because they have severally applied to them for licenses but they had not been granted these licenses. Even after eviction, they made several complaints to the ministry but it did not bother visiting them as a way of empathising with them; the suffering that they had gone through. 

It is as a result of that background that they sought the help of Parliament, the temple of democracy, where such allegations can be investigated without fear or favour. 

They have a list of four prayers, which have constituted our terms of reference and we are reporting against each of them. I will not go through the method but let me start with the first prayer, which has four parts to it: 

Prayer 1 

They are asking Parliament to intervene and urge the Minister for Energy and Mineral Development to carry out a study so as to rationalise and formalise the operations of artisan and small scale miners in Uganda; within that, they have four parts: 

    1. That Government recognises that artisan and small-scale miners and construction materials mining in Uganda is not a crime but a livelihood to over 400,00 youths, women and men. It indirectly sustains over two million Ugandans through various supply chains.
    2. Government undertakes a registration exercise of all artisanal miners with a view of establishing a proper regulatory mechanism.
    3. Government undertakes a review of the Mining Act, 2003 and expedite the enactment of an amendment to the Mining Act, 2003 to provide for the operations of artisanal miners.
    4. That Government implements and enforces all contemporary and international best practices in regard to small-scale and artisanal miners.

Within this prayer, generally, the petitioners are arguing that Government is passively rendering Artisan and small-scale mining commercial activity as an illegal activity.

However, the petitioners are saying that artisan and small scale mining is not provided for in the law; that the Mining Act, 2003 does not comprehensively provide for the regulation of artisan and small scale miners in Uganda and is not in conformity with other international instruments such as the Africa Mining Vision and the Lusaka Declaration of the International Conference of Great Lakes Region. 

They argue that to say that artisan and small scale mining is an illegal activity is an attempt to criminalise those involved in the activity.

They also argue that despite organising themselves into associations with other 60,000 members across the country, they have not been supported by Government to improve their work conditions. It is against this background that they argue that saying that it is illegal is lack of understanding of the significance of the sector, which they said is a source of livelihood as mentioned earlier to over 400,000 youths, women and men. It is indirectly sustaining over two million Ugandans through their various supply chains. 

In investigating this area, we looked at the significance of artisan and small scale mining in Uganda. 

Secondly, the committee also sought to determine whether or not artisan and small scale mining is illegal in the country and how it fits within the existing laws and policies. 

Finally, the committee also sought to review what is required to formalise it in the country, which neatly leads to the amendment of the Mining Act and registration of the artisan and small scale miners. 

Page 8 of the report talks about committee findings. First of all, we realise that artisanal and small scale mining is a major activity in the country. It is also recognised by the National Development Plan II and National Development Plan III. 

In particular, we note that artisan and small-scale mining accounts for 90 per cent of all the mining activities going on in the country, which is very significant. 

The committee is, therefore, surprised in its observation that despite the enormous contribution of this sector to the national economy and its great contribution to rural employment, artisan and small scale mining has remained unrecognised and unregulated in many incidences. 

As we noted, we were also surprised that licences are being issued on large swathes of areas to the Investors. This is very much to the exclusion of the local people and unfortunately, these so-called investors do not develop their area.

3. 	The committee also observed that there is need to ensure a critical balance between the country’s economic development needs whilst at the same time observing the need to sustain the livelihoods of the people, especially the host communities and good governance of the sector.

We recommend that there is need for Government to adopt practices demonstrating recognition of the artisanal and small-scale mining in the extractive sector, as important players. For instance, this could be through increased licencing of artisanal and small-scale mining instead of preserving disproportionate mining areas exclusively to a few large so-called investors. 

Prayer 1(b); that Government undertakes registration exercise of all artisanal miners with a view of establishing a proper regulatory mechanism. 

Madam Speaker, on this one, we noted that Government has recognised the need to have this registered. However, what we found very surprising was that although they can only be registered in their mining areas, Government again, as a matter of policy, had embarked on a process of evicting them. Therefore, we found a contradiction there as to how it will be able to register them after it has evicted them. 

We recommend that Government expedites the process of registering all artisanal and small-scale miners throughout the country in order to have their activities formalised and to enable them benefit from the various Government programmes geared towards the sector. 

The committee further recommends and urges all unregistered artisanal and small-scale miners in Uganda, to organise themselves in groups, be registered and acquire licenses in their current areas of work. This will go a long way in curbing indiscriminate evictions and will further give them a bargaining platform.

Prayer 1(c) review of the Mining Act, 2003

Madam Speaker, I think I can summarise that by saying that Government recognises the informalities and the many hazards - the lack of law this is posing. We have been assured that the Mining Bill completely overhauls the Mining Act, 2003 and that the principles and consultations have been agreed on by Cabinet and they are now in the final stages of presenting the final Bill from First Parliamentary Council. Without taking much of your time on that, I think there is significant progress on that and we should just wait to see what will be presented. 

On prayer 1(d) was on good practices. The petitioners prayed for good Government practices that nurture and stimulate development of artisanal and small-scale mining. We had some commendable initiatives that have been started by the ministry. We also heard from the ministry, in their presentation, that they have actually hired a consultant to undertake a study on best practices that the ministry should adopt. We thought that was a very commendable initiative, which the ministry needs to build on and report to Parliament where they are now since we had the intervention with them. 

We recommend that Government expedites the ongoing review of the legal and regulatory framework on artisanal and small-scale miners, and implements and enforces contemporary and international best practices in regard to small scale and artisanal miners.

Prayer 2: 

Government reviews the decision to evict the small-scale miners and investigates the operations of the mineral investor for violation of the Mining Act, 2003. Madam Speaker, the argument of the petitioners was that they owned the surface right and that according to both the Mining Act, 2003 and the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, certain procedures should have been followed before evicting them. Therefore, because the necessary procedures were not followed, the evictions were illegal and therefore, should be reversed.

Secondly, that the investor M/S Hubei Jiu Zhou Geological Exploration Company Limited fraudulently acquired the exploration license and that license should also be cancelled.

In handling this prayer, we have investigated whether the artisanal and small-scale miners were legally evicted. If not, what went wrong? Who evicted them in the first place? Also, as they prayed, we have looked at the license of Hubei and the activity of the company in the area. 

Concerning this one, we found that the eviction of the artisanal miners was illegal. They did not follow what was provided for; that should have happened. The artisanal miners owned the land and that was not respected; they were evicted from their land. 

We found that it was like a process, which had been started from Mubende and we will be reporting on that, hopefully tomorrow, and they were carrying it out throughout the country. They started it in Kamalege in Mubende, which is now in Kassanda and this was according to what the minister reported to Parliament.

The argument of the ministry was that there were many illegal miners who had come in; some of them were aware of where they had come from but for others, they said they did not know where they had come from. They said some of them were from neighbouring countries.

There were also complaints about illegal mining activities, which were hindering the exploration of areas, for instance, that the artisanal and small-scale miners were operating on the license of Hubei International and therefore, they were hindering any activity that Hubei could have carried on.

We also noted a problem of speculators, which started shortly after the surveys and when there was recognition that there is immense wealth in some of these areas. Speculators came in and occupied large areas, where they were not bothered on who was mining there. That is how the artisanal and small-scale miners continued operating in these areas, which were supposed to have been occupied by Hubei International.

As a matter of fact, we would like to report that at first, Hubei did not seem interested in the actual mining; instead they were interested in mining mulondo. Mulondo is a herb, which is harvested from the forest and it is used for making ginseng tea, which is very expensive in China. They were caught, prosecuted and convicted. We had evidence to that effect and it is included in this report.

Although there was an argument at a certain point in time that they were unable to go into the area because it was occupied by the artisanal miners, we did not find that a convincing argument. We felt that there were speculators when they came in; and because they were speculators, they were not concerned about what was going on in the area. The artisanal miners took advantage of that although they did not have the licence. Eventually, Hubei evicted them because the business had become very lucrative.

There was also a controversy, on page 20, around the licence owned by Hubei. It had been renewed, according to the petitioners, against the law. 

Most importantly, however, there were claims that the licence was fraudulently obtained without the support of the local authorities. According to the local authorities, however, the renewal came as a surprise suggesting that somebody forged the signature of the CAO in the area for the licence to be renewed. 

There was also the point of applying for renewal of the licence within 90 days, which was against the law. They should have applied after 90 days. Then, there had also been change of names several times. 

Against that background, Madam Speaker, the committee notes that the ASMs were largely the landowners and that they had been mining in the area for many years. The committee also accepted the explanation of the ASMs that they had severally applied for mineral rights but they had not received any response. Their lands and mining areas were licensed to Hubei and the licence later renewed under controversial circumstances.

The committee also notes that the licences were granted to the same people under very controversial circumstances without any visible exploration work as required under the Mining Act, 2003.
I trust that the committee has seen and will be responding to all issues regarding mining in Kassanda District in another report.

Whereas on one hand, the artisanal miners have been mining in the area for more than 10 years, their application for mineral rights was not given priority. The committee accepts that these mining areas were licensed to Hubei regardless of the controversy there might have been surrounding the issuance of the licence to Hubei. 

The committee also acknowledges that an exploration licence confers exclusive rights for the licensee to carry out exploration activities in the area, and to the mineral to which the license relates. In this case, the ASM became illegal miners within the exploration licence. 

However, the committee notes that according to the prima facie evidence, the licensee was granted the license in error and according to the Directorate of Geological Surveys and Mines inspection reports reviewed, Hubei was not undertaking any mining development activities. The license, therefore, was not performing at all.

Secondly, that in evicting the ASMs, there was no proper warning notice. They were inhumanely given two hours to vacate the mining areas and were not allowed to take their belongings with them. 

Thirdly, their land rights were not recognised. Their belongings were looted and there has not been any attempt to compensate them for their land which they lost.

The committee also notes with a lot of sadness that illegal mining activities are continuing in the area where the artisanal miners were evicted, this time round, superintended over by the Mineral Police Protection Unit. We have also noted the contention as to whether the ASMs were evicted – the Mineral Police Protection Unit says that they just ran away when they saw the police. We note that contention. 

It is however clear that they were evicted by the Mineral Police Protection Unit, an illegality that the Directorate of Geological Survey and Mines of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has strenuously distanced itself from. 

It is also interesting that at the time the ASMs were evicted, the matter was in court between the artisanal miners and the said investor, Hubei, as a civil matter. In which case then, it is surprising that the Mineral Police Protection Unit intervened but had no locus standi of getting involved. 

All other factors constant, Hubei’s licence at the time was expiring in a month’s time. In which case then, according to the Mining Act, 2003, Hubei could only reapply for renewal for only 50 per cent of the area. 

We are baffled that the Mineral Police Protection Unit found justification in responding to complaints of the investor, here the investors were claiming that the artisanal miners were encroaching on their license area. 

However, we ask, to what extent has the same police supported ASMs to formalise their activities or to co-exist with the so-called investor who is mining illegally under the pretext of an exploration license? 

As it is the police now mining, the committee observes with serious concern that the poor mining communities in Buhweju continue to get poorer as a few selfish officers enrich themselves. Under that, we have six recommendations on page 25.

On prayer three, that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development revises the licence granted to mining investors with a view of bringing it to conformity with the Mining Act, we noted that there are several licences here and the licences that operate in the area are highlighted on page 27 of the report. 

There is EL 1626 which is the license of Hubei, EL 1650 which is the licence of Kitomi Gold and Base Metal Co. Ltd – they jointly operate with C-Asian Partnership. Then there is a license EL 1663 C-Asian and Mineral Ltd – this is for base metals and gold in Buhweju, Ibanda and Rubirizi. Under C-Asian, there are several other licenses EL 1880 and EL 1937. We noted on page 27 that many of these licenses were irregularly awarded to the licensees. 

Secondly, we noted that there was abuse of the mining conditions and that is on page 28. Many of these licensees had been given exploration licenses but instead, they were actively mining. 

We also noted that there was weak inspection by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; the people who are supposed to monitor these licenses on our behalf.

We also noted that actually, while all these licensed companies were mining, they were not paying any royalties. They were not declaring what it is that they have mined because they were illegally mining. Actually, on the question of royalties, there was a public outcry that the area is not benefitting from its gold reserves. 

The committee noted that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development was not aware of how much gold had been recovered by Kitomi Gold or C-Asian during their exploration activities. The Department of Geological Survey and Mines relies on records produced by the mining companies. So, it expects the mining companies themselves to declare what they have recovered and does not have staff posted at the mines; they only have regional offices in Mbarara.

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development cited recruitment challenges as one of the hindrances to having staff posted to the mining areas. There was no URA staff on ground and no equipment to verify the quantity or quality extracted.

The ministry indicated to the committee that they will carry out an estimation to determine how much the exploration companies had recovered during their operations and thereafter, improve on the collection of royalties.

In conclusion on this prayer, Madam Speaker, based on the findings, the committee makes its observation and recommendation in regard to whether the licenses had been irregularly issued.

Secondly, whether the mining companies in the area are abusing their license conditions and finally the issue of inspection and monitoring the licenses, the issue of royalties and the issue of environmental degradation. 

We have already noted the irregularity in issuing the mineral licenses. In addition, we have highlighted how some companies like C-Asia were mining in a central forest reserve on exploration licenses.

We have highlighted how Kitomi Gold and Base Metals Company are polluting River Kyambura. We also note that the ministry was unable to provide inspection reports on how much the companies had recovered during these explorations, as per the conditions of the license.

There was a serious issue of the ministry not having staff posted at the mines and only has regional offices. Around these, Madam Speaker, we make some recommendations;

    1. The ministry should issue a Cease and Desist Order immediately to these illegal gold mining operators in the said area;
    2. C-Asia should declare all the gold recovered in the course of exploration and pay all the attendant royalties; and
    3. The revision of the Mining Act should be expedited. 

Madam Speaker, let me conclude with prayer four, which is that Parliament investigates the actions and allegations of gross human violations, pillage, extortion, illegal mining, forced labour, employment of children and exploitation of small scale and artisanal miners by the Police Mineral Protection Unit of Uganda.

Here, the committee findings are that as earlier reported, Mineral Police Protection Unit surrounded the mining areas for about a week and thereafter, gave the artisanal and small scale miners two hours to vacate their mining sites without being allowed to carry their belongings. 

The committee heard that people ran away in fear and in some incidences, even left their children behind. The committee also heard that even landlords were evicted, in complete disregard of their land rights and provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, especially Article 26 (2b), which provides that no person shall be compulsorily deprived of property or any description, except where the following conditions are satisfied:

    i. That there is prompt payment of fair and adequate compensation, prior to the taking of possession or acquisition of the property; and 

    ii. That a right of access to courts of law by any person who has an interest or right over the property.

Madam Speaker, evictions even went beyond the mining areas. The committee heard moving testimonies that even people who, for instance, had restaurants and other economic activities linked to mining activities were not allowed to take away their equipment.

In the process, people were beaten by the Mineral Police Protection Unit and were thereafter displaced and denied access to their properties, gardens or sources of water in the area.

At the time the committee visited the mining sites about two months later, it heard stories that the community is virtually paralysed and very disturbed as a result of loss of household incomes, children had dropped out of schools – This was before COVID-19, Madam Speaker - failure to get medical care due to lack of money and the miners had been rendered jobless. 

Secondly, we noted with interest that there was no equipment on site. After eviction, at least the equipment should have been on site. At the time the committee visited the mining sites about two months later, there were two possible explanations as to why there was no equipment on site. 

The first was that some people had paid money to the Mineral Police Protection Unit to let them recover their properties. The committee was told a story of somebody who had paid Shs 2.5 million to the Mineral Police Protection Unit to get their mining equipment back and that people were being asked by the MPPU to pay money to gain access to their land, fetch water, tend their goats, which they had been forced to leave behind and recover whatever might have been left behind.

Secondly, at the time of the committee’s visit, there were rampant stories of extortion of money for purposes of allowing the people who were mining there earlier to illegally mine. There was a public outcry, especially from the mining communities and public officials of Buhweju, that the Mineral Police Protection Unit officers were enriching themselves through extortion of money. 

The Mineral Police Protection Unit officers were portrayed as surviving on the sweat of the local artisanal miners. Somebody said, “Once you give them money, they let you continue mining, irrespective of whether you are illegal or using inappropriate mining methods,” one of the miners exclaimed adding that, “…however, even the little money we are getting, the mineral police are taking it away.”

This makes one wonder whether the mineral police is itself interested in fighting illegal mining or is in a way promoting illegal mining.

We wonder what this Mineral Police Protection Unit is. This is on page 34. Generally, the creation of this police unit came in the wake of escalating conflicts between large scale miners – the said investors – and artisanal and small-scale miners; with the former accusing the latter of illegally encroaching on their licensed areas. In particular, the unit was created by the Inspector General of Police on 07 August 2017, after the eviction of the artisanal small scale miners of Mubende. 

In a memo seen by the Committee and addressed to the DPC of Entebbe, the Regional Police Commander, Kampala Metropolitan and others, the IGP appointed Superintendent of Police Jessica Keigomba to head the MPPU. The Memo states in part, “The unit shall be responsible for the planning, policy formulation, supervision and monitoring of mineral security in the country" as the overall objective of the unit and that it will be reporting directly to the IGP. 

In the media, the unit portrays a picture of one that is sensitising local artisanal miners about the dangers of illegal mining and guiding them on how they can benefit better from Uganda's minerals. However, on the ground, the unit is instead being accused of aiding illegal mining and at times, it is itself engaged in illegal mining. 

Whereas it was a welcome idea especially around sensitising the community on safe mining and the environmental impact and dangers of illegal mining, there was something that the committee noted as mysterious about it. First, the Superintendent of Police Jessica Keigoba came across as an extraordinarily powerful police officer, a law unto herself, and even holding two jobs in police. She has a job at Entebbe and then she has another job as the commandant of the Minerals Police Protection Unit. 

Secondly, we also compared the Mineral’s Police Protection Unit to other units, for instance, under the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) and the National Forestry Authority (NFA). All these units were created as a result of Acts of Parliament and we directly appropriate money for them. Also, the Environment Police Protection Unit reports to NFA and if they are in NEMA, that is where they report. Actually, they write reports – The authorities there can explain what they are doing. 

In this case, both the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the Commissioner of Minerals, Directorate of Geological Survey and Mines strenuously struggled to distance themselves from the activity of this Minerals Police Protection Unit. When it came to actual eviction of these artisanal miners, as I noted earlier, the Mineral’s Police Protection Unit insisted that the artisanal miners ran away when they saw them coming. Put under pressure, SP Jessica Keigomba said, “I halted them”. However, when we asked the Permanent Secretary and the Commissioner for Minerals in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, they said they did not know anything about it. 

Madam Speaker, I think I have built enough profile on who the Minerals Police Protection Unit are. I have built a profile on the eviction of the artisanal miners. I think Members can conclude whether this was legal or illegal.  Actually, the abuse of human rights is in there. 

Therefore, under this prayer, the committee has investigated whether, as alleged, the conduct of the Minerals Police Protection Unit in evicting the Artisanal Small Scale Miners and what happened thereafter amounts to the alleged gross human violations, use of excessive violence to take people's properties, extortion of money and illegal mining by the Minerals Police Protection Unit and people being forced to work many hours by the Minerals Police Protection Unit without being paid. 

As mentioned earlier, although there is no standard definition of abuse of human rights, for purposes of this work, the committee adopted a definition of fragrant abuse of human rights and fundamental freedoms. This is what happened; that there was abuse of human rights, fragrant abuse of human rights and fundamental freedom. 

It is disturbing that over 20,000 artisanal and small scale miners were violently evicted and not even allowed to take their belongings, some of which is later alleged to have disappeared. In eviction, people were beaten by the police and subsequently displaced and denied access to their homes and the essentials in the community. Since then, this has been followed by extortion of money and continued illegal mining superintended over by the Minerals Police Protection Unit, which is now accused of aiding illegal mining. 

The committee condemns the manner in which the Minerals Police Protection Unit conducted the evictions which was in the most inhumane manner and without any due regard to human rights. 

    1. In the immediate run, the committee strongly recommends that to save the name of our police and before more scandals erupt, the Mineral’s Police Protection Unit should be disbanded immediately and leave the ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to do their work in a more professional way. The ministry can call on help of either the UPDF or the police as and when it requires it. 

    2. The committee further recommends that within three months, Government carries out a forensic investigation into the actions of the Mineral’s Police Protection Unit commanded by SP Jessica Keigomba and bring the perpetrators of the cited human rights abuses to book.

    3. The committee recommends and urges Government to refrain from using excessive force when dealing with the populace as these amount to abuse of human rights.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

I would like to lay on Table the minutes of our meetings and other reports that have been gathered in the course of this investigation. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources for that elaborate report on that petition from the artisanal miners of Buhweju. Let us have a few comments.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the chairperson and the committee for the work well done about the plight of artisanal miners in Buhweju. The chairperson indicated that he has another report that he will presented about Mubende, now Kassanda District tomorrow. It is my humble appeal that, given the time and the number of Members present, we debate this matter about artisanal mining in the country when we have heard also the report from Kassanda District, which we have been waiting for some time. 

These are critical matters that touch the livelihood of the people, and we need really to give it ample time so that we find a solution because mining has now ended up in the hands of some individuals who we are happy to call mafias; even the minister seems not to have authority over them. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is my humble request that tomorrow, the chairperson presents the other report for Kassanda and we handle this matter at once so that we discuss not only Buhweju but also artisanal mining and the plight of Ugandans who like to participate in mining who have been stopped by the people with guns.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, when can we get the Kassanda report?  

MR KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, it is ready; I can present it even now.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is an area, in which we need serious attention. It has not been regulated by legislation or policy. Therefore, we need to give it time. Let us defer debate on this, we receive the one of Kassanda and then we can have a fully-fledged debate on the issues so that we can give direction in this sector. Debate is deferred.

Honourable members, we have done quite a bit of work. I would like to adjourn the House. 

However, there is an announcement; the Uganda Olympics Committee launched a campaign dubbed “Health At Home” to encourage Ugandans to remain physically active by engaging regular physical activities and exercises especially during this time when health clubs’ facilities are not operational and most people are convened at home.

The Uganda Olympics Committee put up a few workout guides that have been printed to aid Ugandans to workout with ease at one’s convenient time and without necessity of an instructor.

Honourable members, the Office of the Clerk has placed the printed workout cards in the pigeon halls to make use of them with your families. These are the types of cards which have been placed in your pigeon halls; you can study them so that it helps you to keep fit.

6.06
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I take your guidance that we defer debate on the Buhweju eviction. However, since the chairperson says that the report for Kassanda is ready, I pray that it is tabled tomorrow so that we debate it because since then, people have never gone back to work and have been waiting for this report.

I beg that the chairperson brings it tomorrow and we debate it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We shall ensure that it is on the Order Paper and I know that hon. Keefa will be available because of this. It is a very important area which needs to be discussed and given policy guidance. House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.07 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 1 October 2020 at 2. 00 p.m.) 
