Friday, 28 September 2012

Parliament met at 11.17 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s special sitting where we have gathered to bring the past to meet with the present. It is a sitting to honour our senior legislators, particularly from the LEGCO and the First National Assembly. I am receiving information about who has arrived and I will be letting you know those who are in the gallery or their representatives.

We also have another team from history, the people who played the Independence Cup match in 1962. Some of them are also in this gallery. We have Mr Baker Kasigwa, who was the first Ugandan to play in the United Kingdom in 1956 and he also played in the Independence Cup. We welcome him. We also have Prince David Ssimbwa, Mr John Agard who was the captain, Joseph Mabirizi, Mr Jimmy Semugabi, Mr Ben Omoding, Mr Sam Bukenya; all these were part of the Independence Cup and we happen to see them here. Mr Kefa Kiwanuka was also among the first to play in the United Kingdom. Mr Ssemanobe was the President of FUFA for 10 years. Mr Ibrahim Dafala played football for Uganda from 1960 to 1970. Mr Hassan Mutasa played from 1961 to 1965. You are all welcome. I will be reading the list of the legislators after I have got the update.

We also have children from Froebel Primary School in Ntinda represented by hon. Ruhindi and hon. Nagayi. There is another group of children but I will let you know who they are when I have got the information.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE PREVIOUS PARLIAMENTS OF UGANDA, THEIR LEADERSHIP AND LEGISLATORS ON UGANDA’S 50TH INDEPENDENCE ANNIVERSARY

11.21
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to move a motion under rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to previous Parliaments of Uganda, their leadership and previous legislators on Uganda’s 50th Independence Anniversary.

“WHEREAS the Republic of Uganda gained independence from colonial rule on 9 October 1962;

AND WHEREAS it is important that Parliament recalls its history and appreciates the role played by the institution of Parliament in the achievement of independence;

AWARE THAT the First Parliament (the National Assembly) was established in 1962, soon after Independence, and was chaired by Sir John Bowes Griffin, the first Speaker, and hon. S.W Kulubya, the first Deputy Speaker;

FURTHER AWARE that the Republic of Uganda has since then had eight other parliaments;

NOTING THAT these parliaments have been at the forefront of the fight for democracy, good governance, the rule of law and the independence of government institutions;

AWARE THAT the institution of Parliament has witnessed several challenges, most notably being the period between 1971 to 1979 when Parliament was in abeyance;

FURTHER NOTING that the institution of Parliament, through its legislative oversight and representative roles, played a key role in the consolidation of Uganda’s independence; this is witnessed by the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution which, among others, ushered in a new political dispensation, democratic governance, cemented a rule of law and respect of human rights;
 
APPRECIATING that the role of Parliament is supported by a strong technical team led by the Clerk to Parliament;

NOTING THAT on 9 October 2012, Uganda will celebrate 50 years of independence, self rule and democratic governance;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that:

1.	The Ninth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda affirms its strong adherence to democracy, good governance and the rule of law;

2.	Parliament collectively congratulates the people of Uganda on this momentous occasion as we celebrate 50 years of independence;

3.	Parliament takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contributions made by all Members of the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Parliaments in the consolidation of democratic governance in Uganda;

4.	Parliament recognises the contribution of, and honours the following former Speakers of Parliament for the enhancement of the legislative oversight and representative oversight and representative roles of Parliament:

•	Sir John Bowes Griffin, Speaker of the Uganda Legislative Council and First Speaker of the National Assembly;
•	Rt Hon. Narendra Patel, Speaker of the National Assembly (Second Parliament);
•	Rt Hon. Edward Rugumayo, Chairman of the National Consultative Council (Third Parliament);
•	Rt Hon. Alex B. N. Waibale, Chairman of the National Consultative Council (Third Parliament);
•	Rt Hon. Francis Butagira, Speaker of the National Assembly (Fourth Parliament);
•	H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, Chairman of the National Resistance Council (Fifth Parliament);
•	Rt Hon. James Wapakhabulo, Speaker of the Sixth  Parliament;
•	Rt Hon. Francis Ayume, Speaker of Sixth Parliament;
•	Rt Hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Speaker of the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments;
  
5.	Parliament recognises and honours the following former Deputy Speakers of Parliament:
•	Hon. S. W. Kulubya, CBE, MP, Deputy Speaker of the First Parliament;
•	Hon. A. Ngobi Nume, Deputy Speaker of the Second Parliament;
•	Hon. Al Hajji Moses Kigongo, Vice Chairman of the National Resistance Council (Fifth Parliament);
•	Hon. Joseph Ekemu, Deputy Vice Chairman of the National Resistance Council (Fifth Parliament);
•	Hon. George Cosmas Adyebo, Deputy Vice Chairman of the National Resistance Council (Fifth Parliament);
•	Hon. Betty Okwir, Deputy Speaker of the Sixth Parliament;
•	Hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Deputy Speaker of the Sixth Parliament;
•	Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, Deputy Vice Chairperson of the National Resistance Council and Deputy Speaker of the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments;

6.	Parliament recognises and honours the following living and pioneer legislators who have been located:
•		Hon. Boniface Byanyima
•		Hon. Stanislus K. Okurut
•		Hon. Francis Akello
•		Hon. Joyce Mpanga (Mrs)
•		Hon. Mathias Ngobi
•		Hon. Mayanja Nkangi
•		Hon. Florence Lubega (Mrs)
•		Hon. Silvanus Isiagi
•		Hon. Sam Odaka
•		Hon. Adoko Nekyon
•		Hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer
•		Hon. Sarah Ntiro
•		Hon. Ali Kasakya
•		Hon. Eli Bisamunyu
•		Hon. K. Karegyesa
•		Hon. Angelo Andrew Banya
•		Hon. Mahendra N. Mehta
•		Hon. Sugra Visram
•		Hon. G.S Muduku
•		Hon. Ezron Bintu Bwambale
•		Hon. Barbara Saben;

7. 	Parliament recognises and honours the following former Prime Ministers of Uganda, leaders of Government Business and Leaders of the Opposition in Parliament:

Prime Ministers and Leaders of Government Business in Parliament:
•	Hon. Dr Apollo Milton Obote (Deceased)
•	Hon. Ben Kiwanuka (Deceased)
•	Hon. C. J Obwangor(Deceased)
•	Hon. Otema Alimadi(Deceased)
•	Hon. Prof. Apolo Nsibambi

Leaders of the Opposition in Parliament:
•	Hon. Basil Bataringaya (Deceased)
•	Hon. Alex A. Latim (Deceased)
•	Hon. Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere 
•	Hon. Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo;

8. 	The Parliament of the Republic of Uganda recognises and honours the following former Clerks to the Legislature:
•	Mr Phillip Pullicino
•	Mr Ignatius Barungi
•	Mr Edward Ochwo 
•	Prof. Omwony Ojwok (Deceased)
•	Mr Edward T. A. Ochwo
•	Mr A. M Tandekwire

9. 	The Almighty God sustains the Republic of Uganda, blesses its people and grants us peace and prosperity.” 

For God and My country. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Hon. Dombo, you can now justify.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, 50 years ago, the people of Uganda celebrated their independence from colonial rule and made a decision to determine their own course of action and governance. There were men and women at that time who led that fight and who made that contribution.

Quite often, there have been many challenges through the process of governance over the 50 years. When there is a war or a challenge, history is written by the victors and because of that, we have not heard a proper record of history and what has happened in Uganda. Because of that, we have not given due recognition to the people who have been contributing to the due process up to where we are. In your wisdom, Madam Speaker, it was decided that during this Parliamentary Week, the former leaders of Parliament and administrators be recognised so that in the annals of history, the record can be put right and the people living should know and remember who has kept the process up to where it is now.

If Parliament was an academic institution, the distinguished former leaders would be the old boys and old girls of this institution. Each of us knows well how we want to relate with our former institutions. When did we last invite the former Members of Parliament to interact with us? Who ever knew who the former leaders of these institutions were? Who ever knew who presided over these Houses at the time and the challenges that they went through? It is incumbent upon us a Parliament, the fountain of democratic governance in this country, to set the pace for others to follow so that we recognise the contributions of previous leaders and we put the history in its correct perspective.

It is from this background that I have moved this motion. It was the decision of the Commission and Parliament under your wise leadership, Madam Speaker, that we let history be recorded right and let the people who contributed to the affairs of this nation be recognised. Can you imagine 50 years from now, when the people of Uganda will be celebrating the century and nobody remembers the contribution you have made to this country as we are doing now? Would that be right? If we wish to be remembered, we must begin by remembering others first so that we set a precedent and this is what this Parliament has done. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, commissioner. I now invite hon. Cecilia Ogwal to second the motion.

11.35
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to second this very important motion. I would also like to thank hon. Dombo for allowing me to contribute to this very important subject. My contribution will be very short because I was informed last night at 9.30 p.m. that I would be seconding the motion. However, as we have always said, we are ever ready to face any challenge.

When I was told last night that I would second this motion, first of all I really appreciated your leadership, Madam Speaker. We should have been recognising and discussing the history of Uganda every year, but this is the first time that we are recognising that actually every year we are growing one year older. We are 50 years now and we are trying to do an assessment and an audit of the performance of our country. It is an important event in the history of Uganda that we are auditing and making an assessment of what has been achieved in the last 50 years. Without adding much to what hon. Dombo has already said, I want to propose, and I wish you could agree, that we make this an annual event so that politically, we can do our own audit and come forward with new spirits and programmes.

In the Book of Samuel, Chapter 11 - I believe that you cannot be a leader unless you believe in the divine power of God whether you are Muslim or Christian. I happen to be Christian. I looked at the Book of 1 Samuel, Chapter 11 and I realised that that chapter is very important to a politician. David was a God fearing man. He was a man who was so strong in terms of character, a man who could not be challenged in any battle but he fell by wickedness. He just looked at a beautiful woman and he fell sexually through illicit sex. That made him to first of all tell lies to cover up his illicit acts with somebody’s wife. 

The sin of covering up is a very serious problem in politics. You commit a sin or do something which is wrong and hurts your people and instead of repenting, you try to cover up. In the process of covering up, David even committed a worse crime by murdering the husband to Bathsheba. After murdering the husband of Bathsheba, you know what happened. 

We are the Nathan of Uganda. Nathan had to tell David by asking him to imagine a very powerful man robbing a very poor man of the only thing he had. Then David asked him to let him know who that person was. He said he would punish that person and even put him to death. Nathan said that when he took Bathsheba, David actually killed the husband. Strategically, David assigned the husband to a war front where he would be killed as an assured deal and there we are. How many acts have we committed and we will never appreciate that we have actually done wrong. 

I think that as Members of Parliament, we should agree that we are the Nathan that will tell the king that he is naked, who can tell King David that he has robbed the poorest of the poor of his wife. Let us tell the most powerful that, “Thou shall not rob a poor person.” When you steal from the government coffers, you are robbing from the poorest of the poor. (Applause)

When we complain here about the price of cotton, we are defending the poorest of the poor. (Applause) In my region, the poorest person is the one who grows cotton. Somebody who can flourish through grain trade and the like will not bother to grow cotton that takes eight months to mature and is very labour intensive. Every year, we have laboured to say that we should stop robbing from the poor by levying illegal tax on the poor and using it to enrich the industrialist or the investor who is supposed to come to us with money; we are instead robbing the farmers to finance the investor. (Applause) Madam Speaker, we must be Nathan to tell David that he has murdered somebody’s wife - the poorest and the weakest of the weak. 

There are many segments in the history of Uganda and I cannot go through them all, although it is very rich. By the way, for those of you who think that Uganda has had the heaviest of the bad events in its history, you first have to read other histories. I want to thank the Speaker and the House because not only did I share a platform with the European Union Members of Parliament but I am now sharing a platform with the parliamentarians from the Continent of Africa. It is through this that I have come to realise that we as leaders have a lot to learn from our lives and from other countries. Nobody is going to tell anybody the true story about Uganda except us. So, thou shall not tell a lie about the history of your country. Let us tell our children the truth and let us write the correct history for our country. 

I have come to realise that even as a continent, we rely on the white man’s story about Africa and we quote it sometimes word for word. We have intellectuals and academia that fear to write what will hurt a white man. I have asked, during the African Forum in the Pan African Parliament, why those people are always presenting our leaders carrying AK47s. That is the greatest picture they will portray - everybody with an AK47. 

I have asked them, “Who planted the first seed of conflict in the continent?” It was not an African. Africans were living peacefully. We were poor and naked but we never invaded another country until the colonialists decided to divide us and catch us like fish from the water as slaves. In the process of resisting that, you committed a crime and so turmoil started. So, who planted the seeds of conflict in Africa? Not an African. Name one! 

I must say that in our zeal to serve our nation, we drive the message too far. Reading the history of Uganda makes me very proud, and today you can see me dressed in red and black because I am saying thank you to the father of politics, Mzee Musaazi. I am saying thank you to Jolly Joe Kiwanuka. I am saying thank you to Dr Milton Obote. Although they are not with us, I am saying thank you as I stand here today dressed in black and white. 

In fact, Madam Speaker, if you do not mind for one minute, I want to tell a story. Mzee Obote sent me on a mission to the United States with Dr David Anyoti. As I was writing my document, I asked Dr Obote, “By the way, when was Uganda National Congress born?” He ignored me as he kept reading his book. I asked the second and third time and then he said, “What is the box number of the secretariat?” I thought that he was asking me a different question. He asked me the second time, “Excuse me, what is the box number of Uganda Peoples’ Congress Secretariat?” I did not understand. He then told me to go and find out and in the process of chasing me away without giving me an answer, I actually learnt that the box number of the Uganda Peoples’ Congress was 1951 – that was the year UPC was born and I did not know. So, there are many of us who seem to know when we actually do not know. We know on the surface. (Laughter) 

I was too ashamed to even ask my staff what the box number of the secretariat was and I had to call a researcher into my office and ask, “By the way, do we know when Uganda Peoples’ Congress was born? Do we know when the national congress was born? Do we know the history?” The researcher said that he knew and I told him to put it down in writing so that everybody gets to know. Some people said UPC was born in April, others in March but now you can ask me anything at anytime and I will tell you that UNC was born in 1951 and UPC was born on 9th March. I now know everything. 

So if you are a member of the National Resistance Council and you do not even know when the first group went to the bush, then you do not need to go to Kyankwanzi in order to learn it. You must learn it as a matter of interest. Madam Speaker, I do not want to provoke another debate because I am already debating on a motion. (Laughter) 

I also must share with you one thing I have learnt in the history of Uganda. Today I thought I should share with you two documents of the ceremony in Parliament. The last one, which all of us are associated with, was on 14 June 2012 - “The President, the Vice-President, the Speaker, the Chief Justice, the Deputy Speaker...” I also have this document that says, “The President, the Vice-President, the Rt Hon...” - (Interjections) – This was 17 March 1981. I do not know whether you were born or not but I just want to share with you this information. I am very happy to see my son, hon. David Bahati, listening very keenly because he has always asked about this. (Laughter) 

So, on the 17th day in the month of March 1981, it is the same programme - Dr Milton Obote, the President; Paulo Muwanga, the Vice-President; hon. Otema Alimadi - which is missing in our document here - and then Francis Butagira as the Speaker. Whether we are talking about 1962 or about 1981 or 2012, everybody has laid a brick to build this country called Uganda. (Applause) I am very happy, Madam Speaker, that you and I participated in the constitutional making process. 

Our history is sweet and sour. There are some aspects of our history that are very sour in the mouth and there are some aspects which are sweet. But I must tell you that right from the start, I am on record as having said that I know this military man called Yoweri Kaguta Museveni because both of us - some of you might not know - were on the committee of the Common Man’s Charter. The current President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, and I actually participated in the writing of the Common Man’s Charter, the move to the left. I translated it into Luo and he translated it into Runyankole. So, ideologically, I know him but the moment he came back with a gun, I said, “Ah! I know him, he is my brother but we are not relatives; I am not sure.” (Laughter) 

I recognised him because we are identical; we come from the same placenta, from the same ideological foundation. We both participated in analysing the Common Man’s Charter, the move to the left. But the moment he came with a gun, I said, “I know you are my brother; I know we are of the same mother but for heaven’s sake, you have your house and I will stay in mine. Even if mine is grass thatched, let me wait for the right person to build me the right house.” So, I am on record as having resisted not only President Museveni but any system that uses the gun. I do not care whether it is Idi Amin or Museveni or any person who comes tomorrow - it is not the person but the system. 

It is important that you hear this from me because some people have misunderstood me. Some people think it is personal; it is not. So, it is important that I put this on record, and it is important that we avoid hypocrisy. There are many people from Buganda who are busy blaming other people for not giving them federalism. I am on record as having said a Muganda is his or her own worst enemy. So, you can put it on record that Ogwal said it. 

We can go backwards and analyse how you have been an enemy to each other. It is not for this forum but I want to say that in the Constituent Assembly, we did debate the issue of a political system. We preferred a federal model of governance. We felt it would have been better than decentralisation. I did a lot of consultation, came back and tried to move a motion, driven by hon. Eresu. Delegates, who come from the palace, hon. Mulondo and hon. Bidandi Ssali, were the ones who shot down the motion. So, Madam Speaker, as long as I remain in the House, if any Muganda brings a motion to return federalism, I will shoot it down. (Laughter) I have a very good reason for that. That is why I want to speak on the Floor of Parliament. 

Where we felt we could have made a compromise - You know that the 1962 Constitution was a result of a compromise. It was a result of wide consultations, bringing people of different interests -  monarchs, politicians and so on - together to arrive at the 1962 Constitution. We thought that given an opportunity in 1995, we should have done the same. [Mr Ssebagala: “Order.”]

THE SPEAKER: A point of order in this special sitting? Honourable, this is a special sitting. You will speak later. 

MRS CECELIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am not trying to step on anybody’s toes but I am trying to say that time has now come for us to build on nationalism and not patronage or tribalism or ethnicity. We must build on Uganda and let Uganda be the strong foundation upon which our children will grow. When they look at the name of Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga as having been Speaker and in that same House there was hon. Ogwal, they will say, “Yes, our parents did it and we are also going to do it; we are going to build a stronger Uganda.” (Applause)

Finally, I want to say that much as we can make progress in one aspect, in politics we must be balanced. Obote is on record as having presided over the golden economic era in Uganda and we have never achieved that. We had alot of surplus. While we are looking for money for hospitals, among other things, Obote had surplus. Unfortunately, internal and external forces bombarded the government and destroyed even the successes which were scored. That is why I am pleading with all of us and our children who will come after us that let us learn from the past. Let us never forget that a human being can make a mistake and let us learn from it. 

Let nobody say, “I am the owner of everything.” Do not ever say that. I was a very clever girl in university and nobody could beat me. Never! But I could never say I was the cleverest. I was always nervous that somebody would come up and beat me. Unfortunately, hon. Mathias is not here today but he would have confirmed what I am saying. So, for anybody to say, “I am the owner of the vision”, they would be lying. (Laughter and applause) 

Time has come for us now to seek our foundation. We have now also seen that actually women, when in power, do very well. (Applause) We have supported men for 50 years and this is the time for us not only to look at our sons, but also at our daughters so that we may support them too. As women, we have now abandoned the stereotype of kitchen-born; we are now in the boardrooms, in the Cabinet, in Parliament and we now want to drive from top to bottom and not from bottom to top. May God bless you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those were the two generations. Now let me invite the third generation; hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa.

11.56
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity to second the motion to pay tribute to the former Parliaments of Uganda. When I received a call asking me to second this motion, I felt a little bit challenged to speak to a motion intended to pay tribute to Parliaments of Uganda 50 years ago. My father had his first born in 1962. This was 10 years before my mother’s marriage and that was 14 years before I was born. That is why I am saying this presented a little bit of a challenge to me.
 
However, I would like to say that I feel very confident and happy that I am a Member of the Ninth Parliament. I also feel confident because I can take us through what has happened throughout the 50 years up to now and look at the tasks ahead. 

I read the speech that was delivered on the Independence Day in 1962 and I noticed that one of the issues raised by the Legislature at that time was about unity for Uganda. It was about how the different people in Uganda, different tribes in Uganda and the different kingdoms in Uganda would unite to form one entity, Uganda. Was it met then? They moved but did not realise it so soon. This was distorted by the problems that saw the army attack the palace of Buganda Kingdom or the palace of the then President of Uganda, Sir Edward Muteesa II. So, the path to realising independence came to a halt until 1986. 

However, a lot has happened and let me now talk about constitutionalism. Look at the constitutions of 1962, 1967 and the one of 1995. I am proud to be in a Parliament that is functioning under the 1995 Constitution. I am very proud about it. That is why I would like to pay tribute to all those who took part in the drafting of this Constitution. It is a beautiful and strong Constitution. It is a Constitution that gives Parliament the mandate to check Government. It is a Constitution that when well adhered to, can make Uganda move ahead for another 50 years.

On the achievements in the 50 years of Independence, my first point will be on peace and security. While reading about the history of America 50 years ago, I came across a speech by J.F Kennedy where he mentions that in 50 years, America has to go to space. He was asked why? He said that, “We have got to choose this hard decision, this hard goal; it is so hard but what we have to do now in order to control the rest of the world is to go to space.” My question to Parliament of Uganda is: After 50 years of independence, what hard decisions are we going to make? We need to think about that. In other words, what is that hard decision that Parliament, the driving force of the country, can take? 

I want to recognise that part of the many achievements include peace, security and stability of the nation. I would like, in that line, to commend my government and all Ugandans. It is because of endurance that we have had our government build peace and security. On this note, I would like to congratulate our brothers and sisters from the North. They have lived with insecurity for long but as we talk, we can all agree that the entire Uganda is stable; there is security in Uganda although the country still strives to have peace and security enjoyed by its neighbours. What remains today, which is the hard fact that we have to think about as Parliament of Uganda, is the question of DRC, our neighbour.

On the economy, I would like to say that I am very proud to be part of the Ninth Parliament, which is handling legislation relating to petroleum. This is going to be a very big determinant of the economy of Uganda in 50 years to come. Aware that we are exploring more oil wells - we had anticipated production for only 30 years, now we may have to anticipate production to take more than 30 years. What does that mean? It means that this Parliament has got to set a pace for Uganda’s economy for the next 50 years. Those who will live in the next 50 years should be able to judge us right. 

While we talk about that, allow me echo the message to the effect that peace and security are very important elements. The peace and security of DRC is very important and I think that is the only remaining factor. If you want to understand what I am saying, travel to the western border and see for yourselves the many brothers and sisters flocking in from DRC to take refuge in Uganda. That is a sign that their security is at stake, they are feeding on our economy.

Let me now talk about the oil wells. Many of these wells are being shared between Uganda and DRC along the lake shores. What that means is that our production of petroleum will also have to be dependent on the peace in DRC. This is a challenge we have to face and accept. So, as Uganda, we must recognise the fact that we have to be part of the process that will take peace to all our neighbours.

Let me now talk about governance. There is governance in Uganda and I want to say it again, there is governance in Uganda. Perhaps, if it had not been due to the existence of governance – we must all recognise – many of us would not be Members of Parliament today. 

I felt so challenged to speak after Mama Cecilia Ogwal, but at the same time I am so proud that I have been able to speak because there is governance in Uganda. It is because of the wealth of experience that I have acquired for the last 10 years; ever since I turned 18 years, I have always participated in the youth structures. This enabled me to have a wealth of knowledge in leadership and governance. However, it was not only I; when I look at the other side, I can see quite many of the people I have been training with. This means there is a future for Uganda. Let us think about what happened in 1962. Did the first Parliament have internal leadership? What training had they had?

On the economy, I want to say that this is a challenge. It is true that we are facing challenges of corruption. We need to know that we are running one of the fastest growing economies in the world – the Uganda economy. You may not want to hear this, but that is the sour fact. The only challenge that this Parliament has got to deal with is corruption. We have got to pronounce ourselves against corruption. I want to thank the Ninth Parliament for often pronouncing ourselves against corruption. We must continue to legislate and make laws and policies that address this monster called corruption. It is a monster. Once corruption is not addressed, 50 years to come when we are anticipating and expecting to have the oil wealth, it will be a very big problem. 

We have another task ahead, and that is the environment and climate change. This is something we are taking lightly. We have a challenge of climate change, which is greatly and immensely affecting production and the growth of this country. We need to address it and pronounce ourselves upon it as Members of Parliament under the Parliament of Uganda because when we talk about oil production, this grossly affects climate. How do we address this? When we talk about population growth, it is putting a lot of pressure on climate and the environment. So we have to make it one of our tasks so that we can legislate and make the best policies on environment if we are to have and celebrate a wonderful 50 years to come.

Finally, on women empowerment, as a woman and as a Member of the Ninth Parliament, I would like to state that I am very proud to be speaking in the Parliament and to be contributing to a motion where the Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, is a woman. We have come from far but today we have women Members of Parliament. Perhaps, in our history, and as we look through our achievements - it may not happen in the next three or four years - we are hoping that in the next 10 years, we shall even talk about a woman head of state.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I would like to call upon the Members of the Ninth Parliament to reflect seriously and greatly on what happened 50 years ago and to make a vision for Uganda through legislating proper policies for what Uganda has to be in the next 50 years. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, before we proceed, I want to say that Parliament suffered when we were in abeyance as our records were destroyed and vandalised. So, tracing many of the senior legislators was hard but we have been able to identify and invite today in this gallery the following:

I want you to join me in welcoming Mr Eli Nathan Bisamunyu - if you could stand up. He was the Deputy Speaker in the First Parliament. Hon. Akbar Adoko Nekyon spent 18 years in Parliament. Honourable, and our own, Joyce Mpanga; there she is. There is Professor Lugubrious, Apolo Nsibambi.(Applause) We have hon. Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere, former MP. We have Mr Anil Visram representing Mrs Sugra Visram who was a member of the LEGCO in 1961. We have Mr Alexander Waibale, Speaker of the Interim NCC, 1980. We have hon. Stephen Gidale Muduku, the former MP for Budadiri County, 1961. We have hon. Samwiri Mugwisa, former Minister of Agriculture in the Obote Government. I am particularly pleased to announce the first woman in the LEGCO, Mrs Florence Lubega. There she is. We are very happy to see you.

We are also pleased to welcome Mrs Elizabeth Ayume, the wife of our former Speaker. We welcome Mr Paul Sseruyange, former MP of Mubende South East. We welcome Mr Ezron Bwambale, former Member of the LEGCO, 1961. The hon. Andrew Angelo Banya is there and he has come with Mrs Banya. We welcome Mrs Florence Omwony, the wife of our late colleague, hon. Omwony Ojwok. We welcome Francis Akello, former Member of the LEGCO.

We have Dr Wana Etyem; he has come to listen to the debate. He is the chairman of Makerere University Council. We have Mr Milton Wabyona who has accompanied Mr Adoko Nekyon. Those who you do not see this morning, we might see in the evening at the reception.

We still have our friends from the National Assembly of Malawi, hon. Kaliati, hon. Kufuna and a third one. They are welcome.

12.13
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I am particularly happy to be contributing to this debate in recognising the old daughters and the contributions of Ugandans in the last 50 years. I want to thank you, on behalf of the Government, and appreciate the motion for it actually creates a record in the Hansard for the future generations. What is said today and whoever is given a chance to come and speak, you are actually building records and writing history for the future Ugandan generations.

I am going to highlight roadmaps of events and much of it will need research. You need to do research depending on what happened from Independence in 1962 to 1966. Find that out and then you will understand what led to the attack on the Lubiri for that matter. These are details; just find out what was happening. That is one.

Two, we would like to recognise each and every son and daughter of Uganda who contributed in one way or another. I believe they did not all contribute in the same way. The contributions vary and, therefore, you also need to research on what happened from 1966 and what led to 1971, 1979, 1980 and 1986. You have a lot to research on, especially you the leaders. You must know these things and they are there in the library. You must learn. Study so that you lead the future. That is why I am giving you highlights and points of research. (Laughter) 

Uganda, as an independent country, was born in 1962. It has passed through many hands – different leaders - as has already been read. Our first President was the Kabaka of Buganda then, the first Executive Prime Minister was Obote, then Amin, Yusuf Lule, Binaisa, Obote again, Tito Okello – Muwanga was somewhere before; he came before Obote II – and then Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. What happened to each one of them? You need to learn this. You must learn what happened to each of them as a way of studying your past history. These various leaders somehow brought up Uganda up to where it is now. 

Uganda was subjected to hostilities starting with the 1966 crisis; what happened? What could have been done to avoid it? For 20 years up to 1986, we had hostilities; what happened and why? From 1986 to 2006, we had another 20 years with part of Uganda experiencing hostilities. You must know why because you are still fresh. You must learn. From 2006 up to today, at least we can say Uganda is experiencing total peace - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Just another minute for the General.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: So, there is some kind of peace and we should pay tribute to and thank people and the entire Uganda as well. Whether they know it or not, they contributed to bringing this peace. Some of you may not know but whatever beer you took, the tax element is part of your contribution. (Laughter) The fact that you were able to drink enabled Government to pay for the war costs and finish it. (Laughter) So we must thank the Government and the people of Uganda.

Finally, Madam Speaker, we must recognise that we in Uganda are now enjoying the peace dividends. Again, whether you know it or not, there are very many dividends of peace. The fact that you can do what you want shows that you are partaking of some of the dividends. Therefore, I would like to thank the motion mover and also appeal to leaders to leave a legacy behind. They must write something down. It is only one Kabaka who wrote something; I do not know why our other leaders could not write. I have seen some of our elders and I hope they will be writing. I am also writing my memoirs. 

When you write, it is a way for people to know about you. If I begin talking about you after death, normally tradition dictates that you do not blame the dead and you do not even point out their mistakes. If that person is alive and you tell him something, he or she will be able to respond or correct you. 

I want to end here. Once again, I thank the motion mover, the Speaker and everybody who listened to me. I welcome those who are still a living witness to our Independence and to what happened in the LEGCO. I want to say, “happy birthday” to them. Thank you.

12.22
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you for giving me this opportunity to say something about the tremendous contributions the past parliaments have made and the challenge that we face as we go to the future.

Let me just take two lines of arguments of where we have come from – quickly - because we know it since it is written. The first challenge is what lessons have we learnt from the past we have traversed since 1962. If I was asked about a few most binding milestones that have impaired the rate at which Uganda could have progressed, the ones that come out prominently are insecurity and instability. Consequently, as we move to the next 50 years, the lessons learnt from the past should guide us. 

I do not want to dwell on the past because my colleagues have ably articulated it. The greatest challenge we have is the vision of the future. I want to put this question to rest - a vision of a country could have originated from a single man but as long as it is shared, it becomes a national vision. (Applause) We really know where we want to go as a country; we know the Uganda we want. The challenge is: how do we get there? The vision we have of this country is a transformed Uganda – from being predominantly peasant and subsistence to a modern and prosperous country in our life. We need to make this country not a third world; it must become a middle-income country at least during our time. 

What is the Uganda we want? Clearly, Madam Speaker, you are a Speaker because there is peace. We are Members of Parliament because there is peace. Without peace, this House would be the first to close. Honourable colleagues in the gallery like Nathan Bisamunyu would testify to this; hon. Adoko Nekyon would testify to this. In the times of instability, Parliament is the first institution to close. For us to guard it, we must adhere to the following: Whatever differences we might have as Members of this Parliament, we must resolve these differences and conflicts peacefully on the Floor of this House. (Applause) I know Members have mentioned teargas; I tell you the alternative could be a live bullet. (Laughter) Actually, teargas is an improvement; we have seen it. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, we want a society which is knowledge-based and consequently supporting UPE – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, our guests are elderly people; I do not want them to stay for very long. Three minutes only.

12.26
MS RUTH NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to those of my colleagues who have supported this motion. I want to thank the mover, hon. Dombo, and the seconder, my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who was properly attired for the occasion. 

I want to thank the mover for resolution No.3, where Parliament recognises the distinguished service rendered by the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Parliaments. Why? Because I am one of those whose works are being recognised, having been a member of the Sixth, Seventh, Eighth Parliaments and now the Ninth Parliament. (Laughter) So, I want to thank the mover for recognising our contribution.

Secondly, the people who were honoured, some of who are right here in our gallery, are people some of us worked with when we had just left the university and had joined the Constituent Assembly. I want to stand here and thank them for their contribution - hon. Joyce Mpanga, Prof. Nsibambi, hon. Adoko Nekyon, hon. Kawanga Ssemogerere and all those they have mentioned. We have been privileged to work with them and I think that is the reason why we are still here, because they mentored us.

Madam Speaker, you remember that hon. James Wapakhabulo and Francis Ayume were nominated by the President, one of whom was to be elected as the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly. James Wapakhabulo was overwhelmingly elected in the CA where I was. He lost elections in Mbale but the President knew him and he trusted him and that is why after the Constituent Assembly, he went on to win the elections and became the Speaker of the Sixth Parliament. Likewise, hon. Francis Ayume was given responsibility; he was nominated as a Cabinet minister and then afterwards we elected him as Speaker. The Speaker, hon. Kadaga, who was our Deputy Speaker - and I am happy to stand here because I was a campaigner of all these people whom we are honouring - did tremendous work and we shall always remember her. 

Lastly, democracy, constitutionalism and rule of law are some of the landmarks that we are celebrating in the 50 years. We should not forget the contribution of the members who promulgated the 1995 Constitution. Hon. Wapakhabulo was the first Speaker of the first Parliament after the 1995 Constitution. This Constitution recognised many things, among others which hon. Cecilia Ogwal has mentioned, - the rights of women, the rights of interest groups – and they were enshrined in the Constitution and that Constitution - (Member timed out) 

12.30
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We want to thank God for having attained 50 years as an independent nation. We have definitely had tremendous achievements and several hurdles and challenges.

Madam Speaker, I want to pronounce myself and recognise the role played by different governments, especially in emancipating the women. In this motion which has been moved by hon. Dombo, when you look at the list of women who were in the LEGCO, the number is five. From the LEGCO up to today in the Ninth Parliament, 50  years down the road we have made a tremendous achievement; we are now around 120 plus. Also, we have made tremendous achievements especially in business, civil service, academia, the spiritual sphere, armed forces, to name but a few.   

Uganda made history by being the first African country to have a woman Vice-President by the name of hon. Dr Specioza Wandira Kazibwe. Uganda has made history by having the first woman Speaker of Parliament by the name of hon. Rebecca Kadaga Alitwala. In East Africa, Uganda has made a record by having the first woman Speaker of EALA by the name of hon. Margaret Zziwa. These achievements cannot be underrated. 

Ugandan women have been at the centre of mitigating and arbitrating in peace building especially in this county. I want to recognise the women who have been at the centre of trying to bring peace to Uganda: hon. Betty Bigombe, hon. Betty Amongi, hon. Franca Akello, hon. Christine Aporu and I will be cheating myself if I did not mention hon. Bintu Jalia. (Laughter) 

Uganda has made history through our Constitution by being the first country in Africa to bring the youth to Parliament, to bring the people with disabilities to Parliament,  to  bring the workers, to name but a few. I was one of the pioneer youth to be in Parliament in 1994. Tremendous achievements have been made. Today, when you look at the Parliament and when you look at the past parliaments, we have so many youth in the Ninth Parliament. We have a reason to celebrate the 50 years of independence.

Of great concern in the 50 years of our independence, I want to highlight what has persistently haunted the people of Bunyoro Kingdom, the issue of absentee landlords in Kibaale District. The LEGCO and the honourable members who were in the First Parliament might have discussed this during their sessions but to date, we still have this as a pending issue which the Government in place has to sort out. (Member timed out)    

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Amongi comes in, I want to introduce the students of Sironko Parents Senior Secondary School and their teachers. Please stand up. They are represented by hon. Sasaga and hon. Femiar Wadada. (Applause) I want to introduce the children of Busia Talents Primary School of Busia Municipality represented by hon. Nekesa and hon. Taaka. They are here. You are welcome. (Applause) 

12.35
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am fortunate that hon. Jalia Bintu has already articulated the strides made by women in the 50 years. I only want to note that I need to congratulate the UPC Government, especially the first UPC Government, for laying a firm foundation for women’s empowerment. You should note that schools like Wanyange Girls, Tororo Girls School, Nabisunsa, Mary Hill, Bweranyangi and St Catherine were all built in the Obote I Government- (Interjections) - Yes.

You should also note that the UPC Government expanded some of the Moslem, Catholic and Protestant schools like Nabisunsa and Gayaza. I am so proud that the majority of the women sitting in the corporate boardrooms went to these schools. The foundation was laid in that Government.

I want to state the core challenge that remains. Our forefathers who fought, fought at a difficult time, at a time when Buganda wanted separate independence from the rest of Uganda. I think this should be noted. For that government to unite all Ugandans and by 1958 when the negotiations for independence were taking place, Buganda refused to participate in the committee that was chaired by a Muyindi then, someone called JB Wells - Buganda refused to participate but by 1962, Obote had harnessed Buganda and convinced Buganda to participate. That was the fundamental unity that we realised at that time. 

There were difficulties of tribal politics at that time, but for someone to have moved beyond that and made Uganda gain independence cannot be left out and cannot go without recognition. It is important, and the greatest challenge this country continues to face is the demand from Buganda that we cannot run away from. At that time, Buganda was demanding that they wanted separate independence, that Buganda should be separate from the rest of the country. Today, have we resolved the question of Buganda? No. 

When we sat here, I was one of those who tried to amend the Constitution for regional governments. What happened? Up to now we cannot establish regional governments. Why? Because - (Member timed out)

12.38
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have got a very brief poem in honour of this great day. So, I am going to say very little and then embark on the poem.

Madam Speaker, let me thank you very much for enabling this Assembly to debate on a matter of great importance like this one. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal said that she is not going to support anybody who brings back the federal motion. I would like to inform her that when she decided to support Buganda in the CA, she must have accepted that Obote had made an error to bombard the Lubiri. That being so means that much as Mulondo is a sinner, anybody else can be a sinner. So, we still count on you, should a motion on the federal system come back.

We had made an error and I think we should correct this error. We have paid tribute to a number of people but we have not recognised those people who acted as Presidents of Uganda. Allow me to mention the late Sir Edward Muteesa, Milton Obote, Idi Amin, Prof Lule, Godfrey Binaisa, Paul Muwanga, Tito Okello and Yoweri Kaguta Museveni.

It is also on record that sometime back we paid tribute to Prof. George Kakoma for composing the National Anthem. I want to bring it to your attention and the attention of Government that the Leader of Government Business came here on the Floor of the House and promised that sooner or later, they will clear the financial demands of the late Prof. Kakoma. I hope you are doing so as you mark the 50 years of independence.

Why has Uganda failed to reach its destiny? Uganda must be understood. Many leaders have come and they have failed to understand Uganda. Why has President Museveni spent the last 26 years in power? It is partially because he attempted to understand the geographical and cultural traditions of Uganda, reviving the kingdoms - the Kabaka, the Kyabazinga and the Abakama. That is partially why he has survived up to now. (Laughter)

Uganda is not homogeneous; Uganda is heterogeneous. All leaders that have attempted to rule Uganda uniformly have failed. You need to understand the philosophy of tradition in Uganda. Uganda is a nation of many nations where people greatly harness culture and tradition. You speak negatively about that - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the poem. (Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the chance to narrate the poem. The poem reads as follows:

Uganda, Uganda, Uganda
Uganda is the Pearl of Africa
It is the land of the sun
It is the source of splendour
It is the land of waterfalls
It is the land of the zebras.

At the Murchison Falls
When the waters flow
The lions roar
The giraffes yawn
And the rains fall.

Uganda is the land of many nations 
With diverse cultures
Diverse peoples
The Karimojong, the Kumam, the Alur, Japadhola, the Banyankole
There are also kings
Abakama, Kyabazinga, Rwot, Adhola, Emorimor, Obusinga
In Buganda, the Kabaka reigns, he does not rule but he still commands.

In the Albertine Graben
There is oil
The Graben is the habitat of endangered wildlife species
The greater Kudu, the flanked duiker and the mountain gorilla

Uganda, Uganda, Uganda
When you harvest the oil
Save wildlife
When you pass the laws in Parliament
Strengthen constitutionalism to promote the talk of nature to man
Uganda, Uganda Uganda.   (Laughter)

12.44
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I want to join my colleagues in supporting the motion as moved by hon. Dombo and supported by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the former Miss BAT Uganda. That is part of the history you must know, that hon. Cecilia Ogwal was Miss BAT at one time. She was not only a beauty but she was also a brain, she told you.

As I was sitting here, I was looking at myself when we are celebrating 100 years listening to legislators debating. I felt so good but our history has been tainted with problems but also it is 50 years of mixed blessings. We have had the good and the bad and we must learn from that. We must not shy away from telling the truth, whether bad or good. It is part of our history. 

We have had leaders here, even still seated here in this House, who have been in all those governments. Gen Moses Ali here is an example; he is here with us. Prof Kamuntu; without his signature you would not get foreign currency in Uganda in 1980.

In the gallery here, we have legislators who laid the foundation and I must thank the Parliament and I must thank you, Madam Speaker, for having recognised them in their special way. We are grateful to you. We have seen the Cabinet move from 16 in 1962 to 26 in 1980, to 72 today. You can talk for and against the numbers which we have today but that is part of our history.

We have seen wars. We have suffered but we have also celebrated. We have seen tribalism. We have seen the fight to restore peace, unity and nationalism. We have seen people in the camps - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute, commissioner.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we want to see Uganda united in the next 50 years. We do not want to see a situation where we are going to see scholarships being given to one region. We want full representation and nationalism; otherwise, we are sitting on a time bomb. As Ugandans, as people, we should be united and fight evils.

Finally, on the spiritual aspect, we should fight homosexuality, an immorality which is entering our society, in the next 50 years. We have hon. Bahati here whom because people believe homosexuality is a style, has been banned from going to the USA and to European countries. But with the power of God, he is a victorious person. (Applause) We must all join him and in the next 50 years, I want this Parliament to pass that law against homosexuality. Thank you and may God bless you.

12.48
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking hon. Dombo for having moved this motion as seconded by hon. Cecilia Ogwal and Ann Maria Nankabirwa. 

I would like to thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, together with the Commission for having set aside this special sitting to pay tribute to our past leaders and legislators in this country. I feel humbled having looked through the records to note that out of eight parliaments, two of the leaders of this Parliament actually come from Mbale. That is hon. Narendra Patel and the late James Wapakabhulo. Narendra Patel was a Mugisu of Asian origin. Of course, hon. Wapakabhulo was from there as an indigenous leader who led us in the Sixth Parliament. 

I want to pose a question: As we mark the 50 years in recognising and paying tribute to our past leaders and legislators, where is the first building for the LEGCO? I believe it is in Entebbe. What is happening to that building right now? This is something we should also look at because that is a very important historical structure which we should recognise as Parliament so that occasionally, we go and see where the first sitting of our leaders and legislators happened. I think we must, as a Parliament, resolve and undertake to rehabilitate this structure and then occasionally go there for a pilgrimage to see where our colleagues started the process of legislating for this country.

As we mark the 50 years, the issue of unity has been talked about. I would like to insist that we, as legislators, much as we talk about unity, let us be seen to actually act and move towards achieving this goal. Often we talk about unity and then when we are outside, we practise differently.

The leaders who were in these legislative assemblies in the past sacrificed a lot and we have built on what they left behind so as to arrive where we are. Actually, I would like also to recognise the fact that because of their contribution, we have ended up having women emancipation. I am proud to see my Speaker, Rt Hon. Kadaga, sitting in that chair as the first woman Speaker in this country. (Member timed out)

12.52
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Commission for organising this special session to debate about a matter which we think is important for our country. It is good to appreciate people, but it is even better to appreciate people when they are still alive. 

We thank all of you who participated in contributing to the growth of this country, especially those seated in the gallery. One of the things we learn from these people who are seated in the gallery is that they were exemplary leaders. Look at Prof. Nsibambi. You might forget about any other thing but you know that Prof. Nsibambi is very good at time keeping despite his lugubrious language. (Laughter) I am also happy to speak today when my grandfather, Eli Nathan Bisamunyu, is seated up there in the gallery. 

Throughout the parliaments which we have had, we have had greatness in each Parliament. But one thing makes a Parliament stand out from the other, and that one thing which we must preserve is the independence of Parliament. We should protect the independence of Parliament if we are to move parliamentary democracy forward. 

I want to challenge those who are seated up there. Yesterday, hon. Adoko Nekyon was speaking. You missed the public lecture. He spoke eloquently. You could think that he was still 20 years old.  But we want to challenge you to collect some of the historical facts which were distorted in the history of our country and statements. There are some things which have bothered me for the so many years which I have lived. One of them, which I have always been wondering about, was why Milton Obote, a man who had married from Buganda, a man who claimed to be a democrat, stood up and said  a good Muganda is a dead one. (Interjections) I tried to find out from the elders. Actually, one of them told me that he did not say that but it is something that has passed through our history and people believe it. 

One of the elders told me that President Milton Obote was at a burial and people were speaking good about the person who had died. He said, “You people, when this man was alive, you never talked good about him but when he is dead, you are speaking good; it seems a good one is a dead one.” From there, all that has been distorted and we think that actually, he spoke wrong things. (Applause) So, it is important that you who are seated in the gallery there, write books and correct some of the historical distortions which have happened in our country.

Finally, I believe that we are also challenged today. I do not know which generation you belong to but I think there are three outstanding generations which we have had. We have the generation of the revival, the generation of independence, which fought for our Independence and we thank you, and the generation of people who laid down their lives for us to be liberated, the generation of Museveni. Today, we are asking you -(Member timed out)

12.56
MS EVELYNE ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for first of all, organising this special sitting for us to recognise our past leaders. Madam Speaker, I am happy that you have also recognised me as the future generation. I would like to assure the House that with me around, the future is bright for the young people that we are leading. 

As I was coming for this sitting, very many people kept on discouraging me saying that I should leave this debate for the older people because they know history better. This is because as Uganda is celebrating 50 years, I am just half those years and they were wondering what I would say. When we got our independence in 1962, I was not yet born; I am just half those 50 years that Uganda is celebrating today. However, that does not mean that I do not follow history. 

As a history student, I want to say that one of our past leaders happened to come from the same district with me, that is, the late hon. Francis Ayume. At the time the late Francis Ayume was Speaker, I was in Primary Six and by that time, I was already learning how politics is run in this country. 

One thing I learnt about the late Francis Ayume is that he was a nationalist and a Pan Africanist. The people of Koboko are scattered; you know our history - some of us are from South Sudan, some of the Kakwas are from Congo. What the late Ayume did, which is still practiced up to now, is that he formed something known as Kakwa Salia Musala. That means that we have meetings with Kakwas from Congo and the Kakwas from Sudan and we look at ourselves as Africans who speak the same language. He did this to promote unity. 

He was able to do all this because he did not marry a Ugandan. His wife, Elizabeth Ayume, who is up in the gallery, is from Kenya but up to now we call her Mama Koboko. This is because of the way she carries herself in the district and how she encourages us to speak the same language in the district.

Madam Speaker, the young people of Northern Uganda today look at the late Francis Ayume as an icon because he built for us a youth centre in Koboko. As the young people of Northern Uganda, under the leadership of hon. Anite Evelyn - that is why I told you that the future is bright -  when I went there, it was after I became a Member of Parliament that I realised that we actually have a youth centre in Koboko that has become very bushy and was being occupied by crocodiles. I went down and mobilised the young people of Northern Uganda that I lead to go and slash the area and we started having our activities in the district there.
Now I can report to you, Madam Speaker, that the youth centre has been revamped because of the strong power of a woman called Anite Evelyn. (Member timed out)

1.00
MR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County, West, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you immensely for making us part of this history. I am not sure, Madam Speaker, whether you know that we are proud of you; I am not sure. But if you are not, please know it from today that we are very proud of you. (Applause) I want to also salute past parliamentarians for all the contributions they have made to the history of Uganda. 

It is debatable whether the people of Kibaale also became independent in 1962. At that time, there were raging struggles for self rule, which lead to a referendum in 1964. Even after the referendum, the Kibaale land question has remained, 50 years down the road. We are there, we do not legally own land and we look like squatters on our own land. 

Madam Speaker, I certainly want to salute the Second Parliament, which passed the Referendum Act, which somehow had tried to sort the problem that had been existing for over 50 years. Much as the problem was not sorted out, I pray that this Parliament will be part of the history and sort out this problem. 

I want to thank the NRC because it did reinstate the traditional leaders. We should also commend the Sixth Parliament, in which I was honoured to participate, because it enacted the Budget Act which makes Parliament very relevant. It enacted the Administration of Parliament Act which made Parliament no longer an appendage of the Executive. These were very cardinal legislations.

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for saying that Parliament should never allow its power to be taken away when we are watching. It is in the Budget Act that our power lies. We must make it even stronger and make sure that the Executive know that we exist and that we are partners in the administration of this country. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for the lost counties.

MR KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI: Madam Speaker, this Parliament should be part of history by enacting the oil and gas laws that will make sure that Bunyoro and Uganda will remain for generations to come. If we make good laws, the next generations will sit here and say, “The Ninth Parliament did a good job.”

Lastly, is it possible that in the new Chamber that will be constructed, we have a hall – instead of having portraits of past leaders in the corridors? They should be in a hall so that someone can go there and see the history of Parliament and this country as a whole. However, I thank you for having done it. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, there will be a hall of honour in the new Chamber. It is part of our design.

1.05
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since 1962, the Government of Uganda has gone through the hands of many leaders. All those leaders have got good and bad things. As we celebrate our golden jubilee, I believe this is the time that we should start focusing on the things that bring unity and those things that bring us together for the development of our country. 

We should stop talking about the bad things that past leaders did to avoid creating anger and enmity among ourselves. As you occupy that seat today, you may think you are doing the best but when you leave, they will look at only the bad things you have done and not the good ones. So, let us set the pace and speak about the good things.

Madam Speaker, allow me also thank the first women who broke the ice in our society thinking, that women belonged to the kitchen and their work was to look after their husbands and the family. They gave us the courage to move on and today there are more women who are in this Parliament and holding many positions.

Let me thank the UPDF. As we celebrate our golden jubilee, the UPDF has done a tremendous job. (Applause) They have restored peace and security to this country and we can now stay wherever we are and say Uganda is peaceful because we can move to all parts of this country. 

On the issue of climate change, as we celebrate our golden jubilee, I am appealing to Government that climate change is affecting the production and the livelihood of our people. The Government needs to put into place mitigating factors so that we may be able to meet the 2015 Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) as far as fighting the climate change is concerned. I thank you.

1.08
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also take this opportunity to thank colleagues who have moved this motion in recognition of the past leaders during this celebration of 50 years independence. We are very proud, being leaders at the current time when we are celebrating 50 years, to be part of the past but also part of those who are responsible for forging the future of this country. We live at a real opportune moment to appreciate all that was done by our past leaders but also to take right decisions which impact on the lives of the people we are responsible to.

As we celebrate 50 years, allow me to appreciate the great work that all the past leaders did, both the deceased and the leadership still living. We thank them for the struggle they went through to liberate this country from the colonial masters. We appreciate the struggles and the achievements they made during these 50 years. There were a lot of challenges, considering the policy of divide and rule that the colonial masters used to enshrine in this country, but they did a lot. They made mistakes but we should exonerate the mistakes that they did unintentionally. Those that they did intentionally, if the long arm of the state is still available to reach them, let it take its course. If they are deceased, let them face the judgement of the dead. Let us, as leaders currently taking decisions of the day, learn a lot from them as far as the legacy of divide and rule is concern. This is a very important element for us as leaders. 

During the framing of the 1995 Constitution, balancing the diversity of this country was enshrined, and I appreciate what has been done in as far as considering women’s emancipation, persons with disability and the youths is concern. These are very good ingredients, which bring on board everybody to participate in far as governance of this country is concerned. 

I would also like to thank, as I wind up my presentation, the originators of Uganda’s motto which stands as, “For God and My Country”. In leadership, this country has been saved from so many challenges because it is a God fearing country. We appreciate the 50 years of faithful leadership, believers who have helped to guide this country to continue to be on its right path so that there is governance and better improvement of the people. I am grateful – (Member timed out)

1.11
MRS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I wholeheartedly appreciate the efforts of the Parliamentary Commission for having this session. I think it is something worth recommending and emulating. I thank you so much. With the good leadership of the Speaker - we really appreciate this opportunity.

I personally wish to thank the former Speakers of Parliament and all the clerks who have really done their part and shared in building of this nation. Above all, I want to appreciate the efforts of the distinguished gallant sons and daughters of Uganda, most of whom by then were congressmen and democrats. We thank you so much and we appreciate your share in building this nation.

I now move to the question of equal opportunities. In my possession is the Hansard of the first session of the first meeting on Wednesday, 10 October 1962. In this document, the letters patent, the message from the Queen of England, looked at the issue of welfare and the loyalty of the citizens. In this aspect, if you looked at the independent Uganda by then, there were some bits of equal opportunity. 

Looking at the spread of the schools that we had, wherever you were, whether your parents sold cotton, coffee or cows, we all almost went to the same schools. Aeneas Tandekwire, the former Clerk to Parliament, will always tell you of his first posting somewhere in West Nile. Wherever a civil servant was posted, with due diligence they served Uganda. However poor your parents were, you went to the same good schools like Budo, Namagunga – all of them. People from Teso are proud; Akabway is one of them who went with the President to Ntare. But at the moment, if Uganda is not well guarded, there are those who are born in the same village, go to the same UPE schools, same teachers’ colleges, go to the same towns, work around home and they will die without going 100 kilometres outside. 

Looking at where and how far we have come, may the present leaders deliberately look at the issues of equal opportunities as key, so that Ugandans will feel proud that they belong to one nation, they will cherish this country. Not until then will they feel that they really belong to this country. That is in my honour what I believe to be the good spirit of nationalism.

On the question of the expulsion of Asians, we have seen in this the question of the economy of this country. When Amin expelled the Asians, he was castigated and up to this moment, some of the Asians have failed to return to Uganda. There are bitter memories. I request this House that whichever Government comes to power, it should handle the issue of the economy very well because you will not have an economy that thrives on investors who come from outside and all the monies that are made are not owned by the indigenous. Go down South – (Member timed out)

1.15
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion and also thank you, Madam Speaker, in particular for bringing this in this Ninth Parliament to recognise the people who laid the good foundation that we are all building on. 

I want to particularly look at the first parliaments and in particular the Sixth Parliament. I was happy the other day when you told the country that Parliament should not take away its powers by repealing the Budget Act. The Budget Act was brought up by a private member after having seen the way that Parliament was being taken by the Executive. I want to inform members that Parliament by then was taken as a Government department, even the way Members were paid. So, one Member brought up the Budget Act and it is through this Act that we can also participate in formulation of the budget from its inception up to the end. 

I also want to still thank the Sixth Parliament because I looked at it and I hated the multi-party system, I am sorry to say that. I recall that in the Sixth Parliament Members of Parliament would move as a team and go everywhere in this country and perform their oversight role and accountability without any hindrance. But today, in the multi-party system, when I have a function, say in Ntungamo, because I am NRM if I invite a person like the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I am looked at as someone who is not – 

I want, in the next 50 years, for us to create nationalism. Much as we are in the multi-party system, let us be one like we were in the Sixth Parliament. We used to move in unity. So, I do not know whether we should abolish the multi-party system and go back to where we were. (Member timed out)

1.18
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I stand strongly and wholeheartedly to support the motion. The Bible says that all authority comes from God. Aldous Huxley said that a country deserves the leaders it has. Recognising or remembering people’s contribution as leaders at a particular time in our history is not only correct but an investment for patriotism and love of your country. Therefore, I would like to say that it is great that today we are lucky to have lived to see the 50 years of our independence anniversary and started recognising our people who contributed to it in the past. 

In 2001, the Seventh Parliament passed the National Honours and Awards Act to recognise and honour people who have made specific contributions in this country. His Excellency the President has already awarded some of these people and more will be awarded. In the list that we have here, I can confidently say that they all qualify for the award of the independence medal. 

I stand here in this Parliament with a lot of pride. In the British system, they have what they call the “Father of the Nation”. Somebody who has continuously served longest in Parliament is called the “Father of the Nation”. I qualify to compete for that position in this Parliament having been here for the last 26 years, since 1986, and seen the amount of work that goes on in this Parliament and how it contributes to the progress, transformation and development of the country. So, anybody who contributed, and those who are on this list, in one way or another really play a wonderful role at the national level and need to be recognised. 

I could perhaps move an amendment to the motion because from the list of the pioneer Members of Parliament who are being recognised here, I think we are only talking about the living but I think it is necessary that we recognise even those who died. We should recognise them posthumously, if that amendment could be allowed. I also recognise that there was an omission in the Prime Ministers, Samson Kisekka and Cosmas Adyebo. They should also be included in the list of Prime Ministers. 

Since my brother Lukyamuzi recited a poem, allow me to sing for you one chorus of my song about Uganda called, I Wish I Could See:

I wish I could see, continually see, our beautiful country; our country Uganda of milk and honey, full of fresh water, full of fresh air; fauna and flora, full of sunshine, full of sunshine; The Pearl of Africa, the Pearl of Africa, the Pearl of Africa, the Pearl of Africa” Thank you. (Applause)

1.21
MR SAMUEL ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I only pray to God that when Uganda celebrates 100 years - by that time I will be 85 - I hope to be in the distinguished gallery.

I just want to pay tribute to three people in just a minute and leave the remaining time for other people to use. First, I would like to pay tribute to the Speaker of Parliament, hon. Rebecca Kadaga. This is my third term in Parliament and under two terms I was under different Speakers. It is only hon. Rebecca Kadaga who ordered that the pictures of all the former leaders be brought back to Parliament. (Applause) I think she deserves to be thanked. 

In the version of history of Parliament then, the pictures of the former presidents were not there. Actually, when President Obote died, we did not even have a picture in Parliament. So she made that directive. So, if you walk up there, you will see all the pictures of former Presidents in Parliament. I think she deserves to be applauded for that. (Applause) Long live Kadaga! At times I even wondered why there were people to contest against her when she was running for speakership. (Laughter)

Secondly, I want to thank and pay tribute to Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, who is here in the gallery. He was a great Prime Minister. Some of us were baptised by having him as our first Prime Minister in Parliament. His good command of English, when he would say, “I am in charge”, “I want to urge” - (Laughter) 

During his time as the Prime Minister, we had the opportunity of learning new English words like, “lugubrious”, “giganomous” and many other words. These are nice memories that I would confidently talk about. Those days when Prime Ministers were still Prime Ministers, you would really come to Parliament and expect to learn new words. But these days, we live with the challenges and we just keep going on like that. (Laughter) 

I also want to recognise a son of the soil, Mzee Banya Andrew, from Acholi. These are really domestic names in Acholi. They played their role. Lastly, I want to recognise two presidents for the role they played. One is President Museveni on one note, and that is on the note of humility. I remember I had an opportunity of being invited for a meeting with the President and I noted something which was very strange. As I got in the house for the meeting, which was organised by then hon. Amelia Kyambadde, it was a one-to-one meeting but I was so moved that as I got into the meeting room, the President was seated with the national flag behind him. He even had the audacity to get up to greet a mister nobody, a one Odonga-Otto. I think that kind of humility from a head of state deserves recognition on such important days like this. (Applause) 

Secondly, President Idi Amin played a lot of roles in Uganda, save for his negative side. Most importantly, without him having constructed the bridge to West Nile, I would have probably had to swim across to West Nile to marry my beautiful wife. So, these are the moments we really have to recognise them. I really want to thank all of them and wish you good health. God bless you for your efforts. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I still have nearly 30 members who want to contribute, so I am going to reduce the time to two minutes. 

1.26
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and thank Parliament, particularly you and all the past leaders who have led this Parliament. 

It is clear that as a country we have moved and we would wish to continue moving. We need to know what is at stake now. People have talked about nationalism, patriotism and the rest. I agree this is very important but what we need to know is what is at stake now. 

People have talked about nationalism, patriotism and the rest and I agree with them that those are very important. However, what we need to know is the fact that the gap between the rich and the poor in the country is widening. So, much as we say that we need to move as a country, as we talk people from Karamoja, for example, are on the streets. We need to look at those things that may cause us problems in the future. We need to know that a ballot is as important as a decent meal. So, as we talk about development in politics, we need to also address the economic situation.

The other issue is about corruption. This is a cancerous tumour that we must really fight in this country. And it is Parliament that must stand firm. Much as we have attempted to fight corruption, we still have a lot to do. We have used the hit-and-run method, but now we need to develop the hit-and-stay method. People are removed from this Parliament, but they return in the following terms. That means Parliament still needs to move especially in prevailing over the Executive.

On constitutionalism, I would like to say that as long as, we don’t stick to what is stipulated in the Constitution, we are bound to go back to where we came from. So, I pray that as Parliament we stick to what is in the Constitution and prevail over the Executive to keep observing what is stated in the Constitution.

1.28
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When you go to Uganda House in New York that was constructed under Gen. Idi Amin Dada’s rule, you realise that someone tried to rub that name, but the inscription was so strong that it remained. That shows that although we have had leaders, we cannot rewrite history.

In the 50 years of Independence, Uganda has had ups and downs. We have had leaders come to power through guns, and also had those who came to power through elections. But the most important thing is that all of them have been trying to make Uganda better. So, it is only befitting that we recognise and acknowledge the contributions of all the leaders that have served this country since Independence. It is on this note that I now salute our forefathers and mothers in the distinguished gallery for the contributions they made to Uganda.

When Members of the first Parliament were in this House, I am sure they had a mental picture of the kind of Uganda they wanted in 50 years. Maybe each of them has their personal assessment, but as Members of the Ninth Parliament, we are privileged to serve as a bridge that is now connecting the past and the future.

Therefore, as we mark 50 years of Independence, as Members of Parliament, we must reflect on the kind of Uganda we want to see 50 years from now, when we shall also be recognised. We note that our vision is to transform this country, which means we must play our role in order to contribute to the transformation process of this country.

We have had several parliaments, but we also know that the strength and integrity of Parliament also largely depends on its leadership. In that sense, I want to say that we are proud to be Members of this Ninth Parliament with you, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, as our Speaker. Some of us, who work closely with you as Commissioners of this Parliament, know the kind of vision you have for this Parliament. We, therefore, salute you and thank you for that.

As I wind up, I would like to say that framers of the 1995 Constitution saw it fit that Parliament should be independent. In that sense, they provided for the creation of the Parliamentary Commission. Let me also thank the various Members of Parliament, who have worked with the various speakers who have been recognised. I mean those who especially came in after the 1995 Constitution that provided for the creation of the Parliamentary Commission. 

So, in addition to the long list of leaders who have been recognised, allow me add the names of: hon. Wandera Ogalo, hon. Salamu Musumba, hon. John Kazoora, hon. Ben Wacha, hon. Margaret Zziwa, hon. Kasule Lumumba, hon. Dennis Obua and hon. Ibi Ekwau who have served as Parliamentary Commissioners. In addition, hon. James Kakooza, hon. Alice Alaso, hon. Guma Gumisiriza and hon. Nathan Byanyima of Bukanga County. 

I just wanted for the record to recognise their contribution as we strengthen the institution of Parliament so that in future, as a Commissioner now, I should also be recognised. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for organising this session. I also want to salute and thank our distinguished leaders in the gallery, for the contributions they made in the democratic journey of this country. Thank you very much.

1.33
COL. FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for being visionary as is exemplified by this motion. When a country forgets its history, that country’s future is lost. So, I salute you for remembering our history.

I would like to take this opportunity to inform hon. Cecilia Ogwal that it is the gunman who brought in the democracy that has enabled her to stand here comfortably to make that moving speech. So, we should recognise the efforts of the gunmen that made that contribution.

In that view, Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, I would like to remind you that Uganda has experienced violet conflicts since Independence. These conflicts brought different regimes to power. I believe you all know why these violent conflicts brought these violent regimes to power. However, have we learnt any history? Have we learnt how to guard the democracy, stability and national unity that this country is now enjoying?

Madam Speaker, the Constitution requires every Ugandan and every State organs to work for peace, stability and national unity. In that regard, let me take this opportunity to congratulate the UPDF for being the vanguards of peace and security for all Ugandans and their properties. It is this peace we are enjoying that ushered in the investments that have transformed this country economically and socially.

I would like to thank the UPDF for they have guaranteed the consolidation of internal and external security. I would also like to thank the Government of NRM for strengthening the political institutions and good governance –(Member timed out.)

1.35
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to contribute to the debate on the Floor as we celebrate 50 years of Independence. However, the question is: Is it worth celebrating?

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the answer is yes! But there is the next question, which is: Are there challenges in the 50 years? Again the answer is yes! So, should we be trapped by the challenges we have gone through as a country? My answer is no! And if the answer is no! On this note, I would like to appreciate the contributions made by the various leaders in this country towards  its development.

Madam Speaker, should the youth of my generation be trapped by the past? The answer is no, and it is for a reason we all know the obligations for anybody who participated in the development of this country. That is why we appreciate the efforts of whoever contributed.

By the time the NRM Government took power, Madam Speaker, I was seven years old and the reason we were given, as to why NRM went to the bush to fight, was that the votes were rigged in the 1980 elections. That was the main reason, the Ten-Point Programme notwithstanding.

What is the challenge in the next 50 years? What Uganda do we want as the young generation in this country? Madam Speaker, we would wish to see the democratic path of this country taking the right direction. When I talk of the democratic path, I mean the democratic process vis-à-vis the electoral process. 

Some of the challenges we have had as a country stem from violent and fraudulent electoral processes that we have experienced as a country. Are we prepared to address the challenges ahead of us? The answer is yes and no, because the electoral process is governed by fundamental pillars vis-à-vis the Electoral Commission. Is the commission independent to guarantee a free and fair election? Madam Speaker, the answer is no. 

What am I saying? From this point to the next 50 years we are looking at, we look forward to having an independent electoral body, which will actually organise electoral processes where there will be no complaint -(Member timed out.)

1.38
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion of paying tribute to previous parliaments. As a person associated with a party that fought for the independence of this country, because before you talk about yourself, you must talk about your father and mother. Before we talk about Independence, the party that ushered in this country for her Independence government was the Democratic Party.

Therefore, you must know that in 1961 and April 1962, the Democratic Party led the self-government of this country. In April 1962, when we lost power, we gave power to the UPC. I, therefore, want to recognise -[MS BETTY AMONGI: “Order.”]

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a special sitting, we are not using those orders today, please. We are not going to take orders and clarifications.

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. History is still history that from 1961 to April 1962, it was the Democratic Party on the government side. So, history will still be history.

The issue I want to talk about is the suppression or the Army being in Parliament and engaging in civilian politics. That is a very important point, that as we celebrate 50 years after Independence, we have to know the role of the Army, where they should stop and how they should go.

In 1964, when we had the Army mutiny here, the Tanzanians purged the whole Army. In Tanzania they demoted, in Uganda we promoted the Army instead, and since then, we have had this relationship of the Army and the civilians even in Parliament. Today, you even wonder where the Army should sit. In fact, you always see them on the government side and you wonder whether they are non-partisan because they should be non-partisan. But if they sit on the government side and we continue to do that even 50 years after our Independence, I think this is a challenge we have to look at.

Lastly, it has not been easy for the previous parliaments. I will give an example. Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere led the Opposition here from 1980 to 1985, but during that period, five Members of Parliament on the Democratic Party side lost their lives. They were gunned down; the late Bakamuturaki; the late Kasula; the late African Sembatya; and the late Bernard Buzaabo. We should remember those Members of Parliament who shed their blood for democracy -(Member timed out.)

1.41
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryadongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I want to begin from the basics. I want to say that when God created heaven and earth, he made three things rather very straight forward for mankind to adopt. One, He made it clear that there must be leadership, which He gave to Moses. He made it clear that there must be rules, which he gave us through the Ten Commandments. He made it clear that there are consequences if you go through the scripts and this cuts across all religions.

Premised on that, I would like to thank our founding fathers for anchoring Uganda on the foundation of God’s wisdom, and I would like to remind all of us that as leaders, on judgement day, since we have been given a higher responsibility than the rest, we will be judged a little more harshly and, therefore, the need and the call is urgent for all of us as leaders to do the right thing because on that day, you will carry your own cross.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, there is always a saying that if you see the presence of Parliament in a country, it means that there is democracy to a certain degree and the degree can be argued.

So, I would like to thank the government that has made the presence of Parliament in Uganda a fact, and that has anchored a certain degree of democracy that I was talking about.

It is a common thing that Parliament is such a strong arm that can do many things, but cannot change a man into a woman or vice-versa. I want to say that the challenge of Africa is a challenge of vision; and vision in its true sense must be shared.

The other challenge of Africa is the sovereignty, which we do not want to share. We want to be proud about Uganda and the very little states - 54 of them in the African continent, and we think we can be strong and make an impact on planet Earth without sharing our sovereignty - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to release our guests to go to the canteen and have lunch, while we complete the debate. After the lunch when we close, we shall come out for a group photograph but now we want them to go for lunch. I think we have kept them a bit long. 

MR OTADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to conclude by saying that our forefathers had a clear vision, a vision of the welfare of our people, and I want to say that this is actually embedded in our rules and in the prayers that we recite here every day.

Transformation and accountability will come on a generation by generation basis - accountability and unity for the people of Africa. 

Many speeches have been made, but I want to just quote one very recent speech, which inspired me. President Obama said, “Even if we disagree on both sides of the aisle, even if we have ideas that are competing, that is not justification for violence or war.” That inspired me. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.45
THE MINISTER OF LANDS (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you and the Parliamentary Commission for coming up with the idea of this debate as we celebrate our 50 years of Independence. I also want to fully associate myself with hon. Dombo, the mover of this motion. We must pay commendation to our past leaders, our past speakers and Members of Parliament, for delivering us where we are at this particular moment.

Madam Speaker, I also want to commend the NRA and NRM leadership which ushered in this vibrant democratic order so that we can be in a position to freely debate issues of varying degrees of opinion as a means of ensuring that we propel our country to even greater heights. This debate is unique; it is the first of its kind. It enables us to reflect on the past, evaluate our present standing and also to set the direction and pace for the future.

Prof. Ali Mazrui in his essays On Heroes and Uhuru Worship clearly captures the Independence struggle for the various African countries. He also analyses the various characters of the post-Independence governments. His essays are fairly instructive. Unfortunately, Prof. Mazrui, like many other scholars and leaders of that time, never saw the advent of the military on the African continent in the 1970S and 80s. The military that took over power on the African continent in many countries, including Uganda, left us a major question: What do we do in order to ensure that there is no return to military rule and undemocratic practices. Our Constitution of 1995 comes up with fairly clear solutions –(Member timed out.)

1.48
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate you for the creative way you are handling business in this House that has given rise to this opportunity to pay tribute to our past leaders. The past leaders laid a foundation so that we may be. I salute you, our past leaders and I am glad to have been part of this history, having served Parliament diligently since 1996.

As Ugandans, we must work for reconciliation within ourselves, within our groups and the world. We must work and live peacefully and appreciate each other. It is so disappointing that at 50 years, we still talk of our tribes and the ills that the colonialists left with us. We must resolve to solve these ills however hard and challenging it may be so that we come out victorious as a country, though there may be losers along the way. We have to tackle some of these challenges; we have talked about the lost counties, federalism for Buganda and the like. I believe that if we sat down as a country, it is possible to resolve all these.

Madam Speaker, I call upon Ugandans to have a minimum programme and  vision – a minimum common interest – where we cannot compromise anyone whether we are in Government or in the Opposition.

Lastly, I would like to say that the discovery of oil must be a blessing to Ugandans; let us spend the resources that arise diligently, but also save for the future. We must not compromise our environment; let us use it sustainably as we develop our country because if we do not have a strong economic base, we may not necessarily be independent. Thank you.

1.51
DR KENNETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to honour our past leaders. I am glad to be part of the people making this history. The 50 years of independent Uganda has been a long history and the bitter past characterised mainly by three segments. The first segment of the 50 years has been characterised by struggle for identity and self-determination. This was followed by the second segment which was full of conflicts, wars and instability. This period took almost 25 years of Uganda’s post-Independence period. We are now more hopeful because the third segment has been presided over by the wise and visionary leadership of President Museveni. This segment has been a struggle for liberation and transformation. This is where you and I, and all those who are still alive have to play a role. 

Madam Speaker, it is important that we take time to study history so that our future is not lost. Out of this, we should be able to understand our past mistakes and build on the foundation laid by our forefathers. This is the opportunity that God has given us and I would like to call upon all those still alive – men and women, young and old – let us all rise up and stand together, forgetting our differences, which may exist, but our values and interests are strong, and upon them we must unite. It is because of this that we shall stand together, pray, work hard and let the sun shine upon the “Pearl of Africa”. I pray that may the Almighty God be merciful to us so that we will be the living generation as we look forward to celebrating the next 50 years.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to announce the presence in the gallery of students and teachers of Jinja Progressive Secondary School, represented by hon. Balyeku and hon. Nabirye. Are you the ones? Please stand up. You are welcome. (Applause)

1.53
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Speaker and the Commission for giving this House some kind of prominence and independence that is enshrined in our Constitution. Parliament has seen a number of leaders and legislators, of some of whom are just blackmailers and others are legislators who fear for their pockets. Some fear to speak while others wait to cross the Floor when the government in power dangles a ministerial job. (Laughter) Others are in the House to vote when the government calls for it. 

I know that this is a credible House, where we must display leadership until –[HON. LUMUMBA: “Procedure.”] 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today we have a special sitting and I did not want to have those incidents. (Applause)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We must benefit ourselves when we choose to benefit the entire world. And the leaders you saw in the Distinguished Gallery have displayed that. And that is why we are honouring them today; we want to thank you so much for giving in that spirit and showing us the way. We also want to thank both the leaders who sowed the Independence spirit and now we can dwell on it and say, “There lived leaders” and we are proud of their products. We want to thank -(Member timed out.)

1.57
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by saying the Independence of Uganda is meaningless without the name of Dr Apollo Milton Obote. This is the man who spearheaded the lowering of the British Union Jack and the raising of our national colours of black, yellow, red, symbolising Independence for the people of Uganda.

One fundamental point as we celebrate 50 years of Independence is that, in 1962, the population of Uganda was approximately six million. Fifty years down the road, our population has shot up to 34 million. Madam Speaker, the size of Uganda has never increased. This poses a big challenge to the question of land. And as we celebrate and look forward to the next 50 years, I think the land question is a critical question because our population is increasing day by day and night by night. We need to protect, preserve and defend the fundamental rights of the land of our people as we celebrate 50 years of Independence.

Secondly, what is my vision? What is our Vision? This vision must be a shared one for the next 50 years. I would love to see a corruption-free Uganda in the next 50 years. I would love to see a nation where service delivery reigns supreme. I would love to see a nation where the principles of separation of power and the rule of law are adhered to.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and bring into perspective some of our very sons and daughters who are so dear to us, who participated and helped other nations.  A case in point is the only Field Marshal in the history of Uganda; Field Marshal John Okello. This is a man who left Alebtong District and went and spearheaded the revolution of Zanzibar.

Secondly, is the late John Akii Bua, the first Olympic Gold Medallist. It must be on record, as we celebrate 50 years of Independence, that these are the people who should be key -(Member timed out.)

2.00
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like my colleagues, I also want to appreciate you and the Commission for this special sitting. In a similar vein, I want to appreciate the mover, hon. Dombo, the seconders and the debaters so far. I appreciate the contributions of our gallant sons and so many unsung heroes and possibly that is why we have got the monument of the unidentified soldier at Kololo because of the so many unsung heroes. 

Specifically, I want to focus on page 4 of the motion. Hon. Dombo, I wish to appreciate that you do me good to acknowledge all the former leaders irrespective of party affiliation, irrespective of ideology and irrespective of belief; and I also appreciate all those who have acknowledged all those former leaders in his debate.

The biggest problem we have in this country is denial and hypocrisy. Denial is where somebody has made a contribution but because you differ politically, you do not want to acknowledge their contribution -(Applause)- and at the end of the day it leads to hypocrisy, where we define hypocrisy as showing an outward expression that is not your inner self. So, I wish to thank those colleagues who have brought that out. It is very symbolic. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want you to acknowledge again that we are heterogeneous in nature, but even when we are heterogeneous we still maintain unity of purpose, and that is the whole essence of a multiparty system. You could differ but you still have one purpose of nation building. That is why we say that when you are in the Opposition, you are supposed to be a loyal Opposition to acknowledge the sitting Government. But even when you are the sitting Government you must give the Opposition democratic space -(Member timed out.)

2.02
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you and the Commission for organising this special sitting in which we are paying tribute to the previous parliaments and legislators of Uganda. The previous parliaments fall under different regimes and to bring them together for such an occasion is a sign of unity, which unity we need to promote for generations to come. 

I would like to thank our senior legislators for turning up for this occasion. It shows that although they have retired from politics, they are not tired of serving Uganda and that is why they have turned up.

Yesterday, we had a public lecture at Imperial Royale Hotel and hon. Adoko Nekyon shared with us his experience. He facilitated that public lecture and we learnt a lot about the history of Uganda. He took us through the achievements, the challenges and what we in the Ninth Parliament need to do in order to push Uganda forward. So, these people are a potential. It is good they are still with us and we pray that God gives them long life so that we can get more knowledge from them in as far as the history of our country is concerned. 

I would also like to thank the NRM Government for empowering the women. Besides the increased number of women in this Parliament, as you are aware, this Ninth Parliament is being steered by two women in the names of Madam Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, and Mrs Jane Kibirige our Clerk. And you are doing a very good job! We pray that God gives you good health and knowledge to steer this Ninth Parliament to the end so that Uganda will have nothing to regret in empowering women to lead this Parliament. (Applause)

2.05
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also join others to support the motion. We talked about these people who have contributed to the nation for the last 50 years, but according to the motion, I have seen page 4 or 5, “Parliament recognises and honours the following living and pioneer legislators who have been located.” Much as we have located where they have been, I beg that as Government we help these members who served to access medical services at their age. Like hon. Muduku is the only politician in Bugisu who is still alive. 

There are also other people who are outside Parliament but who contributed a lot. At one time I was watching TV; there is a person from Teso who lowered the flag. That person should be among the people to be recognised because he demonstrated how he went to Kololo; they had to switch off lights in the whole area for his safety. Such people should be honoured.

As we celebrate 50 years, let us work for the unity of the country. Let us forget about politics and work for the country. Anything for the nation, let us be one as we are Ugandans; forget about the politics and other issues which keep on dividing us -(Member timed out­­.)

2.07
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also -

THE SPEAKER: May I suggest that we now reduce to one minute because more people want to speak. One minute now.

MR ISABIRYE: Madam Speaker, I want to say happy birthday to the people of Uganda! Today, we are here to recognise the contributions of the various leaders present and past for the work that they did to move Uganda wherever it was up to date. I want to thank all the leaders who participated in this. They did very good work. They prepared the Uganda they wanted and today, they are here enjoying the fruits. 

It is our duty as the current leaders to prepare and organise the Uganda we want after 50 years from now. The Uganda we want is the Uganda that is corruption-free; and the Uganda we want is the Uganda that is mindful of the people that we leaders serve. After 50 years of Independence, we still have many of our people who are suffering; many of our people who are drinking unsafe water; many of our people who are going without or with only one meal. Uganda has moved far. Uganda today is a Uganda that we want to continue cherishing -(Member timed out.)

2.09
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to join my colleagues to support the motion on the Floor, and before I go into appreciating the roles of the previous leaders, I have a message from the Baptist Union of Uganda who requested that we appreciate one of their leaders, Dr Herbert who led the Independence prayer on that very day. 

And then, we have an old man from Kasese called Mr Baluku, who blew the Independence trumpet and I wish we also use this opportunity to recognise him. When you hear those jingles and the trumpets at midnight on that day, just know a one Baluku from Kasese is among those who are blowing the trumpets. I wish to take this opportunity to also recognise him.

The people of Kasese requested me to use this opportunity to thank His Excellency Idi Amin Dada, who offered them a district status and that with his minimal level of education, he opened the first secondary school in Kasese District, Saad Memorial Secondary School. I am proud to be a product of that school. Today, we go through uncalled for crises of fuel, but during his regime, we had fuel tanks. They are still in Kasese, but not utilised.

I was also requested by the people of Kasese to appreciate the role played by Dr Apollo Milton Obote for his support to agriculture where he promoted cooperatives and ensured that farmers are not cheated by creating the marketing boards. We are proud of the Coffee Marketing Board and the Produce Marketing Board which ensured that prices are stabilised and that there is no famine. 

They also thank the late Prof. Lukongwe Godfrey Binaisa and His Excellency Yusuf Lule, for ensuring that there is good neighbourliness for the people neighbouring the national parks. They would create days when people would go hunting and ensure that they protect their animals unlike today where we are bringing crocodiles which are eating people. So, they ask me to recognise these people in a very special way and that as we celebrate the 50 years of Independence, we wish all Ugandans a happy Golden Jubilee and may God bless us and may God bless Uganda! Thank you.

2.12
MR PATRICK NSANJA (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, Uganda at 50 is memorable, historical and we need to be honest with ourselves. I will focus on the first prayer on page 2 which says, “The Ninth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda affirms its strong adherence to democracy, good governance and rule of law.”

The same is reflected under Article 79, which is a constitutional provision. I would really wish to talk about the three organs of Government that is the Judiciary, Executive and Parliament, but because of time, I am going to focus particularly on Parliament and posing a question that, what is our commitment as Parliament to the people of Uganda?

In this same House is where you find a Member of Parliament launching the restoration of Presidential term limits and at the same time after a few days, you find a Member of Parliament launching the crusade for the fifth term -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: He had not made his point. Half a minute.

MR NSANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Really, as Members of Parliament, we have to stand our ground.

Secondly, we make decisions here at the same time we caucus on them outside Parliament. We caucus on the corrupt after making a decision here. That becomes very unfortunate. 

Our substantive contribution while debating. We are 375 Members of Parliament against 80 of the then Parliament. Which substantive contribution can you make in one or two minutes? Honestly speaking, we need to be fair with ourselves -(Member timed out.)

2.14
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we celebrate 50 years today, I want to appreciate in a special way the people of Northern Uganda because they had 20 of the 50 years in serious conflict where their mouths and other body parts were mutilated by fellow Ugandans, but they persevered up to today. I want to appreciate them.

In a special way, allow me to thank very much the past leaders that led from the year 1986 up to date, especially the Sixth and Seventh parliaments. They led during a very difficult time, especially the Members of Parliament who came from Northern Uganda. In a particular way, Madam Speaker, allow me to mention a few although I may not be able to mention all because of time.

I want to pay tribute to hon. Betty Bigombe, hon. Justice Owiny Dollo, hon. Peter Okwera, hon. Betty Akech, hon. Omwony Ogaba, hon. Okello-Okello, hon. Prof Ogenga-Latigo -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half minute to complete the names.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Okumu Reagan, hon. Otto, hon. Ocula Michael.

These four last names of Prof. Latigo, Okumu, Otto and Ocula, I want to specifically thank them because they stood their ground even when they were being beaten for representing their people in Acholi Pii. We still remember what you did; you stood your ground as leaders of Northern Uganda to bring peace. We want to thank you very much! 

Madam Speaker, I thank you also for being the first Deputy Speaker to visit Northern Uganda during a very difficult time when nobody wanted to come to Northern Uganda. You came to Pader District and launched a very good programme, which is still running. We really appreciate you for that! I thank you very much.  

2.17
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion on the Floor to pay tribute to the gallant sons and daughters of Uganda; those who were in the leadership of Parliament, particularly those who gave in their all to struggle for Uganda’s Independence.

I want to pay special tribute to those who negotiated for our Independence in London led by the former Prime Minister, Dr Apollo Milton Obote. I want to pay special tribute to all those who were on that team because at that time, the whites felt like Uganda wasn’t ready for Independence. The leadership of the government of that time, the post-colonial government, the person we had of UPC, did a very great job in trying to preach nationalism, trying to promote growth in the country and also preaching unity. At the time, we were just transiting from a segment of leadership which was based and built along kingdoms and chiefdoms, basically which was tribal.

But I want to pay tribute to the leadership of Apollo Milton Obote. I think he made various strides in his endeavour to preach nationalism. Even at the time it was believed that people had to put their lives along chiefdoms and kingdoms, he moved on to marry from outside his tribe and married from Buganda -(Member timed out.)

2.19
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion and thank the movers and supporters of the motion. I would also like to thank you in a special way for allowing this special session to be held, because when we got 25 years, we never celebrated our leaders and I believe we had some Speaker there. But at 50 when you are there, we have celebrated. I want to thank you so much. I believe that is the power of a woman. 

You remember when Jesus was born and they took him to register in Jerusalem; the father forgot him in Jerusalem. But it was the mother, Mary, who remembered that they had forgotten Jesus and they had to go back to look for Jesus. I want to thank Madam Speaker for remembering the past leaders during this special session. (Member timed out.)

2.20
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish also to thank the movers of the motion. In the one minute given to me, all I can say is that, we meet in one way or another, the past parliament, their leadership plus the legislators. 

I wish to say that as young people now, all we can do is to make comparisons of how Uganda was and how it is now. I can quickly argue that past governments and leaders, for example, contributed by initiating Uganda Development Corporation as an engine for industrialisation, employment creation for young people and galvanising peasant farmers into cooperatives. Therefore, in this struggle of nation-building by the NRM party, let us mobilise our people to the levels of development, investing meaningfully, have our national heritage and a shared vision under President Museveni. Thank you.

2.22
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As we celebrate 50 years of Independence, I just want to raise one challenge regarding the future of Uganda. In the last 50 years, Uganda has not seen and had a successful and peaceful handover of Government. President Mutesa did not hand over to Obote; Obote did not hand over to Amin; Amin did not hand over to the Military Commission and the three presidents. Lule did not hand over to Binaisa. So, even when the current President came in, he did not receive any power handed over from anybody. From the time he came in, he has been handing over to himself -(Laughter)- for the last 26 years! In the coming 50 years, we need to see the President handing over to another President as it has been in Tanzania. In Tanzania, Nyerere handed over to Mwinyi; Mwinyi handed over to Mkapa; and Mkapa handed over to Kikwete -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude. Half a minute.

MR SSIMBWA: We also want to see as it happened in Tanzania. We want to see in the coming 50 years, President Museveni going to Kololo, and handing over to the incoming President so that Uganda develops democracy.

Madam Speaker, you received the instruments of power from hon. Ssekandi and you will also at a certain time hand them over to some person. As you hand over the instruments of power of Parliament, we want to see you receiving instruments of power higher than the office you are holding. 

2.24
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): I want to join the rest of my colleagues to thank the movers of this motion in paying tribute to our previous leaders under your wise leadership. I want to thank all the leaders who have contributed greatly to making Uganda what it is now, both women and men. 

As I grew up, I saw Uganda trading with different nations such as those from Asia. I saw industries grow. I saw emancipation of women in both the civilian and political world. I have seen corruption being handled to a certain degree and above all, I have seen peace in the last 25 years -(Member timed out.)

2.26
MS NAKATO KYABANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Madam Speaker, as we celebrate the 50 years, I would like to thank the government for having fought our inflation to the level it is now. However, I would like to inform this House that there are a number of people who are not with us in celebrating the 50 years, and these are the traders. 

The traders’ mortgaged properties are being sold off by banks due to failure to meet their increased loan repayments. You know very well that Bank of Uganda increased its rate as the a way of fighting inflation and, therefore, commercial banks increased their rates too, which increased the loan installments. 

So, I would like to suggest that as we celebrate the 50 years, can we as Parliament advocate for a fund for rescuing our traders in times of economic hardships. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Complete the sentence.

MS KYABANGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When Bank of Uganda increases its rates, commercial banks pass over the burden to the traders, but the traders have nowhere to run. So, if we had that fund, it would have rescued them.

Lastly, I would like to request the Minister of Finance to request commercial banks to give some grace period to traders so that they can recover from the economic hardships and also celebrate with us the Independence. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.29
MR KENETH ONGALO (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to pay tribute to our heroes who have placed us where we are today. Fifty years is a very short time in history, and yet in those 50 years, Uganda has been able to write its name in world history for mostly bad things like brutality, terror, disappearances which began with stoning and shooting of guns at Lubiri in 1966, to the current war being waged by Kony to overthrow the government. 

But I still believe that in spite of all that suffering, the starvations that have happened in this country, something good is coming out of it. Uganda is a much stronger country because of its history. We remain with only two challenges now to strentgthen this country: One is to strengthen democracy. Democracy is not about winning all the time; democracy is also about learning to lose gracefully. (Member timed out.)

2.29
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this time to reflect on our history and then forge a way forward. I would like to thank the Members but also thank the Opposition because now we shall celebrate together. Both sides of the House should celebrate. Let us not have pictures in the press about people spraying teargas on Independence Day.

Madam Speaker, the future wars shall be about land, water and jobs. So, Parliament at this moment should legislate about the land - not about the power of the past; celebrate about having water and legislate about every community receiving water; and we should celebrate and thank those in history who have helped our scientists and recognise them. Parliament should also recognise that. While we divide people, science works for us all, and I cannot forget my father, Dr Israel Kibirige Ssebunya and the late Mangeni and the late Ochieng Aoyi who worked for science even during the times of war. Please, let us legislate and thank them, and Parliament should help us write the right history for all of us; not for Buganda, not for Teso but a history of unity in this country.

2.33
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for making us busy the whole week and as Parliament we are proud to have the best Speaker. We have gone through a lot of activities that make us feel that we have indeed made 50 years. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker! 

I want to request this Parliament to pay tribute to the person who designed the national flag. The colours which were put in it have a lot of meaning: Black for Africa, Yellow for the sun, and Red for the blood. And the one who designed the Coat of Arms – those are key people we want to know because we do not know them. At least we saw Kakoma when he was dead; they brought him here, but we have never seen these other people. We need to see them if they are still alive. If they are dead, at least let us have a moment of silence for them. 

Secondly, normally when we travel abroad we see pictures which wrongly accuse Government, especially in the USA. When you use a train, you find Oxfam makes bad statements on their placards. Why don’t we sell Uganda better now that we have natural resources, industries, hot springs – in fact, we have all the tourist attractions that would make Uganda one of the best countries in Africa? But when we go out, people ask us, “Is Idi Amin still alive?” They ask bad things about the poor leaders whom they think still exist –(Member timed out.)
			

2.33
MS GRACE HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons With Disability, Eastern): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and the Commission for having thought about this. As women, we are proud of you; you are now a trade mark in this country. I have a young daughter who said, “I want to be like Rebecca” and I think that is good.

I would like in particular as I recognise these leaders to say that in Teso, we had names like Anyoti, Okurut, Isiagi, Francis Akello; these are names we were proud of even as children and they made us want to become leaders. These were uniting people. Whenever they came to Teso, you would see unity that is not there today. Now we are in different groups; we are fighting one another. I would think that we need to emulate these people who came with a message and fought for peace in Teso. 

I remember when we had problems in the early 1990s, people like Okurut and hon. Aporu – we were caught up in the  bush but they came out and everybody wanted to be like them. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that I am proud to be part of this Parliament which is recognising 50 years of Independence. But what does it mean? What lessons do we have to learn? We need to make our steps follow the kind of leadership that was there at the beginning of our flag. It seems we want to destroy our democracy because everybody is thinking as an individual. I think we should borrow the Rotary motto which states: “Service Above Self”.

Corruption is eluding our people and I think that as leaders and as Parliament, we need to show this in Uganda –(Member timed out.)

 2.34
MR MIKE MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, let me thank you for having been the first Speaker in the history of this country ever since Adam and Eve left Eden, for having recognised our past leaders. Thank you! (Applause)

I would also like to thank the late Rt Hon. Wapakhabulo; may his soul rest in eternal peace, for having ushered in the Administration of Parliament Act, which has made this Parliament independent. That motion was moved by hon. Ogalo; that was an excellent achievement for this Parliament! (Applause)

I would also like to thank the gallant forces of NRA who gunned themselves into power and mid-wifed the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, of 1995 and that has changed the dimension of democracy in this country. 

However, I want to raise one fundamental point as Chairman of the Pan African Movement. The lakes in Uganda continue to remain under the names of the Europeans; this is a negative colonial legacy that we must reverse. Five of the lakes are named after Europeans and for me I believe that this Parliament and all current leaders must be able to entrench the Africanism in the leadership and in all that we have as Uganda. (Member timed out.)

2.35
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for organising this important debate. I am sure that it could not have happened under any other leadership. I wish to congratulate you for being steadfast. (Applause)  

In 1961, I am told by my parents, a then young soldier Kanuti Akorimo who comes from Omatenga in Kumi raised the Uganda flag right here in Kololo. Our Independence was declared, there was jubilation, ululations, people ate, drank and partied all night long. 

The Independence came as a result of a protracted negotiation, and I think this is the most important aspect of this Independence. Unlike in other countries, it was not achieved through bloodshed, but through negotiations. It came through talking. If there were any deaths, they were minimal – that ushered in the unity of this nation. What has happened ever since? We have seen coup after coup; we have seen bloodshed; and we have seen the skulls in Luweero. What story does this tell of us as people who took over from our forefathers? We accepted this attitude of violence. I would like to –(Member timed out.)  

2.38
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank so much our past leaders who did their best in making the foundation of our country firm. 

We need to rewrite the history of this country. Nowadays if you read history books, you find that our past leaders are being painted with a lot of negativity and this is creating a bad picture for the unity of this particular country.

Our future children will begin tracing where Amin hailed from, where Obote was coming from and automatically, our children will never unite in the future if we continue with this history.

Secondly, on behalf of the people of Amuru District, we would like to so much appreciate Idi Amin Dada. Idi Amin Dada – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, complete your sentence.

MR OLANYA: I thank you. Idi Amin Dada degazetted most of the gazetted land. He was really foresighted that in the future the population would grow including in Darfur where our people are currently being expelled from. It was Idi Amin Dada who degazetted for the people of Acholi to live in that particular area. Now we ask ourselves that in 50 years to come, what will happen next if right now we are grabbing the land that Idi Amin has degazetted for the people to live in. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Taaka. I think I should be fair to hon. Aza and hon. Okello since they have been here since the beginning of the debate. 
  
2.39
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would just want to take this opportunity to support the motion and to support you for the shared vision that you are having. Visions are normally shared, which brought in this kind of debate.

In Busia, they remember Obote for the good schools and hospitals that are there like Bugiri Hospital, which is nearest to Busia. Amin is also remembered for trying to give the economy back to the Ugandans and also for building the satellite station. 

I want to thank the women who have brought in emancipation. We cannot forget Mrs Obote because she started fighting Obote right from the time when President Obote was saying that the woman’s role is in the kitchen – I also differed from him. We would like to thank Mrs Matembe, Ms Winnie Byanyima, Solome Mukisa, Jamwa and the Civil Service –(Member timed out.)
 
2.41
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo):  I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank and congratulate all our past leaders in Parliament and also in Government. I would also like to congratulate our footballers of the 60s and also Members who are in their 50s. 

I was born in 1962 and in the 70s and 60s, our football pitches were never given to investors, but now they are being given to investors. Our forests and green areas have all been given to investors and yet it was not so. Golf courses in all the districts and even school land like Kitante and so on, have all been given to investors. Our roads - Imperial Royale Hotel has taken away one of our good roads in the city. This should all stop and I thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You forgot the Uganda Museum. (Laughter)

2.42
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, indeed the institution of Parliament through its legislative role needs to consolidate Uganda’s Independence. We regret all the ugly incidences that happened in the past and Uganda’s history is simply not the best. For instance, you may ask yourself why we are talking about the 9th Parliament today in 50 years. This kind of incidence calls for sanctions through formulation of legislation. 

As you may be aware, when a challenge in society demands it to be regulated, some sorts of rules and regulations are formulated; and so society needs to keep itself at peace and failure for society to keep itself at peace leads to anarchy. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me invite the mover to quickly wind up. We need to go and –

2.43
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you Madam Speaker for the wisdom and vision to decide that the previous leaders and the Parliament be honoured and recognised. (Applause)

I want to thank the honourable members for the various contributions. The intention of this motion was to honour the leaders of Parliament, but during the course of debate, it has given us an opportunity to recognise not only those who had a role to play in Parliament but has also brought on heads of Government like His Excellency Apollo Milton Obote, Idi Amin Dada, Lukongwa Binaisa, Yusuf Lule, Sir Edward Mutesa, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and many other leaders. 

Madam Speaker, you know what happened on this Floor yesterday. When the Minister for the Presidency had difficulties in confirming to the House whether the Government is going to fund billboards to recognise the previous leaders – the House demanded that yesterday. 

But for us before the Executive goes ahead to do that, as a Parliament, we have chosen to lay the foundation. One of the things that has come out very clearly in this debate and which is the intention of this motion is that if you want to be remembered, you start by remembering others who have preceded you. (Applause) This is a very huge challenge to us as Members of Parliament. How many of us recognise the previous leaders in our constituencies? At times we have talked as if we are the first MPs in our own constituencies.

In Tanzania, they have taken a decision to build physical offices for every Member of Parliament in the constituency. They are trying to see to it that even in the constituencies, there must be hand over for the new members of Parliament that come in. (Applause) We have financial challenges to even put up a Chamber, but these are some of the issues that we may look at.

Finally, in my father’s house, the late Abasian Lumala, there is a picture of teachers and members of the family cutting an Independence cake. In that picture, my mother is very pregnant and every time I look at that picture, I know that although I was not physically present to see the cake, I was in my mother’s womb witnessing what was happening at Independence because like my name Emmanuel suggests, I only came in December when Independence was in October. But moving this motion has given me an opportunity to play my rightful role at the time when I am a leader. 

I have listened to the media and people harangue Members of Parliament. This is the only institution where everybody in the public is at liberty to scorn and say any sort of words. While they do that we should never give up. Let us play our rightful role in the community. There is nobody who will come and do what we are doing now. We are the leaders today and we can only author the history that should be. 

We pay tribute to the leaders who have been here and those to come in future. Let us hope that we shall build a foundation for reconciliation; that we shall be empathetic in our decisions; and we shall be exemplary in our foundation. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do pay tribute to all the leaders mentioned in the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I informed you earlier, our records were vandalised during those eight years when there was no Parliament so we had difficulty trying to reach everybody. So, this is just the beginning. I want to assure the country that we shall be honouring others as we trace them and find out what role they played.

Someone suggested that maybe we should do it annually. The Commission will think about it. I think let us do our homework, and also the work of writing the history of this country. I think we need to do something about it. 

Members, I would like to adjourn the House so that we go and take a group photograph with our guests. I want to invite you to come back in 45 minutes so that we attend to some urgent business of the House. House adjourned until 3.30 p.m. This was a special session so we return for the other session at 3.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 2.35 p.m. and adjourned to 3.30 p.m.)

SPECIAL SITTING

Friday, 28 September 2012 

Parliament met at 3.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to welcome you to this afternoon Session, and to thank you very much for attending the Special Session held this morning to honour the past legislators and leaders of this country.

Let me now amend the Order Paper by moving item 5 to come in the place of item 3, and the others will follow in that order. Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING 

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2012

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to move that a Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2012” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it has been.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would also like, in accordance with Section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001, to lay the Certificate for Financial Implications thereto. I beg to lay.

MOTION MOVED UNDER RULE 15 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE TO SUSPEND RULE 118 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE TO ALLOW FOR THE SECOND READING OF THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2012

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, first and foremost, I would like to thank this august House for supplying the figures for the Budget for financial year 2012/2013, yesterday.

I mentioned here yesterday, that immediately after the supply, we would take the figures to the Government Printer at Entebbe, which we did. We were able to print them overnight. This morning, the figures were brought to Parliament to facilitate the first reading of this Bill.

However, given the challenges that we are now facing in light of the fact that the Budget Act requires that we should have passed the budget estimates by the 31 August of this financial year, and now that today is 28 September 2012, it is my prayer that I move a motion, under Rule 15 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament to suspend Rule 118 of the same Rules of Procedure, to allow for the Second Reading of the Appropriation Bill, 2012 so that we can be in a position to pass this Bill into law today, to enable us implement  the Budget for financial year 2012/2013. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

3.48
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Under our procedures, we would be required to subject this Bill to the Committee of Budget for consideration, but I believe that the Minister of Finance, in his motion, is seeking a waiver of that requirement. 

However, allow me seek clarification and guidance on how we shall proceed when there are errors in this Bill, which would have needed harmonisation by the Budget Committee. I take the example of what hon. Paul Mwiru pointed out last time, but was brushed off, yet on a closer scrutiny, I realised that what I presented to this Parliament, as Chairman of the Local Government Accounts Committee, in regard to the budget figures for some of the municipalities and districts, is not what is in this Bill. 

Let me take the example of hon. Paul Mwiru’s Jinja Municipality. Under the Bill, we realised that there was a cut of Shs 70 million without any explanations. And there are about five cases of a similar nature that I have examined. May the Minister give some clarifications on this? If we proceed without subjecting this Bill to the Committee of Budget, how shall we handle the errors that are arising?

MR OUKPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The other clarification I would also like to seek, is about the total figure. Here it is indicated as Shs 9.6 trillion. But when the minister read the budget, the figure was more than Shs 11 trillion. So, can the Minister of Finance clarify on the correct figure – the overall total budget?

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to react to what my colleague said. The motion is seeking the suspension of Rule 118 so that the Bill can be read the second time. It is true, there could be some errors, mathematical or otherwise; but to me, we can address these during the second reading debate before we move to the third reading of this Bill.
 
Given the urgency of this Bill, I support the motion seeking to suspend Rule 118 so that we can have the Bill read the second time. Thank you.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Appropriation Bill, 2012 depicts the supplies that were done yesterday by this House; figure for figure, and word for word. In the most unlikely event that there are any discrepancies, they will be addressed during the supply.

Secondly, the issue that has been raised by hon. Elijah Okupa about the figures, I would like to say that the figure we are supplying is Shs 9,653,741,598,000. These are votes, which are both recurrent and development, and which are not under the statutory expenditures. The total statutory expenditure is Ugshs 1,821,610,589,000.

Madam Speaker, when you total all this, the total budget for this financial year appropriated and statutory, will stand at Ugshs 11,475,352,187,000. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

On the issue of what was raised under the Jinja Municipality. These are issues, which were raised in the corrigendum and the corrigendum were passed to all Members of Parliament and in that, the particular one for Jinja Municipality was raised by the Ministry of Education, where some schools had been budgeted for under different districts. 

So, I think there were those, which were given more money than should have gone to them, and there were those who had been given less than they should have received. So, it was correcting these imbalances, and all these details were given to Members. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, I have a problem. A budget cut of Ugshs 126 million on a single small district of Lamwo cannot be explained away by the corrigenda. Madam Speaker, unless we go with what hon. Bakkabulindi is suggesting, I think it would be very dangerous to say these should have been pointed out during Supply. We hear this is the final stage. If a municipality like Fort Portal is being given an additional Ugshs 177 million without any explanation, and another district loses Ugshs 130 million - I think we have a problem.

I would rather we go with what hon. Bakkabulindi has proposed; we proceed to stage two, but you allow me, as the Chair of that committee, to point out those errors. They can turn out to be very controversial later on, Madam Speaker.

3.54
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representatives, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to allay the fears of my colleague that there is no bad intention in the corrigenda he is talking about. At the same time, I also want to interest Members to follow the Budget process. When a corrigendum is brought to the House and laid on table - for this particular one, it was brought when we were looking at the policy statements and the estimates book had already been brought to the House. 

Members then, including colleagues that are concerned, should have looked at the corrigenda and brought out this issue during that time when we were looking at policy statements. That was the right time for us to have caused any amendments or even reversal of that corrigenda on certain items. But now, the House has considered, it has supplied figures, and we are going back to where we came from.

So, the point I am trying to stress here is, this is the ninth Parliament. Perhaps for some Members, we are just trying to learn and understand the process; but the assurance is, we are now at the tail end of the process, we are now going to appropriate. We have finished confirming the figures, and there is no way we can now start changing these figures, which we have pronounced ourselves on.

Madam Speaker, that was the guidance I wanted to give. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of North Road Primary School, Mbale Municipality, represented by hon. Wamai and hon. Nakayenze Galiwango. You are welcome.

Now honourable members, I put the question that this House do suspend Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure to allow for the Second Reading of the Appropriation Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2012

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2012” be read for the Second Time.

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues - The Appropriation Bill, 2012. The object of this Bill is to provide for appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund under Section 15 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 of a sum of Ugshs 9,653,741,598,000 only, to meet the expenditure for Financial Year 2012/2013. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Appropriation Bill be read for the Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2012

4.00
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the Schedule do stand part of the Bill.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Under the Schedule, I would like to be guided on how we handle errors of print where figures were presented, the policy statement was laid on table with the clear figures of the various votes, and there may be an error in print. How do we proceed?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Point out where the error is so that we can address it directly.

MR MAGYEZI: Page 22, Vote 585 - Recurrent Expenditure for Lamwo District. The figure, which we presented is Shs 8,036,158,000. I would like to submit that this should be an error in print. 
Otherwise, it raises a cut of Shs 126,485,000 for this district.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like the honourable member to also read the figure that was supplied yesterday under this vote item.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are confirming that what is here is what was supplied?

MR OMACH: Yes, Madam Chair. What we have printed is exactly what was supplied yesterday by this august House.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chair, I beg to move a motion that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered a bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2012” and has passed it without amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2012

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that, The Appropriation Bill 2012,be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Appropriation Bill be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE APPROPRIATION ACT, 2012”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have just managed to beat the deadline. Thank you very much for the work done throughout the Budget process. We have finally concluded it; it is now the duty of the Minister of Finance to do the needful. There is a big drought in the vicinity and I hope you will be able to address that situation. (Laughter)

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, now that the clouds have started forming, I think the rains will not take long. Thank you. (Laughter)

4.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Justine Lumumba): Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to thank everybody for all their input as individuals and the committee, to ensure that we get to this level. Thank you very much, both sides.

4.06
MR PHILLIP OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, now that we have passed the Budget –(Interjection)– I am not talking about rain; I am talking about the Budget we have passed. We should not look at this money as rain; this is taxpayers’ money. We are very worried about the stealing of public funds by the people who work in Government. We keep passing budgets but the money is stolen and Government programmes are not implemented. We pray that we are more serious with this money such that it is disbursed in a timely manner. We often pass budgets, but the money is not disbursed to districts; when we go there as MPs, we are told it has not been received, yet we have appropriated it. We hope that this time Government will change its style of work.

4.07
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a matter of national importance under Rule 45 of our Rules of Procedure. Last evening, at around 7 o’clock, fire gutted shops on Spire Road in Jinja Town, and over eight shops were burnt to ashes and merchandise was lost by the traders. As usual, the Police Fire Brigade arrived at the scene after an hour and half, whereas the Nile Fire Brigade had reached an hour after the incidence. So, it was not possible to save the traders’ merchandise. 

Madam Speaker, under those circumstances, I call for the indulgence of the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to come to the rescue of the traders in Jinja Town. Secondly, and most importantly, I call for the indulgence of the Minister of Internal Affairs; this is not the first time fire is gutting the shops on that road. We were promised a report in that area, but to date, no report has been produced. So, I seek the indulgence of the House to ensure that the responsible ministers take action concerning that matter. Thank you.

4.09
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take the House back to the Budget process which we have just concluded. The Budget Act is quite clear on the timeframes as to when the executive should bring in the Budget Framework Paper and the timing of all other processes until we do appropriation. For this particular Budget, the Budget Framework Paper was laid on 10 April 2012, and yet it was supposed to have been laid on 1 April 2012. Of course, a delay in bringing that paper means a delay for Parliament to begin and conclude its activities. Today, we have had to suspend some of our rules to make sure we pass this Budget timely.

Last financial year, the same thing happened; again, we had to suspend our rules and read the Bill for the first, second and third times on the same day, and yet our rules, as we have suspended, provide that normally, such a bill should be referred to the Budget Committee. So, the issue I am raising is this: Members have been raising questions. Yesterday, hon. Mwiru raised an issue to do with the corrigenda; today hon. Magyezi is raising the same issue. That implies that the processes we have carried out here, perhaps, have not given Members enough time for them to pick up the Budget process as contained in the law.

Madam Speaker, my prayer to the Executive is that let us try to do things in a timely manner, so that Parliament – this one being the Ninth Parliament, 62 percent of the Members are new, and they need to understand the Budget process and all other parliamentary processes. My prayer is that next time round, let us try and do things in a timely manner, so that Parliament is also given adequate time to perform its duties.    

Madam Speaker, even for the reports that were brought here, chairpersons were given sometimes five minutes to present a summary, and yet it is a committee report that is supposed to inform the House. The chairperson is supposed to bring all the issues to the House so that Members are able to debate from an informed point of view. But because of the timing and the short time that Parliament had, we had to rumble through the process - let me call it “rumble through” – because it was five minutes for the Chairperson to present the report; then two minutes for every Member to debate; and within 30 minutes the report is done; and in a day you are considering about eight reports. I do not think that is the way we want to handle business in this House. So, that is my prayer; that next time, let the Executive give Parliament enough time to do its work in the manner that is laid out in the Rules of Procedure. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We may have to also improve the way we contribute to the Bills or the reports. The whips will have to arrange it in such a way that not everybody speaks on every subject. That is part of the problem. Everybody wants to talk about agriculture, about the roads, about health, and it is not possible. The whips should assist us with say, who will speak on Agriculture; when you finish agriculture you keep quiet, and let somebody else talk about the roads. Otherwise, if everybody wants to speak - that is why we are here now, because everybody wants to speak. So, we will also have to make some changes there.

So, honourable members, I do not want to keep you here the whole day. I want to adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. and I want to thank you very much for the work done. Good afternoon and good weekend.

(The House rose at 4.13 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2 October 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 

