Thursday, 3 September 2015

Parliament met at 10.23 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala
	
PRAYERS              

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We are starting early today for obvious reasons, which we stated on Tuesday when we rose. 

Let me repeat this announcement: The national organising committee would like to announce the upcoming National Prayer Breakfast 2015 to be held on 8th October starting at 7.00 a.m. The theme of this year’s prayer breakfast will be, “The joy of serving others.” The usual venue is Hotel Africa. The chief guest will be His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni and the guest speaker will be His Excellency William Ruto, the Deputy President of the Republic of Kenya. The chief testifier will be Dr Monica Musenero. All Members of Parliament are invited. All your cards are available and will be delivered to your pigeonholes very soon. 

There will also be a women’s forum as part of the series of events that will take place immediately after the breakfast and all female MPs are invited. Invitation cards for this event will also be delivered.

Honourable members, I will use the prerogative of the Speaker to alter the Order Paper to accommodate two statements, the first one being the awaited statement from the Minister for Internal Affairs which will come immediately. The second statement will be from the Minister for Defence, who called and alerted me that they needed to make a statement on what happened in Somalia. We should expect the statements in that order.

Honourable members, this House had been adjourned and sent on recess but we had to call you back for work that has to be completed. As is the tradition of this House, you are entitled to a round trip from your constituencies and back. That is being arranged. I am sure that those matters will be handled very soon.

There are other issues of the “unfavourable drought” that has happened. That is also being handled comprehensively and the Speaker is in charge of that operation –(Laughter)– and so it will be okay. I thought that I should give this “metrological report” to alert the members that all is under control and we should be okay.  

MR LUGOLOOBI: I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Item No. 8, relating to consideration and approval of Supplementary Schedules 1, 2, 3, has been appearing on the agenda nearly every day but unfortunately, it has always been the last. It seems that we are really running out of time for the consideration of this expenditure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will handle that today. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: I am actually pleading that if it could come forward and we get it out of the way. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is on the Order Paper and we shall be handling it; do not worry. You will be speaking for five minutes as you report. So, it is okay. 

Can we start with the statement from the Minister for Internal Affairs? After which, we could go to the Supplementary Schedule if the Minister for Defence is not here. Honourable minister, is the statement uploaded on the iPads? 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

10.28
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Mr Speaker, I am checking on it, after consulting with you, and then I order it to be uploaded.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are they uploading?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Yes, they are uploading.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Mr Speaker, as I deliver this statement, I would like to state that the country is stable and that the security forces are doing their best to ensure that our country remains peaceful and stable. However, at the time this statement was demanded by Parliament under your directive, a number of serious crimes had been committed in this country and a number of leaders from the Muslim faith had been robbed of their lives. 

A number of serious crimes that have recently been committed in the country have generated concern in the population. Following this, I communicated the matter to the National Security Committee in a meeting held on 16 July 2015. A joint Operations Centre (JOC) and a Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC) team under the guidance of the Inspector General of Police were set up and tasked to investigate, handle and report on this matter. 

I wish to take this opportunity to inform the House of the measures that have been instituted to enhance, detect and prevent crime in order to safeguard the safety of people and their properties. The recent most rampant crimes that have caused public concern and are being reported on here fall in two broad categories:
    i) Armed robberies and house break-ins. These are mainly due to economic motivation. 

    ii) Homicide, violent extremism, witchcraft and mob justice.

Honourable members, notwithstanding the above-mentioned concerns and incidents of high profile murders and robberies, the security situation in the country is generally stable. This improvement in dealing with crime is attributed to: 

    i) Enhanced Uganda Police Force capabilities.

    ii) Enhanced cooperation among the security services through joint command centres and joint intelligence committees. 

    iii) Enhancement of popular vigilance, especially through recruitment, training and operationalisation of the community policing or neighbourhood watch as we may also call it. This programme of community policing was officially operationalised by H.E. the President during the Police centenary celebrations at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds on 3 October 2014.

    iv) The Justice Law and Order Sector (JLOS) institutions, especially the Police, the office of the Attorney-General and the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions work closely at what has become known as a one-stop centre. Justice belongs to the people and this has helped in dealing with criminal cases.

    v) Institution of regional cooperation mechanisms. Mr Speaker, we have arrangements in the East African Community, the Northern Corridor Integration Projects (NCIP), and also EAPCCO that have weighed in seriously to ensure that we jointly deal with transnational crimes. 

Mr Speaker, I have attached Appendix I, which is an analysis of the crime incidence/trends from 2006 to date. I have also attached Appendix II, which is an analysis of incidence of homicide and aggravated robberies and break-ins from 2014 to date. There is also Appendix III, which is a report on the killings of Muslim clerics.

Primary Categories that Aid Criminal Violence

Where does intelligence put a finger on where some of these criminal acts come from? There are four primary causes that aid criminal violence in the current intelligence analysis:
1. 	Proliferation of Small Arms and Light Weapons 
    a) Poor control of firearms in private security organisations. 
    b) Smuggling of small arms and light weapons from neighbouring countries. 
    c) Uganda’s past history of instabilities where some guns were accessed and are in the possession of wrong elements. 
This has become a challenge and we have measures that I will mention to deal with this easy availability of some small arms in the hands of criminals.

2. 	Drug Trafficking and Abuse 
	There is increased abuse of drugs.

3. 	Socio-cultural Factors 
Degeneration of values, crisis in families, domestic violence, human sacrifice, wrangles over marital relations or over property.

4. Socio-economic Factors 
Property wrangles over land and buildings, youth unemployment and inequality in wealth; robberies for money, business rivalry, land disputes, carrying large sums of money especially by the business community attract criminals.

Clearly, honourable members, given this state of affairs, all of us have a role to play if we are to defeat crime.

Strategy to Roll Back and Defeat Crime

Mr Speaker, whereas it is true that there have been a number of high profile murders, Parliament will note from the data given in the appendices that since December 2014, incidents of criminal violence are on a downward trend. It is however critical that we intensify efforts to hunt down the killers, whether organised or not. 

We must not lose sight of the fact that criminal violence is a serious threat to the security and stability of Uganda and the East African region. Quite the contrary, criminal violence has, over the decades, increasingly become the biggest threat to security and stability not only in Uganda but to the whole world. Criminal violence ranges from terrorism, homicide, rape, defilement, domestic violence, armed robberies and break-ins, riots and civil disorders, cattle rustling/thefts, motor vehicle theft, muggings, assaults and other forms of violent common crimes.

In our case, for many decades, especially since 1986, we battled the most extreme forms of this violence in the form of warlike threats with a multitude of insurgent and terror groups wreaking havoc in the rural areas as it happened in the north-western part of Uganda, in the north, northeast and then in the Karamoja area. The different groups have however been decisively defeated. In addition, cattle rustling, which had ravaged Karamoja region and the neighbouring districts, was decisively defeated.

Therefore, in spite of the recent killings, Uganda is at peace and there is security. Criminal violence, in particular, and crime in general is on the decline. It would therefore not be correct to conclude from the recent incidents that the situation is getting out of hand.  

To consolidate and deepen the positive gains in the fight against crime, the Police and sister security agencies and other law enforcement agencies have put in place strategies and measures that aim at both prevention of crime as well as effectively hunting down criminals, as we still face real threats.

Mr Speaker, there is now what we refer to as residual terrorism. In spite of the above mentioned successes against terrorism, there are the remnants of those who could have been left by the ADF or even some elements of the former LRA and the Al Shabaab. The remnants of the ADF are hiding in the jungles of Eastern DRC and have cells in Uganda. In fact, the recent killings of prominent personalities, in particular Muslim sheikhs, are suspected to have been carried out by the ADF terror cells. However, it is noteworthy to inform you that of recent, working with the Government of Tanzania, Jamil Mukulu was captured in Tanzania and later on extradited to Uganda and is before courts of law. We hope that that success will weaken activities of the ADF in Eastern DRC. 

The Al Shabaab was defeated as a military force in Somalia but continues to pose a threat to Uganda and our region. They carry out attacks like the Westgate Mall attack and the Garissa University attack. In our case, we have foiled numerous attempts by Al Shabaab to launch armed attacks and/or bombings since their successful suicide bombing attack in 2010.  

Honourable members, we also suspect violent extremism where investigations have established that some of the killings were carried out by individuals with scores to settle but contracting elements in these cells to carry out the killings. Examples include the murder of Sheikh Dr Muwaya in Mayuge, the late Tito Okware in Namayingo District as indicated in appendix III.  

Strategies/measures put in place since this challenge faced us include: 

1. 	On our part, there is now enhanced intelligence-led policing. Intelligence structures have been rolled out from the parish all the way to the national level. We have parish intelligence committees, sub-county intelligence committees and district intelligence committees all the way up to ensure that they give timely intelligence to the Police in order to prevent criminal acts. 

Through this strategy, the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI), the Internal Security Organisation (ISO), the External Security Organisation (ESO), Criminal Investigations Department of the Police are now working together with a common strategy to ensure that they have a sufficient early warning mechanism to deal with crime. The National Joint Operations Centre (JOC) has also been established at the national level. This arrangement is replicated at all levels up to the parish as I have indicated. 

2. 	His Excellency the President recently gave us strategic guidance on combating residual terrorism. We are developing plans to operationalise it. 

3. 	We have also put in place measures to counter crime and these include:
i. 	Developing a watch list of known criminals.
ii. 	Profiling individuals with criminal records to facilitate monitoring of their movements, activities and associates in the country and beyond. 
iii. 	Intensifying security mobilization and sensitisation in the country.
iv. 	Ensuring visible deployments of the security forces.
v. 	Conducting cordon and search in suspected areas to recover weapons that are illegally held.  
vi. 	Counter radicalisation programmes to dissuade potential recruits from embracing this extremism. 

Additionally, of recent a decision was taken, and it was quite advanced, that in order to reinforce human means, we apply enhanced technology by installation of CCTV cameras in Kampala and other municipalities later on. Also, to move faster to issue identity cards as a measure of identification in phase one for those who registered - that is those of 16 years and above - and then after elections, move fast to register those who were never registered, the aliens and those who are below 16 years of age. We believe technology plus human means will go a long way to defeat crime in this country like we defeated other threats to our national security before.

4. 	Countering the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. All firearms have been marked and given numbers of a service or the owner. We are now moving ahead to ensure that the storage is effective. 

5. 	Since some Muslim leaders and other prominent personalities appear to be targeted, we have provided personal security to them. Some of those individuals who are targeted have been provided individual security and they have been briefed accordingly on how to go around with their personal security.

6. 	Prosecution-led investigations have been expedited, deployment of more judicial officers and prosecutors to expedite the judicial process, recruitment of more judges to handle capital offences, increase in both human and non-human capacity to other stakeholders in the criminal justice system to enhance the process of investigations. 

7. 	We continue the task of building the capacity and capabilities of the Police and sister security agencies in particular, investing in security technologies such as the IDs and CCTV cameras.

8. 	Strategy of combined technical capacities and capabilities of the Police with popular vigilance (neighbourhood watch through the system of crime preventers) and strengthening vigilance at all levels. 

9. 	We are also addressing the challenges in the criminal justice system so that justice is delivered and credibility of the system among the public is built. We have noted that mob justice or action is the biggest cause of homicide. Lynching suspected thieves by the public, corruption in the administration of justice, conflicts/disputes taking long to be resolved in courts of law, limited sensitisation on legislation and the law all force people to take the law in their own hands.

10. 	Ensuring that all persons’ bio-metric data is captured and IDs are given. 

11.	Ensuring regular holding of regional, district and sub-county security committee meetings. 

Mr Speaker, as I said, Appendix No. I is an analysis and it can be referenced, especially on how the incidents have been on the downward trend. However, a death is a death. Whether there is a downward trend or not, our focus and determination is to ensure that we win this war on crime.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I would like to assure the House and the country that despite the recent high profile murders, the crime rate in the country is on the downward trend and we are determined to keep it that way until they are defeated. 

Not only has the crime rate and trend been declining since 2006, there was also a marked reduction in crime in the January to June 2015 period compared to the same period in 2014. For instance, while there were 143 incidents of death by shooting between January and June in 2014, there have been 74 incidents of death by shooting in the same period in 2015. That is a reduction and downward trend indicator.

However, to keep the rate on the downward trend, we request for enhanced support of Parliament and the public to address other pertinent issues that feed into criminal violence such as land wrangles. These include but are not limited to social, economic and cultural factors as earlier mentioned in the report. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you will recall that this statement has been requested for many times. When I was informed that it was ready, I had to alter the Order Paper to accommodate it so that the country is informed about what is happening and what the Government is doing as well as what the citizens should feel about their state of security. We can have a debate on this matter, starting from the member for Terego.

10.45
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for having brought this statement. Furthermore, I would like to commend the Police for the good work they are doing in as far as combating crime in this country. However, there are a few lapses and gaps that I would like to bring to the attention of the minister. 

There are instances where crimes are committed, for example the heinous murders of prominent Muslim clerics, and immediately an act of that nature is committed, before even any investigation is carried out, the first thing you hear on radio is, “We know the people; they are ADF.” Now, if you know the people, why don’t you carry out pre-emptive arrests the way you arrest politicians pre-emptively, so that you avoid an instance of a crime of that nature from being committed?

In addition, if you know the people who are behind these crimes, why does it take you very long to arraign them in the courts of law for prosecution? This gives the impression to the public that you are actually navigating in the waters without compasses. You do not know exactly what you are focusing on. Otherwise, if you know what you are focussing on, then you should be able to go after the right person at the right time and prosecute.

Secondly, I would like to commend the Police once again for having opened up branches in various parts of this country. There are now police stations and posts in sub-counties and parishes. However, these police stations are a menace to the public. They are a liability to the public. If you report a crime, the same two or three police personnel there say, “yes you have reported this crime but we do not have transport; can you facilitate us to go there?” 

Immediately you facilitate them, the suspect is arrested. However, as you are going home, the suspect is following you. He is not even detained for questioning. That is where the issue of mob justice comes in. Where the village knows that such a person is a habitual criminal and they have handed him over to the Police but the Police fail to do their work, the only thing that the community falls back to is mob justice. I think the Police need to wake up in that light.

The other aspect is, when you have a suspect reported, whose responsibility is it to keep that suspect there? Who is responsible for his upkeep? Many a time, complainants are asked to bring food to feed suspects in the police stations. That is why I am saying that these stations are a liability to the public. The public no longer have confidence in the Police much as they are closer to them. Something had better be done. 

Every financial year, we appropriate resources here for enhancing the performance of the Police. Where does this money go? Does it only remain in Kampala? Does it only remain in the RPC and DPC offices? What about the person who is doing the donkey work there with the wanainchi helping to combat crime? Can you facilitate them so that we are all seen rowing the canoe in the same direction in order to join hands in combating crime? I think you still have a lot to do. (Member timed out)

10.49
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I would like to add that since the murders in Namayingo District, the security situation has improved. I would also like to commend the Police for the construction of police posts or outlets along the Musiita-Namayingo-Majanji Road. 

However, there is still a security problem in the islands. You find that within a spell of three days, around 20 motorised engine boats are robbed. Honourable minister, I have been to your office and other offices regarding the security situation on the waters. 

You have clearly stated in your statement that there is still a problem because of the porous borders. I would like to assure you that the waters are not well policed and they are a threat to our national security. On many occasions, I have interacted with the police personnel in these outposts and their problem has been fuel. They have the gear to use but fuel is a problem. Most of the times, the fishermen have tried to contribute fuel but it is not enough. 

Honourable minister, it is my plea that water security is looked at. Whereas on the mainland you have highway patrols, water security is still lacking and it is a potential threat to the security of our country. We now have many foreigners on our waters fishing under the pretext of being fishermen and yet they are likely to be a security threat. It is my humble appeal that we do something in this area.

The second issue is that of the Parish Internal Security Officers (PISOs). In many places they were used during the national ID registration project but after the project, many have been rendered redundant. They were trained and they may also cause trouble.

The final issue is that of crime preventers. Many of them are not facilitated and they can instead turn into crime promoters. I pray that you move very fast to see how best they can be facilitated because they provide necessary and important information that can improve our security. However, without facilitation, I fear that they may not do well.

10.42
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the report. I have two issues and the first one is about the inflow and outflow of arms, especially in districts bordering countries. 

Adjumani borders South Sudan and we are hosting the largest number of refugees in this country. Last week on Sunday, we had a problem in Pakelle Sub-county. I went up to the Police and they told me they were following it up. The issue was that one of the refugees was suspected to be having a gun. Therefore, I request your ministry and Government to ensure that border districts are helped so that the people are protected from those who come from other countries. The refugees, especially, who move to and fro should be prevented from entering Uganda with their guns.

Mr Speaker, I pray that the minister comes out clearly on how they have planned to facilitate and motivate the crime preventers. In Adjumani, the issues of motivation and facilitation arose on the day of their pass out and there was no answer. I attended the occasion. Therefore, I request that you come out with a clear statement so that we can convey what the Government has for them, in order to avert this idea of people expecting something and yet at the end they will get nothing. As a result, they can turn around to be dangerous to the community because they are well trained. Thank you.

10.54
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA: (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for finally presenting that statement.

Mr Speaker, the clerics who were murdered and the way Government dealt with their murder has in fact increased tension among the Muslim community. It is not a common sight to see a sheik coming to lead prayers with armed men escorting him. However, the minister should help this Parliament understand what the underlying causes of these murders are. 

In the conflict between two Muslim factions, usually the names of generals were being evoked. One of the sheiks who has been arrested now actually used to boast that he had three generals: Gen. Aronda, Gen. Katumba Wamala and Gen. Saleh. Another one who became a victim had Gen. Kale Kayihura. Can the minister explain to this Parliament how the generals got involved in the conflict and why exactly this conflict cannot be resolved? This is because these murders are consequences of something and that is the bit you must explain to Parliament. 

In a mechanical reaction, when one of the sheiks was killed in Bweyogerere trading centre, they constructed a kiosk there for the Police. However, the murder had already taken place. It is as if another murder is going to be committed in the same place. They then armed the sheiks and asked others to go for training. However, even the one who was murdered in Bweyogerere had a gun in his vehicle and guards. Therefore, you cannot guarantee security by attaching armed personnel to some targets because you may never exhaust the list of those who are being targeted.

Can the minister explain to this Parliament what the causes of this conflict are which eventually resulted into factions within the Muslim community? Even one of the ministers, Prof. Kabwegyere, with the involvement of the President, tried to help resolve the conflict over property and leadership. However, instead of helping, the generals went into it and took sides. As a result, we have people who are being gunned down by armed people. The easiest answer is to say it is the Al Shabaab or ADF doing that. 

Also, fundamentally, Mr Speaker, what is it that drives people including the ADF to do the things that they do? Gen. Aronda, you are a result of rebellion; what took you to Luwero jungle to fight and do you think we must continue that way? You remember how you were being dismissed as bandits. You may dismiss ADF or all the other rebels –(Member timed out.)

10.58
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for making an attempt to tell us what they are trying to do in making sure that we are secure. They are doing a good job.

However, Mr Speaker, we have one very big problem which the minister has not said anything about, and that is the issue of people walking into Uganda as if they are walking into a football pitch to watch a football game. We are the easiest country in East Africa that any criminal or anybody from anywhere can just walk in. At the airport, the Afghan or Pakistani sheiks you come with on a flight just walk in. They cannot speak English but when they get to the airport their passports are stamped as they come into the country. The next thing you know, you will find them in Gomba walking in the villages. What are they doing in our villages? We have got the Chinese who are now hawking in Kampala and yet we have an immigration department. We have got people from Eritrea all over the place. The other day in Bunga, they were hiding in pit latrines to escape arrest. What is going on? 

We are talking about security but there is no way you can ensure security without securing our borders to make sure people just do not walk into this country. I would like the minister to tell us what he is doing to ensure that we are protected beyond just having guns protecting us.

There is another thing that I need not forget; it was mentioned that one of the causes of insecurity amongst some of the population is the fact that there is unemployment. Why are we giving our jobs to useless people from overseas who come to milk this country? Go to Munyonyo and see; security officers are not even officers. Call them what you want. Go there and you will be served tea by an Indian. It annoys me; I think I better stop there. Thank you very much.

11.01
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My understanding of security is that you should prevent a crime from occurring. If a criminal act occurs, you should have the capacity to get to the bottom of it so that you prevent the next crime from occurring. This borders on one issue - the ideological orientation of the people who are manning the security in this country.

When I attended the funeral of the late Joan Magezi, I heard the IGP, in his speech to the mourners, suggest that the criminal justice system of this country should be fundamentally altered to do away with presumption of innocence. It is not possible because the criminal justice system is a worldwide phenomenon. If you have that sort of ideology by the IGP, that this is how we should deal with this issue, and you do not enumerate issues which must be dealt with – 

//Mr Speaker, in my view, attention must be paid to issues of corruption in the Police, tampering with crime scenes and the facilitation of the Police to do their work. This, to me, is fundamental; the ideological orientation of the people who are handling security must move away from guns, tear gas and from giving people who are threatened security and it must be premised on this.

I would also like to say in this House that I presented a strong case of my political assistant who was murdered in cold blood. His file has since gone cold and has died a natural death. There are many pointers indicating the possibility of getting to the bottom of this, including the death in my constituency of a one Monica Kulabako, for whom a suspect appeared before a magistrate and pleaded guilty. That file has also gone cold.

The last issue I would like to draw your attention to is a new phenomenon of what we used to see and hear during Idi Amin days, where people would disappear without a trail of accountability. The Uganda Wild Authority with their wardens – I do not know the people who do their work there - are just killing suspected poachers. They just kill them without arraigning them before the courts of law. It is true that a poacher must not poach but if somebody becomes a culprit, they should be arraigned before court because there is a justice system in this country. However, there are orders that have been imposed. 

My colleague from Nwoya the other day was making the same case –(Member timed out.)

11.05
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the report. My concern is with what he has already highlighted in the report. On the ground, if we assess the work of these security personnel, as some colleagues have said it is becoming more of a burden. There are people who are arrested from the villages, for instance, but the Police do not have the capacity to move the suspects from one point to another. They are kept in their small houses. They do not have enough security to keep those criminals especially the hard-core ones. This burdens those who go to report and at the end of the day, the ordinary Ugandan will say, “I am going to burden myself more”. 

If we are streamlining the security issue, I would like Government, through the minister, to tell us – Recently, as I watched television, I saw these groups that are coming up - the Kakooza Mutales – and I was taken aback. The man was speaking with so much authority, saying you give way to the Mulaalo or else he confronts somebody. This was on television; you do not have to investigate to get the crime. What have you done up to now? Have you arrested them? We would like this to come up.

It is not the first time that Kakooza Mutale is beating up Ugandans during elections. If the Lord Mayor and others are responding, it is because of frustration. You are inciting hooligans from one group to terrorise Ugandans during elections and people are saying no way. What have you done to Kakooza Mutale particularly to bring him to order? 

Mr Speaker, creation of these security committees is a good thing right from parish level, but the problem in the villages is that they have come up to fight clan and family wars. If they picked somebody’s son to be on that security committee, for example, and the family had a problem with another before, they then bring that other family to order by terrorising them. We have even had people incited and arrested because of trumped up –(Member timed out.)

11.08 
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also stand to thank the minister for his statement and also the security personnel for the work they are doing, irrespective of the loopholes therein. We sympathise with the people that have been affected.

Mr Minister, on the matter of CCTV and national identity cards, this is a very serious matter and I thank you for raising it. I do urge you, as Government, to see to it that taxes are waived for the CCTV cameras. I imagine that if all businesses and hotels, among others, had CCTV cameras it would help a lot in identifying some suspicious people that I believe the Police or security personnel would help in apprehending.

On the matter of the national IDs, I would like to thank you for the work you did. I personally got my ID and I am so lucky to have got it. There are some people around that have not got their national IDs but I know that you are working around the clock to see to it that all Ugandans get their national IDs. Maybe you need to introduce a mechanism – Yes, I have my ID but if someone does not ask me to identify myself or to declare whether I am a Ugandan, it may not be very effective. A mechanism therefore needs to be put in place at least to check.

Mr Speaker, during the festive season that we concluded, I was fortunate or unfortunate because I was almost lynched by a gang of young men. I was coming from a function called enkuuka and as I tried to find my way to where I had kept my car, this gang came. You cannot fight a gang; they check your pockets - Fortunately, I found some two people standing and I stood in between them and one of them identified me and asked, “Honourable, what are you doing here?” I wondered if this is what happens out here. 

I do not know what happened to the LDUs and the mobile police that used to move around. I know it is very instrumental; I know we have come up with crime preventers, who I believe need to be facilitated, regulated and sensitised on their roles. However, there is still a lot that is still lacking to ensure that security is efficient – (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give concerns gangs in Kampala. They are now in places called “dangerous spots” by people who work around Kampala and the Police are aware. One of those is around Wampewo Avenue. They raid people during the day using stones and iron bars and cause serious harm. One time I was moving around the avenue and the Police told me that that is a dangerous spot and yet they have not arrested any person in that dangerous spot. I am therefore wondering what the Police is doing.  

Actually, the other piece of information I would like to give is that one time I was arrested and detained at Old Kampala Police Station. One of the inmates I found there said to me, “You should be released but as for me, I am pick pocket. The only problem I have is with the DPC. I have to give him money every weekend but I would like to leave that kind of job. These days, I am very conservative.” I was released the following day but that man was released that evening. Thank you very much.

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for the information. Honourable minister, I ask you to have the Police – (Member timed out.)

11.13
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his report and I would like to thank the ministry because there is improvement in security, especially in Northern Uganda. There used to be a wave of thefts and armed robbery in Kitgum, Lamwo and Gulu but now this has subsided. 

Honourable minister, I listened attentively to your report but I did not hear any strategy to curb infiltration of guns especially from South Sudan to the neighbouring districts. In my district, there is a lot of infiltration of guns and I did not hear that come out clearly; I did not hear any strategy on how to stop them. People are very scared since we are going into the election period. Those guns might end up in the wrong hands and will be used to fight opponents of people who have the guns.

You also talked of security and especially the GISOs and PISOs. The regional –(Interruption)– I do not need information, please. You talked about the GISOs and PISOs but in my district, I do not think they know their roles properly because they are busy politicking instead of doing intelligence work so that we can know what is happening. 

My district is very porous. We have a lot of theft of cattle and we know that Government is restocking, but people from the neighbouring countries come and steal our cattle and go back to South Sudan. Therefore, I wish to ask you: what are the strategies for stopping those crimes of stealing our cattle? When they come to steal the cattle, they come in with guns. I beg the minister to help us so that we can curb the infiltration of guns from the neighbouring South Sudan. Thank you.

11.15
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for having given the Members of Parliament under of the Forum for Democratic Change an opportunity yesterday to attend the national delegates’ conference. It was very successful and a demonstration of democracy not only on paper but in action.

Mr Speaker, I would like to raise four issues. One, we have passed laws here like the Narcotic Drugs Act, the Enguli Act but people are drinking and smoking and even the Police do the same and no action is being taken. What happens to these people when they take these drugs? I think that is the first call point we should begin from.

Secondly, hon. Betty Anywar raised an issue about Kakooza Mutale. I can tell you that everybody is preparing for Kakooza Mutale. So, what will happen in the end? That is dangerous because Government has not taken action on Kakooza Mutale’s acts. They have also not taken action on Kibule, the Minister of State for Water. This shows that Kakooza Mutale has a right to protect the NRM and you must be ready to be beaten by Kakooza Mutale. That is going to be very dangerous. In the current times, we have lot of youth who are unemployed. Even those that Kakooza Mutale is training, if they have no cause, they will use the guns he is giving them to go and do wrong things.

Thirdly, let us be realistic; I am a police officer and I am paid Shs 300,000 but I have a son in Makerere University who is paying Shs 3,600,000 as school fees per semester. That means my salary for one year is able to pay for only one semester for one child. What about the other semesters and the other children? What about food and other needs? What will a police officer do when handling a case of Shs 100 million and yet that night his kids at home have no fees?

You remember during the old governments, Government took action to look after children of the civil servants. Now the Government would be educating the children of police officers or civil servants and they would have cards for medical facilities. That is how you can contribute to their welfare. However, if you are saying their small salaries should be used, I can tell you corruption will continue. For them, they take peanuts and the big bosses who have good jobs take huge chunks of cash and you say there is corruption in the Police. These are just small men doing so many jobs and yet the big one does one job, which involves all the small policemen.

Lastly, I would like Members of Parliament to know about what happened in Kasokoso. It was not something simple; you have underrated it. It is a serious matter. People there live like amphibians. Instead of using charcoal to boil water for drinking, they would rather boil water for the man to bathe - (Member timed out.)

11.19
MS GRACE FREEDOM KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the comprehensive report. Seated here listening to the report, I wondered how we can have such reports being given by the equivalent of security personnel back in our district where we have issues. If it is not possible, then I wish this report could also be relayed to the districts where people could have complete access to this information.

I also would like to thank the minister because the Police are now very visible even in our local areas. Visibility itself is a preventive measure to crime. However, I would like to say that even the national identity cards have changed the situation. Recently, I went home and I found everybody on the streets with their IDs dangling on their necks. What we sell most in the bookshops these days are card straps. People are very proud of these national IDs.

I would like to observe that the concept of community policing has not been understood by everybody. It looks like the Police is doing it alone. If you went home and asked the sub-county leaders, the councillors, I think you will discover that the Police is talking alone. What the Ministry of Internal Affairs is doing is simply sensitisation, which does not address security holistically. Talk about these crime preventers, for example; what is the role of the district? What is the role of the sub-county chiefs and what is the role of the LC III chairpersons?

In our recent history, the district local governments were managing the district police but now the district police were taken over by the centre. Now, even managing crime preventers and managing police itself is far away from them. I would therefore like to appeal to the ministry to please bring some of these concepts near to the people so that all of us can have a role to play. It is better to have concerted coordination in order to address these issues than to have the Police walking it alone. I would like to beg.

Secondly, there is simple transport like the tricycles I see in Kampala; why don’t you give that to the local Police at the sub county level so that they can move? I see my policemen riding bicycles with a gun at the back. I do not know when –(Member timed out.)
 
11.22
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I thank you and I thank the minister for this report. The fact that the minister is coming up with this report spells a case of gross failure of Government’s core mandate. The function of the Police force in Uganda is to protect life and property. The second function is to prevent and detect crime. Those are core functions of the Police force –(Interjection)- Law and order is there; I am leaving it out to be very specific. Therefore, the fact that the General is giving this statement about murders is a gross failure of this Government to protect people and to prevent and detect crime.

Secondly, I do not know whether this statement is comprehensive enough. I am on record, on the Floor of this Parliament, as having given Government a list of murders, some of them at the hands of state organs. You were in the Chair when I talked about Said Lutaaya, who was killed by JATT operatives in Kololo on 22 November 2007, and you are not accounting for that death. I talked of Sheik Musa Mugoya who was killed in Iganga on the orders of the then RDC in April, 2005. He was the leader of the Salaf in that area. I talked of Umar Makubuya, arrested in Kampala and died at CMI in detention in 1997. I talked of Issa Kiggundu, shot in Wakiso on 18 October 2007 by JATT operatives. I talked of Abdu Mugyenyi, arrested from Kasese Town, killed at JATT in Kololo on the orders of a one Asiimwe and Godfrey Mwesigwa. I talked of Yasin Tayebwa who died in 2008 as a result of torture by CMI operatives, mainly Lt Asiimwe. I talked of two unidentified young Muslims killed in July 2008 at Kasokoso near Bweyogerere in Wakiso District by a one Dennis and Mucunguzi both of JATT and CMI.

I have read through the report, but the minister simply does not talk about these people who were killed in the hands of the Government, and all of them are Muslims. These were not killed by rebels. When you go to unresolved murders, we were very specific, not in generic terms. Each of these Sheikhs has been killed in a known and common way - shot dead by boda boda operatives. So, we expected a note and report about each murder and how far the investigations have gone. I think to this extent, this report does not mention that. Give us a detailed report of the investigations of the murders of Sheik Karim Sentamu, Yunus Bakari, Sheikh Twaib Jjuuko, Sentugga, Abdu Muwaya - he has talked about him and said that he was killed because of local rivalry.

Two, the honourable minister is aware that there is a common scenario he should explained. Most of these people were under amnesty by the Government of Uganda and they are former ADF operatives. What we require you to tell us is to what extent and who amongst them –(Member timed out).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to separate roles here. If a person is killed by government officers, a report in Parliament will not help. There are processes which those people should follow to hold those people accountable and also get due compensation for the affected families. A report in Parliament would hardly be the way to go. There are laws of vicarious liability of Government, a suit against the Attorney-General to get real things to real people who have lost people. 

I do not think coming to report to Parliament solves the problem. We should also guide those communities on how to handle incidents like those you are talking about – those who were killed by government operatives under orders of the government people and others. Certainly, they cannot be handled by Parliament; there are processes that can solve them.

Also, I do not think this House should be prepared to listen to a detailed report on investigations. Let us deal with what Parliament can do and leave the other arms of Government to deal with what they can do. We are not going to find out what tactics the Police is using to do what; we cannot do that because we would be exposing the operations of the Police. Let us separate our roles as Parliament and stick to them and ask questions that can make Parliament do its mandate as it is constituted in the law. Otherwise, we will end up mixing up everything.

MR MUWANGA: Mr Speaker, I take your advice but I think it is the responsibility of Parliament in particular to check on the inaction of Government. Where Government has ideally failed to function, it is a core function of Parliament and for the Executive to come here and account to the representatives of the people on how far they have gone. I think by doing that you are not off tangent. 

If you want us to go down to the other issues where Government has failed, Mr Speaker, I have been on this Floor of Parliament to ask this Government to account for who in this Government carries what gun –(Member timed out.)

THE DPEUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to respond in three minutes.

11.30
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I thank you for the concerns. 

One, I would like to state here, without hesitation, that in this country there is no state inspired violence. Secondly, there are no extra judicial killings. Individuals who kill here and there are arrested according to the law and are taken to the courts of law. Secondly, on the recent killings, I would like to report that all suspects who were arrested are before the courts of law and it would be sub judice for me to begin talking about what is before the courts of law. 

This is not the first time; whenever we come closer to elections, there are all sorts of threats. In 2010, we had threats of brigades; there was the famous Kikankane brigade in Kawempe and others but they were told to disband and they did. For these forthcoming elections, no brigade, whether for Kakooza Mutale or whoever, will find reason to get involved in our electoral process at all. Whoever is in the business of training a brigade, the electoral laws and the Constitution provides for the Police to provide security during our electoral process and no one else can get involved. 

However, an intelligence committee or team is inquiring into those possible allegations if Kakooza Mutale has committed a crime or not. We will get a report and deal with it as it comes.

MR NZOHGU: Order!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From clarification to order now? Please, honourable member, you rose on clarification and you were not accepted; you cannot change it to order. No, you are not going to disrupt proceedings. Honourable minister, please conclude.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Thank you for your guidance. Crime preventers are across the country. Before in the UPDF we had a structure, and we still have it, of working alongside LDUs and the command and control structure is always in place. We are working out regulations for the command and control of crime preventers. 

A colleague said that if they are at the sub-county or at the district, who commands a crime preventer? The DPC or even a police station at the sub-county will have a role in controlling them. However, basically, crime preventers are volunteers coming on their own volition to do some basic training and their role is simply to report to the Police in a way. A colleague talked about prevention; that is what we want to achieve – a quick mechanism of detecting and dealing with criminals. Therefore this crime prevention –(Interruption) 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I just would like to seek clarification on the legal regime regulating crime preventers. 

Formerly, we had LDUs and those LDUs I remember participated in one case where an LDU shot a person and we were compelled to sue a district local government. The district local governments then were in charge of the LDUs. Now for these crime preventers, in the event that a crime preventer commits a crime, which authority of government are we going to hold responsible? Is it the Attorney-General, the district council, the local government or should we take them head-on as individuals on their own?

GEN. NYAKARIMA: Under the Police Act there is a provision that will deal with that but the point is to ensure that they are just not there by themselves. Also, they are not armed; any crime preventer found armed will be automatically disarmed.

Let me talk about our border issues with South Sudan. Colleagues, our brothers and sisters out there have just come together to sign an agreement brokered by the regional leaders. We hope they are going to settle down and we will intensify our efforts to deal with them so that they can undertake disarmament of some of their civilians who are armed. 

However, for the time being, we are working with their police. I have just been meeting the IGP of South Sudan and I met the minister and we are encouraging border relations. However, our detection mechanism will be strengthened by these structures we have put in place - the intelligence structures I talked about at the parish, sub-county and the districts - to ensure that no gun comes into this country.

However, even though they come, the point is that once a gun comes, it should be detected by the Police and the intelligence and taken away. We are working with our South Sudan colleagues to ensure that they play their part in reducing guns in their hands. Our intelligence, the UPDF, the Police and the political authorities in the districts that have borders with them are working together.

I have just been directed by the President to go to South Sudan and retrieve some cows which were taken from Yumbe. I heard what the colleague from Lamwo said. I will work with her to ensure that all our cows are returned from that part. There are some individuals in those counties who do not work the way we would work together. Moyo, Yumbe and Lamwo - all those border districts are working together to ensure that the relationship is helpful.

On the cross-border illegal immigration - hon. Tim Lwanga, illegal immigration is now a global phenomenon. This morning, Budapest has had to open the doors around their railway stations to allow a mass number of immigrants to get into there. Now on our part – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister for Internal Affairs, Gen. Aronda, talked about border posts in Moyo. The Opposition went there and we did not find any border post, which he is talking about. If it was there, he should have mentioned it. Is the honourable minister in order to misinform this House that there are border posts in Moyo, which do not exist at all, and that they are playing the role which he is pointing out here on the Floor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a clarification for you.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Mr Speaker, when I took over, we started working with the entire intelligence – the Police, the UPDF and political authorities. Just like we did with the community policing, we want to take up community immigration so that the population itself knows that in as far as they are going to be allowing people to come into our country in that manner, it will be very dangerous for us. We started with Ntungamo, recently we were in Busia and Malaba and this weekend we will be in Manafwa to ensure that –(Interruption)
  
MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is in regard to the border line. When you were talking about the border post, the line right from Arua up to Nimule is not clear. When we were moving around those contested areas on both sides, the South Sudan and Ugandan sides, they were not clear and in agreement where the border line is. Therefore, it has made life difficult in determining who is in control of which area. Much as on the Ugandan side we know where the border line should be and which area is supposed to be a no man’s land. This has made life difficult and it is what led to the recent clashes. 

The cry of the people along the border line, particularly Moyo, has been for Government to demarcate the border line. It would be good for you as the line minister to liaise with other people to see that the issue of demarcation is treated as a matter of urgency. Otherwise, the situation on the ground is still precarious and can result into violence anytime.

MR OLANYA: Thank you so much, honourable minister. Honourable minister, you remember some two weeks ago when I raised a matter of national importance about the South Sudanese soldiers who entered inside Uganda through Atiak Sub County with their animals. Up to now, nothing has been done and those people are still there moving with their animals and guns and the animals are destroying people’s crops. Therefore, I really feel you need to do something on this important matter. Thank you.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: We are taking measures on border issues. South Sudan and the Government of Uganda are taking action to make sure that that borderline is demarcated, including the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). On the issue of cattle rustling, we will take action and return the animals. 

On community policing, we are going outside. Ministers hon. Kiyonga, hon. Jeje Odongo, hon. Mary Karooro, hon. Baba and I are going outside to ensure that these measures I have read here are communicated to the lower structures of security and defence to ensure that the country is safe as we move to elections and beyond. 

On CCTV cameras and tax subsidies, we will discuss it in Government and see what we can do. However, let me talk about hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s concerns. We are very aware and do everything about the welfare of the Police. In addition to the salary which was increased sometime, we have in place the Exodus SACCO where police officers save and take loans and help with their own welfare. They also have a police shop where thy take subsidised commodities in order to do something. 

We are working seriously on improving logistics and transport of the Police. There is already a purchase underway to get vehicles for the Police. We will improve transport, welfare and further improve the capabilities of the police to improve law and order. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. There is a matter of big concern about Kakooza Mutale that you need to take heed and then advise the House at a later time what you have done with that. You need to do that as it has come back many times and we do not want to gloss over this matter of Kakooza Mutale.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

11.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mr Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I take this opportunity to make this statement in accordance with rule 44 (1) of our Rules of Procedure. This is a preliminary statement to inform this House and the country at large of the sad incidence which occurred on the morning of 1 September 2015 at Janale in Shebelle Province in Somalia. Mr Speaker, since this is a preliminary statement, I would like to request that we take the information and we do not debate because we will be providing a substantive statement later on. 

Honourable members, you will recall that this august House in 2007 resolved to authorise the UPDF to deploy in Somalia as part of AMISOM. That action on the part of this House was courageous considering the conditions and circumstances then, and very significant in as far as the cause of African security is concerned. Honourable colleagues, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you very much for your contribution then. 

Since 2007, the UPDF, which is the single largest contingent of AMISOM, has acquitted itself well. It has made a significant contribution towards peace, security and development of Somalia. In 2007, Somalia was a no-go area. Today, business thrives in Somalia thanks to the UPDF and AMISOM.

The struggle for peace and security in Somalia is not without challenges. Much as we have made significant progress, the enemies of peace have not been completely defeated and wiped out. 

On the morning of 1 September 2015 at 5.30 a.m., the Al- Shabaab attacked a UPDF unit at a place called Janale, approximately 90 kilometres southeast of Mogadishu. Janale is in Shebelle Province of Somalia.

The results of that morning attack so far are as follows: UPDF lost 10 dead; the enemy’s side lost 46 dead and two were captured alive. Honourable members, I am giving you these figures so that you are informed and not discouraged and swayed by the outrageous stories that you hear in the media today.

Mr Speaker, may I take this opportunity –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finish your statement; we will do that after. 

MR JEJE ODONGO: The bodies of our comrades are now being flown home. After notifying their next of kin and family, we shall then be at liberty to release the names of the dead and other details, as I have promised in a subsequent more detailed statement. Mr Speaker, I thank you for allowing me to make this statement and honourable colleagues, thank you very much for your attention.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what has happened to our troops is regrettable and sad. Those people we sent there were meant to go and stabilise Somalia, help in the stabilisation process and save lives there but now we have lost lives. Our own sons and daughters have died. Can we rise for a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a statement of this nature would usually attract a debate, and when the Speaker is speaking Members are advised to sit. However, the circumstances of this statement are such that the matters are current and we would not like to start making statements on the Floor that could put our troops in a very compromising situation. As the Minister has requested, I would urge the House that we receive this information for now until we are properly briefed on how we can proceed with the proper debate on the circumstances that have happened in Somalia. Therefore, we will defer debate on this matter, honourable members. I beg you. Thank you.

In the distinguished strangers’ gallery this morning, we have Ms Patricia Sanjay Zei representing the British High Commission in Uganda. She is here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming her. (Applause)

We also have a delegation from the Parliament of Ghana on a study visit to the Parliament of Uganda. The delegation comprises Mr Robert Apodolla, the Deputy Clerk Legislative Management Division and Mr Samuel Addei, Principal Clerk Assistant. They are here also to observe today’s proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

In the gallery also, we have pupils and teachers of Arua Primary School represented by hon. Gabriel Ajedra and Christine Abia, Woman Representative. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)    

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I respect your guidance that we do not debate this matter but I have a procedural issue to raise. The mandate of the troops under AMISOM was as follows: to support the transitional government’s structure, implement a national security plan, train the Somalia security forces and create a secure environment for the delivery of human aid.

The procedural issue I am raising, before the sad incident, is whether this Government does not see it fit to come and brief this Parliament on this mandate and where we have reached, giving a general picture of when we will disengage from this war that is causing us these sad moments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a legitimate procedural matter. I think there has been a standard request from the House that this House be updated regularly on the situation of our deployment in Somalia, South Sudan and in the Central African Republic. This House deserves to be regularly updated and I urge the Government to oblige to this.

MR JEJE ODONGO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We should not only wait for incidents like this and then we come to the House. We need to know because those troops are there by our authority.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The second last paragraph of the minister’s statement shows that we should be hopeful that they will be flying in the bodies of our relatives. However, what is unclear is the period in which the minister will furnish this Parliament with information on the progress of flying these bodies back home. This is because we have relatives there and we would want to know the period so that we do not live in speculation. Therefore, it would be fair for the period to be mentioned clearly so that we are able to monitor the progress of this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, bodies are bodies; they have their own time limitations. Let us not get into things that we do not need to discuss here, please.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 199.89 MILLION FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF JAPAN TO FINANCE THE WORKS UNDER THE KAMPALA FLYOVER CONSTRUCTION AND ROAD UPGRADING PROJECT

MR NGANDA SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The last time this Parliament considered a loan for infrastructure development in Kampala, you ruled that you would not want to continue entertaining these kinds of issues from Kampala until the issues of governance have been resolved. 

Government made an undertaking that at that time that they would pay the salary of the Lord Mayor and then ensure his smooth return to office. That was the undertaking they made before this Parliament considered the loan for Kampala. However, they did not move an inch in implementing their own pledge to Parliament and in total disregard, they are now smuggling in another loan as if you were not the presiding officer at that time.

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for Government to disregard you and this House and make pledges, which they cannot fulfil, and then smuggle in another loan request, without briefing Parliament as to why they failed on the other requests, to borrow money to take to an entity that is not properly constituted?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, at the time that we were considering the debate on an update on what was going on, I did communicate that I was satisfied with the progress then, so I could be able to handle. However, this particular loan is not about KCCA; it is about Kampala city and it is a government project. I am sure it is going to UNRA or some other institution of Government but not necessarily KCCA implementing it. It is not going to be implemented by KCCA; this is UNRA, which is a national government entity. Let us separate the issues.

11.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I move a motion to request Parliament to authorise Government to borrow US$ 199.89 million from the Government of Japan to finance the works under the Kampala Flyover Construction and Road Upgrading Project. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? The motion is seconded by THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS, the Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs, Minister of State for Northern Uganda, Member for Bunyole West, Member for Bukooli Islands – I think the motion is properly seconded. Would you like to justify your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, the national transport system of Uganda comprises of road, railway, air and inland water transport modes. The transportation system in the country heavily relies on the road sector as over 95 per cent of cargo freight and passengers in Uganda move by road.

Mr Speaker, Uganda’s road infrastructure also serves as a transit corridor linking the landlocked neighbouring countries such as Rwanda, Burundi, South Sudan and parts of DR Congo to the ports of Mombasa and Dar es Salaam. Kampala city is a major transit point on this corridor.

Mr Speaker, in a study that was done, it was estimated that if we do nothing now, in 2021 Kampala’s junctions will be clogged and it will be very difficult for us to move into Kampala. That justifies the reason as to why we are borrowing this money from the Japanese Government to do the following parts of Kampala: 

This loan, if approved by Parliament, will do the flyover at the Clock Tower and will also do the underpass construction at Nsambya. We will do the road widening at Mukwano Road and Ggaba Road. We will also work on junction improvement at Nsambya and Kibuli junctions. We will also do the pedestrian bridge at Clock Tower and Shoprite. By doing that, we will be preparing our country and city to make sure that we support the increased requirements of the transport sector in this country. 

With that, Mr Speaker, I beg that this House considers this loan and approves it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think there is a mistake from what we captured in the Hansard. The figure is not corresponding with what is on the request. Can we correct the record? Clerk, help the minister correct the record.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I apologise for that; I think there is a small mistake. The right figure of the funds that we are borrowing from the Japanese Government is US$ 195.78 million. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you will recall that when this request was made, it was referred to the Committee on National Economy. The committee is ready to report. Let the committee report and then we handle these matters. Let them report and then we can raise those issues.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. When we were debating the budget, we expressed a lot of concern about the high interest rates that we are getting on unused loans. I feel that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should do us a favour so that when we get a loan like this one, we should be updated on how we are performing on loans that we have already approved so that we would know how to guide ourselves. Otherwise, it looks as if we are recklessly approving loans, which are earning a lot of interest and the ministry continues to bring requests for borrowing. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I think that as Parliament we should say, “enough is enough”. Let the Government first come and tell us how we have performed on the loans already borrowed so that we can mitigate the losses, which we are getting on the unused loans. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with the Opposition Chief Whip that the ministry should come and update this House regularly on how we are performing in terms of the loans that we have acquired externally. Therefore, at an appropriate time, we can request that we are put on the Order Paper so that we can report. We have the reports on how we are performing and we would be ready to share this information with the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I would like to support the minister in his response to the question raised and how we should function on these loan requests and their performance. It is important that we do so.

I would also like to urge ourselves to inquire in our sessional committees because sector ministries report in these sessional committees. If there is anything that needs to be taken up at that level, like queries on some of these loans already given and are running, the sessional committees should also take up that challenge and ask sector ministries to report on such matters. That is, of course, without prejudice to the position being stated by the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I think that it is a double responsibility here. While the sessional committees have that mandate to find out, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on its own, without being prompted, should seek time and come to the House. Just like they submit some preliminary reports with the Budget statements, they should update the House every time. 

Actually, that should be a preceding statement, that before you make the next request we should show how we are doing and how the new loan will fit in the framework so that we know where we are. That is what the Member is asking and I think that it is a legitimate concern. 

MR SSEMUJJU: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not want to interrupt but every year when the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presents a budget, they present a report on loans. In fact, each year I have read a report on loans and if you ask me, I will give you the figures on how we are performing. I actually do not know what the minister wants to bring now because at the reading of the budget, they gave us the report of 2015 and we have it. It is a recent report dated June. 

The procedural point that I have been raising is that since I came to this Parliament, we have never debated that report on loans and yet we continue receiving requests and passing them. The procedural issue that I am raising is whether it would not be procedurally right for the committee to process that report and enable this Parliament to debate it and take a decision on it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That would be the Committee on National Economy. I think what is being proposed is not out of step because they are saying that as the minister gives a statement justifying the request, he should in summary say “this is how we stand and this is how this loan will fit in the general structure of the loans that we have”. That is what the Member was asking and it would not be completely out of order. It would actually be a good way of doing business so that we know where we stand and how this will fit. One paragraph on that would suffice. Okay, chairperson.  

12.07
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Evelyn Kaabule): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy Government on the request by Government to borrow 19.989 billion Japanese Yen, equivalent to US$ 195.78 million, from the Government of Japan to finance the works under the Kampala Flyover Construction and Road Upgrading Project.

Before I report, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings on the same project. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KAABULE: I also beg to lay on the Table the brief to Parliament that was presented, the minutes of the negotiations, the project loan agreement and the project route map. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those.

MS KAABULE: I also beg to lay the original report on the Table as I will present it. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of the committee report.

MS KAABULE: Mr Speaker and colleagues, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow the said amount - 19.98 billion Japanese Yen equivalent to US$ 195.78 million - from the Government of Japan to finance the works under the Kampala Flyover Construction and Road Upgrading Project.

I beg to report in accordance with rule 166(2)(b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. The request was presented to this House by the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development on March 4th 2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you need to give us a summary of the report and not the whole report.

MS KAABULE: Okay. I beg to present the background. The Government of Uganda revised the Road Sector Development Plan in 2001 focusing on establishment of a safe and efficient road network. The Ministry of Works and Transport prepared the National Transport Master Plan including a Transport Master Plan for the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area with assistance from World Bank, to support the Road Sector Development Plan 2. 

The Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area (GKMA) is not only the centre of politics, administration, manufacturing, commerce and logistics of Uganda, but also the major transit point on the Northern Multimodal Corridor, which links landlocked neighbouring countries to the port of Mombasa, Kenya. This project is expected to facilitate the logistics in GKMA and also to mitigate the traffic flow of the Northern Multimodal Corridor. The logistics improvement of the Northern Multimodal Corridor is expected to contribute to the economic development of neighbouring landlocked countries such as Rwanda, Burundi and DR Congo.

The GKMA has established a long-term framework on the transport sector and proposed the urban transport master plan, which focuses on the GKMA consisting of widening arterial roads, improvement of junctions and improvement of rail road crossings. In order to mitigate this traffic congestion of the greater Kampala, many projects and studies have been carried out. Among them is JICA’s preparatory survey carried out in 2013 and 2014, which concluded that the construction of two flyovers in the city centre, along with improvements to interfacing roads and junction improvements, would be effective and feasible to achieve the above improvements. 

The proposed project lies on the east-west traffic route that bypasses the Central Business District (CBD) of Kampala. The project also considered non-motorised transportation to improve traffic safety. This project is linked to all the country’s strategies.

The main objective of this project is to mitigate traffic congestion and facilitate urban transportation in Kampala City through flyover widening and junction improvement, thereby contributing to vitalisation of logistics and transport and economic activity of the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area.

The expected benefits will be: 
1. 	There will be provision of employment opportunities;
2. 	Reduction in the travel time and vehicle operation costs;
3. 	Improvement of safety of road users most especially pedestrians and cyclists;
4.	 Attainment of improved skills for local communities who will participate in the construction works; and
5. 	There will be tree planting and enhanced landscape management.

The total project cost is estimated at 24.91 billion Japanese Yen of which 19.989 billion Japanese Yen will be provided through debt from JICA while 4.93 billion Japanese Yen will be availed through counterpart funding by Government of Uganda. You can look at table 1 in the report. 

From the table, you can see that JICA will finance 80 per cent of the project cost while the Government of Uganda will provide 20 per cent. Land compensation will take 10.35 per cent of the project cost, which is 2.58 billion Japanese Yen and the rest will be taxes. Contingencies and interest during the construction will constitute eight per cent, which is 1.69 billion Japanese Yen and 0.03 per cent of the financing from JICA respectively.

The loan terms and conditions are highlighted but for emphasis, the maturity period is 40 years, repayment period is 30 years, the grace period is 10 years and the interest rate is 0.01 per cent per annum on disbursed and outstanding loan. You will get that information from table 2. 

I will skip the loan conditions but give you the implications of financing conditionality. This is a high level concessional loan and I have already indicated the loan period, grace period and the loan amount. The present value of the loan is 6.32 billion Japanese Yen, which is equivalent to US$ 61.87 million. The debt service of the loan will be 20.04 billion Japanese Yen, which is equivalent to US$ 196.28 million at a discounted rate of 5 per cent and a grant element of 68 per cent.

As you realise, the present discounted value of the loan is smaller than the nominal value of the loan contracted. This implies that the total future payment of the loan is cheaper than the proposed amount to be borrowed in present terms. I have already told you that the future payment of the loan will be 20.4 billion Japanese Yen after a period of 40 years. The loan is highly concessional since its grant element (68 per cent) is higher than the 35 per cent threshold that is recommended by IMF and the World Bank as well as the Public Debt Management Framework 2013 of our country.
  
Project Implementation Arrangements

The project will be implemented by UNRA, which shall be fully responsible for all the implementation activities. It will undertake all the procurement, management and financial management, including checking all accounts and preparation of disbursement requests. Once the construction is completed, the project will be handed over to KCCA to manage the operations and maintenance of the facility.

Observations and Recommendations

Master Plan of Kampala 

The committee observed that in order to mitigate traffic congestion of Greater Kampala, the Ministry of Works and Transport has carried out many projects and studies, including developing a master plan for the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area. As a result, a number of the flagship projects and ring roads to decongest Kampala under the Kampala Institutional Development Project 2 are being undertaken. However, the implementation of this project is a bit slow. 

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport, together with Kampala City Council Authority, expedites the timely implementation of the Kampala Institutional Development Project 2.

Government Counterpart Funding 

The committee noted that as part of its contribution to this project, Government of Uganda will provide counterpart funding towards land acquisition and resettlement, taxes and duties and acquisition of office space and utilities.

The committee recommends that Government ensures the timely provision of the funds for this project in order to ensure its timely completion.

Stakeholder Involvement

The committee notes that given the scope of the project, the stakeholders, especially people living in the affected areas, need to be involved in the implementation and operations in order to appreciate the benefits that will accrue.

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport should adequately sensitise the public in the affected areas in order for them to appreciate the benefits of the project and to cooperate during the implementation of the project.

Resettlement

The committee observed that the project implementation will involve relocation of the tenants of Centenary Park and Uganda Railways Corporation staff quarters in Nsambya.

The committee recommends that the project affected persons be adequately and expeditiously compensated and sensitised.

Traffic Safety

The committee notes that the project implementation will involve detailed road works and the use of heavy equipment as well as road diversions, which can cause delays in transportation and movement.

The committee recommends that the project should consider non- motorised transportation to improve traffic safety.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, in conclusion, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the request by Government to borrow 19.989 billion Japanese Yen, equivalent to US$ 195.78 million from Japan International Cooperation Agency to finance the works under the Kampala Flyover Construction and Road Upgrading Project. I beg to report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chair of the committee. Honourable members, the question that I now propose for your debate is for a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow US$ 195.78 million from the Government of Japan to finance the works under the Kampala Flyover Construction and Road Upgrading Project. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now.

12.20
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this motion for borrowing of this loan. Kampala, as our city, needs to be improved and upgraded. Therefore, I support infrastructure development in Kampala. However, in future, I wish to see a plan where we can develop the slums. If you move a few metres away from the heart of the city, the structures you will see are very wanting. Therefore, in future, I would like to see a plan for the development of the slums in our city.

Secondly, there was the issue of land compensation. We need a guarantee that this time round, compensation of the people will be well done. We have been seeing in the media how monies have been abused, inflated and even given to wrong people. Can we get that assurance?

Thirdly, on the issue of the contribution to be made by Government, I would like to hear from the minister about the commitment of Government to give its portion in time. There is going to be cost sharing and if Government delays to give its share at the right time, it will affect the delivery of this project or what we expect to be seen.

The last recommendation given by the committee is that the community should be facilitated to appreciate this work. However, the community cannot appreciate unless there is maximum involvement. There is the issue of employment. Whenever we give contracts out, we need to examine the extent to which the local community surrounding the project or the activity going on is involved in terms of their recruitment. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

12.23
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Most of us have travelled to the countries surrounding us and you will find that they are working very hard on their airports and on their capital cities. Kampala City Council Authority made a presentation to us sometime back as a caucus and they had proposals for flyovers simply because of the congestion in Kampala. Given that we do not have land available in the centre of the city, the only way to go around it is definitely to have flyovers. 

Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that the traffic congestion in Kampala after 4.00 p.m. and in the morning is simply something we cannot live with if we are to attract foreign direct investment in this country. This is because you have investors coming here and they simply cannot get through the town and they cannot get from the airport to their destinations in town. It is us, as a country, who will suffer because people cannot come to a capital city where they cannot operate. 

Therefore, I support the loan request for this purpose. However, I caution that when we borrow this money, we should use it as efficiently as possible. I sit on PAC and what I see from the way UNRA uses funds, if that is how KCCA is going to utilise these funds -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is not KCCA; it is UNRA. You heard the report.

MR KATWIREMU: Sorry, I mean the way UNRA has been using funds, according to the Auditor-General’s report, if that is the way they are going to use money for this project, then –(Member timed out.)

12.24
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. What we are saying is that we need value for money and this is pertinent. As much as it is desirable to have these flyovers because of the inconveniences caused to road users, we want value for money. 

I would like the Government to give us this assurance. In light of what is happening in UNRA and in light of the corruption, which is rampant in the country, whatever project comes on, people position themselves to see how much they can get from it. Can you give us an assurance that we shall have value for money?

My sister talked about compensation, which I think is equally very important. This is because most times when Government undertakes such projects, it tends to ignore the owners of the properties where the Government projects pass. During certain road projects, for instance, the Government can come and say, “Let the Government programme go on; we shall compensate you later”. I hope this is not going to be the case as it frustrates the efforts, which you are putting in place.

Mr Speaker, the other pertinent issue is that I would like Government to come up clearly on how they are going to regulate the road users. We have these boda boda people who seem not to abide by the law; they are above the traffic laws. When shall we see an arrangement where we have traffic aligned and respect put in place?

In some places, you find traffic lights but you also find traffic officers redirecting the flow of traffic; one wonders what the use of the traffic lights is. If the traffic officers are there, they are supposed to check on offenders - people like the boda boda riders who are crossing everywhere. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I have members who are opposed to this loan request speaking? 

MR DENIS OBUA: Mr Speaker, the clarification I would like to seek emanates from the fact that in 2013, hon. Tim Lwanga and I were part of the presidential delegation that attended the Tokyo International Conference on African Development where the initial negotiation for this loan was conducted. It was agreed that after Kampala, JICA would roll out the programme to other upcountry towns within the country that are yet to be declared cities. 

As the minister is responding, he should explain to us whether the rollout plan after Kampala is going to take place in cities that are soon to be declared such as Gulu, Mbarara, Soroti, Lira, Mbale, to mention but a few. Thank you.

12.28
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. I have two issues to raise.

The first point is that under KCCA, we spent US$ 9 million on the Kampala physical plan and a report was made to this effect. As we speak, there is no physical plan for Kampala and that is why we are moving from one improvement to another. We had roundabouts and we moved to the new junctions you see in Kampala and now we are proposing flyovers and underpasses.

Mr Speaker, this Parliament cannot be taken for a ride. Look at the Entebbe Express Highway, for example; we are going to spend nearly Shs 280 billion on compensations. On the expansion of the Northern Bypass, we are going to spend nearly Shs 80 billion. Once you do not have a physical plan, you actually cannot begin implementing because under what arrangement are you improving? 

If we had a physical plan, for example, probably the priority would be to do a railway line in the Kampala metropolitan area. We are borrowing money today and tomorrow, we will be borrowing to change the design because the city does not have a physical plan. That is why you cannot detach this loan from what is going on in Kampala. We are supposed to have a Kampala Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority but it is not there. When hon. Muruli Mukasa was the Minister in charge of Kampala, he actually proposed names but those names were never approved. We are now back to square one. 

I can see the urge and desire by this Parliament to improve Kampala but it is like constructing a house without a plan. That can only happen maybe in very remote areas where you just collect and begin assembling blocks and cement. There is no city on earth that you can develop without a plan. Therefore, the starting point by this Parliament would be to demand for the physical plan for Kampala and Kampala Metropolitan Area from the Government before approving any loan. Once you have a physical plan, you can begin approving loans one after another to implement specific projects according to that plan. 

I am actually surprised that the Committee on National Economy did not ask the minister about this. Probably, where you are putting a flyover today is the same spot you will want to put a railway line or a railway crossing tomorrow. 

My second point is a question of borrowing. Part of the reasons that we have unused loans is because when we hear that there is someone who wants to lend money, we just run there. If you read the loans report from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, every year – before I factor in the issue of inflation and the deprecation of the shilling – we pay US$ 4 million as interest on unused loans. This is because we contract and begin paying the interest even before we use the money. 

If you read the report on loans, our total indebtedness as a country is now close to US$ 10 billion. Our total wealth as a country, which is the GDP and depending on who is giving you the figures, is US$ 21 billion according to the World Bank reports. Government puts it at US$ 27 billion. 

The point is, I can understand borrowing and I can sanction that we borrow, but you cannot borrow to put flyovers in a city that has no physical plan. We will go down in history as a Parliament that was simply passing loans. We all want a better organised city, we all want to improve transport but once you do not have a plan - I would like to urge Members that for once, demand that they give us a plan and then we can approve these loans. We should not be taken for a ride.

They removed roundabouts and two years down the road, they are talking about flyovers. Tomorrow, they will come back here to tell us, “Now we want a railway line” and probably later they will want an airfield in Kampala.

Therefore, I appeal to colleagues that before we approve this loan - Hon. Bahati, the minister presenting the loan, comes from the ministry responsible for, among other things, planning; how can you move without a plan and you would like the Ninth Parliament to allow you go ahead with the loan and then plan later? Can we demand that they give us the physical plan of Kampala before we approve these loans? (Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I would also advise that you go to Addis Ababa in Ethiopia and see how the roads and railways are being planned very effectively. It is an African case study and I think it would be very useful for Uganda.

MR SSEMUJJU: As a beneficiary of the information, I would like to thank my colleague. What the others have done is to plan and then begin implementing. However, what you are doing in Uganda is to borrow and begin implementing and then midway, you change the plan and say, “We wanted money for street lights, now give us money for flyovers.” Two years later, you will come back and say, “No, now we want a railway line.” You simply cannot spend the money because this loan request of Shs 700 billion is to be implemented in a city where there is no plan.

Hon. Bahati, please be kind to this Parliament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, is there no plan for Kampala?

MS KAABULE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague that we have a full master investment plan for Kampala and I will provide it. That is why we are coming up with bits. It is not just flyovers that we are doing. It is out of that master investment plan that we are picking these bits that we are bringing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you wanted to -

12.35
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I have followed the debate on the subject of borrowing this money for the development of greater Kampala City. The points that have been raised are very pertinent and I believe that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will take note of them.

On my part, I would like to draw the attention of the House to the 10 per cent of the loan, which will be used specifically for right of way and land acquisition. That is a lot of money and we would like to know how this money is going to be utilised. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the cost of supervision alone is almost 6 per cent of the loan, which is 5.6 per cent of the total loan. Reallocation services are about 2.7 per cent. Those points must be clearly analysed. We need to know how the money is going to be spent on those areas, which have been highlighted.

Otherwise, Mr Speaker, whatever we are going to raise here will not change our decision to pass this loan request. In view of the time that we have and since the NRM Members are very anxious to go and start their campaigns for the primaries, I think we need to note the concerns raised, particularly the lack of a plan. I would like to plead with the chairperson to lay on the Table the physical plan. If we are going to meet this afternoon, you must lay the plan on the Table.

However, I do not see any serious reasons, which we are going to raise to stop this loan from being passed. Particularly aware of the fact that Lira, Gulu, Mbale and several other towns are also going to be cities, they will indirectly benefit as Ugandans and will not be monopolised by the NRM dominated areas. Therefore, I do not have any serious objection. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.38
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Mr Speaker, well aware that there is a lot of consensus from both sides of the House, I would like to move that the question be put to dispose of the motion that is before the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the question be put. I will first put the question to that motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow US$ 195.78 million from the Government of Japan to finance the works under the Kampala Flyover Construction and Upgrading Project.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SDR 94.3 MILLION ($ 130 MILLION EQUIVALENT) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) TO SUPPORT THE THIRD NORTHERN UGANDA SOCIAL ACTION FUND PROJECT (NUSAF III)

12.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I move a motion that Parliament authorises Government to borrow US$ 130 million from the International Development Association to support the third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by West Budama North, Kassanda North, Mawokota, Mbarara Municipality, Rwampara, Jie County and Kitgum District. The motion is properly seconded. Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable minister? [Mr Ecweru: Amuria!] - Yes, and Amuria County. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the overall economic growth in Uganda averaged at seven per cent during the 2000s and 5.8 per cent over the last five years. In addition, the macroeconomic indicators have been stable over the years and there has been significant reduction in poverty from 31 per cent in 2005 to 19.7 per cent in 2012 and 2013. Therefore, on the global aspect, there has been a lot of progress made as a nation. 

While these development indicators, among others, depict progress at the national level, the report of the Uganda National Household Survey 2012/2013 indicates significant differences in poverty levels in different regions. Karamoja sub-region registered an extremely high poverty headcount at 72 per cent while West Nile registered 42.3 per cent and the north and mid-north regions registered 35.4 per cent. 

The persistence of poverty in these areas can be attributed to the legacy of conflicts and violence of the past decades. While poverty has declined sharply in the central and western regions, much higher rates of poverty continue to persist in northern Uganda. Northern Uganda is particularly exposed with more than 80 per cent of households relying heavily on low productivity subsistence crops, which are not sufficient to fight the poverty levels in that area. Therefore, building on NUSAF I and NUSAF II, the Government of Uganda is borrowing US$ 130 million to try, as much as we can, to make sure that we lower this poverty level to the national average. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to request the House to support this motion in order to support the people of northern Uganda. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me first handle this: In the gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Holy Rosary Primary School represented by hon. Acire Christopher and hon. Aol Betty Ocan, Woman Member for Gulu District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them.

Honourable members, the question I now propose for your debate is for a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to SDR 94.3 million, which is the equivalent of US$ 130 million from the International Development Association to support the third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project. That is the motion I propose for your debate and the debate starts now. Sorry, let the chairperson report as this matter was referred to the committee.

12.44
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Evelyn Kaabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since the motion is very popular, I will summarise it. 

Before I read the report, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings. I also beg to lay on the Table documents, which are pertinent to this project, NUSAF III, which include the brief to Parliament, the draft financing agreement and minutes of the negotiations. I also beg to lay on the Table the original report, a copy of which I am going to read.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the documents and the text of the original report.

MS KAABULE: Mr Speaker and colleagues, this is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to SDR 94.3 million, which is equivalent to US$ 130 million, from the International Development Association of the World Bank to support the third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project, NUSAF III. This is in accordance with rule 166(2)(b) of our Rules of Procedure. 

The background to this is that Uganda has experienced robust economic growth, as highlighted by the minister, and we have had significant reduction in poverty from 31 per cent to 19.7 per cent in 2005/2006 and 2012/2013 respectively. However, while these development indicators, among others, depict progress at national level, the survey that has been highlighted by the minister, that is the Uganda National Household Survey, indicates significant differences in poverty levels. Therefore, following the achievements of NUSAF I and NUSAF II, we beg that we bring up NUSAF III in order to bridge the gaps that have been highlighted in the report.

The high rates of vulnerability in northern Uganda indicate that the Government’s growth oriented strategies for northern Uganda have not been able to bring prosperity to all. Therefore, specific pro-poor interventions are needed to protect people from falling into poverty while enabling vulnerable people to contribute more to economic growth in both the short and long term.

Unlike NUSAF I and NUSAF II projects that included significant aspects of infrastructure rehabilitation, this proposed project of NISAF III will strategically direct livelihood investments to the targeted poor households for more impact in enhancing their income. This project is linked to all our country development strategies, which include Vision 2040, PRDP III, the Accountability Sector Strategic Investment Plan and all the strategic interventions. 

The main objective of this project is to provide income support to build resilience of poor and vulnerable households in northern Uganda. The project beneficiaries will be the poor and vulnerable households in 55 districts of northern Uganda. The geographical scope of the project is determined by the area supported by the PRDP III, as indicated in table 1, which you can see from your iPads.

Over the five-year period, 599,100 households, which is almost 2,995,000 people, will benefit from the various interventions of this project. Consequently, 499,000 households will directly benefit from the labour intensive public works component, while the livelihood investment support component is likely to reach 100,000 households, which is equivalent to about 500,000 people, over the period of five years.

As highlighted and already indicated, the project components include labour intensive public works and disaster risk financing, which will amount to US$ 61 million. The livelihood investment support, which is component 2, will take US$ 43.5 million. Component 3 will include strengthening transparency, accountability and anti-corruption and it will take US$ 5 million.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, the project cost and financing arrangements will be US$ 130 million, as indicated in table 2. The terms of the loan are: the loan amount is 94.3 million Special Drawing Rights, which is US$ 130 million. The loan period is 38 years, including six years of grace. The commitment charge is 0.5 per cent per annum on the un-withdrawn financing balance. We have a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum on the withdrawn and outstanding credit balance.

Table 3 indicates the financing conditionalities, which you will look at and which I have already indicated. However, we have a grant element of 62 per cent and a discount rate of five per cent, making this loan highly concessional. The 62 per cent is larger than the threshold of 35 per cent recommended by IMF, World Bank and our State Management Framework of 2013. The economic rate of return for the project is 21.4 per cent, with a net present value estimated at US$ 41.6 million, which indicates that it is economically feasible.

Project Institutional Implementation Arrangements

The project will be implemented over a period of five years, that is, 2016/2017 to 2020/2021. It will be implemented by the Office of the Prime Minister and the Inspectorate of Government. The Office of the Prime Minister will be the overall implementing agency of the project and will specifically be responsible for components 1, 2 and 4. The Inspectorate of Government will be responsible for implementing the transparency, accountability and anti-corruption component, which is component 3 of the project. This will be coordinated by the director of project monitoring department and implemented through its existing structures both at national and regional levels.

The Permanent Secretary of the Office of the Prime Minister will have overall responsibility for project coordination and for accounting for project resources. The Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) will be the accounting officers of the project at the various district levels.

Observations and Recommendations

1. Project Institution Arrangement 

The committee observed that arising from the failures of the implementation of NUSAF I and in an effort to prevent their re-occurrence, the World Bank engaged the Office of the Inspectorate of Government (IGG), in accordance with their mandate to fight corruption. They also provided the required funding to support transparency, accountability and anti-corruption measures in NUSAF II.

The committee found it irregular that the Office of the Inspectorate of Government, which is an institution that is mandated to fight corruption, would get involved in direct implementation of the project.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Office of the Inspectorate of Government should adhere to the implementation of their mandate and not get involved in the implementation of the activities of this project.

The committee also recommends that the Office of the Inspectorate of Government should be provided with adequate budgetary support to enable it execute its mandate as opposed to the office using borrowed funds to carry out their mandate.

2. Poverty Levels in NUSAF II Beneficiary Areas 

The committee noted that whereas the NUSAF II project was meant to reach individual households to improve their livelihood, it did not comprehensively do so, thus there is still widespread poverty in the targeted areas. The committee also noted that NUSAF 2 has not integrated the local and poor people who are the target beneficiaries. 

The committee therefore recommends that NUSAF III should ensure that the targeted individual households benefit from the programme and a sustainability framework be followed.

3. Absence of Signposts at NUSAF II Sub Project Sites 

The committee noted that according to the NUSAF II audited financial statements for the year ending 30 June 2014, all sub projects in Karamoja region, that is, Kaabong and Kotido, and many other areas in Acholi and Lango regions that were inspected lacked signposts for identification, with the exception of Dokolo District. This made it difficult to ascertain whether all the projects inspected were actually the right ones as there were other similar projects run by NGOs.

The committee therefore recommends that for all sub projects under NUSAF III, the Office of the Prime Minister should ensure that installation of signposts by the contractors in all the sub projects is done for easy sub project identification.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, in conclusion, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to SDR 94.3 million, which is equivalent to US$ 130 million, from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project be approved subject to the above recommendations.  I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson, and thank you to the committee for handling this matter expeditiously. Honourable members, I had already proposed the question for debate and debate starts now from Gulu.

12.56
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) made NUSAF II spread widely. When we talk about 55 districts, then NUSAF becomes like peanuts. Even if the implementation of NUSAF I, which was before PRDP, was mismanaged, it was a little bit visible on the ground; it was not for 55 districts. However now, NUSAF being spread in the 55 districts becomes a big problem if NUSAF is to help in mitigating the problems of the war -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the money value has gone up, so that should not be an issue, so that we can move together with the rest of the country.

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, even if the money value has gone up, I would like to say that we need this money but we also need to improve on the implementation. The implementation has not been done well. If we say it is the Office of the Prime Minister to implement, we need to be educated on this because the Office of the Prime Minister let us down a lot.

I would therefore think that implementation of NUSAF should go down to the local governments. It should be decentralised to the districts and then from the district we – At least we used to have an office of the Prime Minister in Gulu, which would try to monitor. Monitoring should be the domain of the Office of the Prime Minster. However, implementation should not be done by the Office of the Prime Minister. 

Last year, we had some of the war affected people, mainly women - (Member timed out.)

12.59
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, chairperson, for the report. 

Mr Speaker, I happened to do some work in northern Uganda before I joined Parliament. I also had a chance, under the Budget Committee, to visit parts of Nwoya, including your constituency. My observation was that I got very concerned about the number of young people who are unemployed. They are gathered in trading centres not doing any useful work. 

I could also see the women suffering because they were the ones taking the mantle. When I went to the gardens, I would find women and I wondered about these young people with a lot of energy being idle and yet the women were suffering. That became a very serious matter of concern.

This programme is very useful but I think there is the other side that needs to be handled when it comes to human potential, especially mind-set - getting people to understand the importance of working and getting them to love work. It will really take a while because when I interviewed a few of the youth, they seemed to be resigned. I think there is plenty of work. The way I see Government operating, especially the civil servants, when there is a project they just want to see it implemented without taking serious consideration of the need to get people organised, train them and get their minds focused on productivity. I think this is a component – (Member timed out.)

1.02
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion. 

I would like to state categorically that this House where we are seated can be brought down within a minute but to rebuild it, you need months and years. This is the dilemma, the tragedy, the position, the plight and the fate of northern Uganda. Northern Uganda underwent civil war for over 15 years and rebuilding it would need two or three times more than what the war took. 

My major point is on the strategic focus of NUSAF III - household income. This is where we need to invest in order to uplift the people of northern Uganda, especially at the level of household income. 

My second point is on the question of accountability. I think the Office of the IGG that receives some funding from NUSAF must double its efforts. This Parliament must always debate that report. How many people are undergoing prosecution arising from mismanagement of NUSAF that was meant to support our people who are traumatised and who have suffered? We need that report from the Office of the IGG.

Third is the question of lack of signposts. When and how shall we know that this particular project was funded by World Bank in partnership with Government of Uganda? This must be taken seriously. All sub-projects funded under NUSAF must have signposts in order for us, as Members of Parliament when we are doing oversight, to be in a position to know that this project was funded by World Bank in partnership with Government of Uganda under NUSAF III.

Mr Speaker, most of our local governments do not do that because they keep on sending accountability committees –(Member timed out.)

1.05
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this loan request. 

When you visit northern Uganda - I have been a regular visitor to most of the districts - when we are going to implement a particular programme, we do not stick to it; we tend to look out for some other programmes that are running. There are areas you get to and find real work moving on, where projects under NUSAF have taken root, and then there are those you find with signposts saying NUSAF II or NUSAF I but when there is nothing. Therefore, I would like to appeal to Government that as we approve this loan, let us scale up efforts on monitoring and oversight so that people see value for money in this programme. 

I would also like to appeal to Government that since there is a commitment in the Hansard regarding Busoga Social Action Fund, I am looking forward to when that programme will be officially tabled. Mr Speaker, I am a well-wisher and I pray that this loan request is approved without any further delay so that our people from northern Uganda can benefit from it. I thank you.

1.06
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. 

As we went to the field to access and review the programme, we were able to get good testimonies from the beneficiaries. When they talk about NUSAF I and II, there is a clear difference that NUSAF II was a very successful programme and that is why we should be able to support NUSAF III. Mothers spoke and said that they touched money, which they did not have before. They were able to feel that they are also part of the system. We recommended that in NUSAF III, a bigger percentage should be given to household incomes. 

I also suggest that before we start NUSAF III, we should be able to find out the baseline - how far we succeeded in NUSAF II - so that when we are starting NUSAF III, we are able to know what we achieved and what we are going to get. This is because NUSAF is a very successful programme and I support it so much. Thank you.

1.08
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the very good report. 

You will recall that recently, we were discussing issues to do with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and poverty is one of the items that has now been highlighted. I think Government is in line with the fight against poverty. More specifically, Mr Speaker, this loan that the Government is requesting for is specifically going to deal with household income. I totally support that this loan request be approved so that it can address issues to do with household incomes. 

Mr Speaker, as highlighted by the chairperson of the committee, you will see that much as the poverty levels have reduced from 31 per cent to 19 per cent, some of the areas, specifically Karamoja, are badly off in as far as household incomes are concerned. Therefore, I also join my colleagues to support this loan request so that people’s incomes can be supported. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

1.09
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Mr Speaker, I also rise to support the loan request. 

I would like to say that as we go through the guidelines, we need to define what vulnerability means. I know that the report is talking of disabled people, the women and the youth but when it comes to implementation, usually at the districts the CAOs are not very conscious about people with disabilities. They are more conscious about the physically disabled and leave out the deaf and the blind. Therefore, there is need to come up with clear guidelines to support this programme. 

I am very happy that this is going to target the poorest of the poor. I think that this group of people is going to uplift the standards of their households.

Mr Speaker, we look forward to seeing the implementation. Thank you very much.

1.10
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 3, the committee observed that poverty levels in northern Uganda are deepening. Definitely, that is a great concern for some of us who represent the people of northern Uganda. I am surprised that this committee has not recommended a special programme of affirmative action through the budget line. It looks as if NUSAF has not helped much because the north has continued to lag behind.

Secondly, development partners and the Uganda Government have continued to support this programme since 2003 to address deep-rooted poverty as a result of conflict. It is very important that as we go through this programme, we also put in place mechanisms of addressing conflict resolutions as a component, so that we deal with those symptoms that can deal with the conflict before it explodes. I think this would give us assurance that this country will not experience conflicts in the future.

Thirdly, it is very important that we now shift the management and supervision of NUSAF to the district level. We know that there is no way we can cure corruption in the Prime Minister’s office. As long as we are going to continue allowing the Prime Minister’s office to supervise or to oversee the management of this project, corruption will continue unchecked. Therefore, I would wish that this House should state, as a condition, that this –(Interruption)

MR PETER LOKII: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to provide information to the effect that even in terms of the reporting on NUSAF II, there is a certain NUSAF in Karamoja that is implemented through NGOs and is not being reported on. Therefore, what level of poverty is being impacted on by what the NGOs are implementing? Doesn’t that tantamount to corruption? That is the information I wanted to give.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Ogwal for giving way. The further information I would like to give is that within the districts, we have all the structures and it beats my understanding as to why if there is any other project, we recruit new project officers leaving out the district structures. 

If there is a project concerning agriculture, for example, we have the district agricultural officer who operates from the district, to the sub county, up to the parish. Why not channel the project through the structures of the district so that monitoring becomes easier by the CAO and the responsible persons? Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Thank you for the information. Maybe you could channel that through the minister when he is replying. He is not only my friend but my relative; he is our muko. 

Mr Speaker, I think you can see that the concerns of the Members involve implementation, supervision and monitoring, which are not benefiting us. However, I would also want to question why the issue of nodding disease has not been included here as a component. The committee has clearly stated that poverty, sicknesses and disease have been due to the conflicts and nodding disease is a result of that. How come nodding disease is not part of that component?

I congratulate Dokolo for taking the lead in expertise as far as management of the local government supervision is concerned. I congratulate my district because that is where I come from and I am associated with that mature kind of leadership. However, I would also want to implore Members that in the implementation, please let us ensure that Karamoja gets affirmative action. More funding must go to Karamoja because we are neighbours to the Karimojong and we would like to live in harmony. As long as we continue to leave Karamoja behind, the fate of our animals will continue to be unsure. (Laughter) We would like our neighbours to be settled.

Mr Speaker, finally, I would like the implementers to be conscious of the selection of the beneficiaries. If we were to ask now to be given the list of the people who have benefited, you would be shocked that there is political bias. There are people who benefit from their relatives. We get a lot of these complaints and yet as Members of Parliament, we are not involved in the selection. People come complaining to us yet we cannot do anything about it. 

Therefore, we must get assurance that when selection is being done next time, Members of Parliament and leaders of the districts must be involved so that we can know which people got the help and how it has impacted on the welfare of the households. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.17
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It seems that there is consensus from both sides that Government should go ahead and borrow. I therefore move a motion that the question be put to allow Government to borrow money for NUSAF III.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the question be put and I am required to put the question to that motion first. I now put the question to the motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to SDR 94.3 million, equivalent to US$ 130 million, from the International Development Association to support the third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project (NUSAF III). I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Honourable members, it is now 1.20 p.m. I would like to suspend the proceedings. Can we resume at 3.00 p.m.? Let us make it 2.30 p.m. House is suspended.

(The House was suspended at 1.20p.m.)

 (On resumption at 2.40p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Whips please ensure Members who are not yet in the Chamber come in so that we can move on with the business of the House. Are the whips themselves not here?

Honourable members, House suspended for 15 minutes. Let the bell be rung. If we resume and there is no possibility of proceeding, we will adjourn.

(The House was suspended at 2.44 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.59 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 179(1) (B) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA FOR THE CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, as I communicated earlier, the decision on this kind of motion is provided for under Article 179(2) of the Constitution: “Any measure to alter the boundary of a district or to create a new district shall be supported by a majority of all the Members of Parliament.” 

That means that we must vote in such a way that we are able to determine on the record whether we had the majority of Members. And the majority of members by simple calculation would be – There are 375 Members of Parliament and half of that –(Interjection)– No, these are voting Members. There are 375 Members and half of that is about 186 Members. So if I put the question and we cannot get that number, the motion collapses. The 186 are supposed to vote in support. The Article says, “…shall be supported by a majority of all Members of Parliament.” So if the Members who are supporting are less than half, the motion also collapses.

For me to be sure, I need to ascertain quorum. We have checked in the book and we have 191 Members. That would be the number required to take this decision provided they vote in support. I will now order roll call to just confirm the number that we have. Can we have the roll call? 

Roll Call

    1. Hon. Androa Alex Onzima 		
    2. Hon. Ababiku Jesca 			- Present
    3. Hon. Acayo Christine Cwinya-Ai		- Present
    4. Hon. Acheng Joy Ruth 					
    5. Hon. Achia Remigio 						
    6. Hon. Achia Terence Naco 		- Present
    7. Hon. Achieng Sarah Opendi 				
    8. Hon. Achile Manoah Mila 		– Present  
    9. Hon. Acire Christopher 		
    10. Hon. Adong Lilly 			- Present 
    11. Hon. Ajedra Gabriel 			- Present 
    12. Hon. Ajok Lucy 						
    13. Hon. Akello Judith Franca 		- Present 
    14. Hon. Akello Rose Lilly 					
    15. Hon. Akena James Michael  				
    16. Hon. Akol Rose Okullu 			- Present
    17. Hon. Akora Maxwell  					
    18. Hon. Alaso Alice Asianut					
    19. Hon. Aleper Margaret Achilla				 
    20. Hon. Aleper Simon Peter 			- Present
    21. Hon. Alero Tom Aza 						
    22. Hon. Alengot Proscovia Oromait 			

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the purposes of this, we will have free sitting. You can sit on either side of the House.

(Roll call continued_)		

    23. Hon. Ali Moses 
    24. Hon. Allen Andrew 
    25. Hon. Alum Santa Ogwang 
    26. Hon. Alupo Jessica Rose Epel 
    27. Hon. Amali Caroline Okao 		- Present
    28. Hon. Amama Mbabazi 						
    29. Hon. Amero Susan 						
    30. Hon. Amoding Monicah 					
    31. Hon. Amodoi Cyrus Imalingat 				
    32. Hon. Amoit Judith Mary 					
    33. Hon. Amongi Betty Ongom 		- Present
Hon. Amongin Aporu Christine  			
    34. Hon. Amongin Jacqueline					
    35. Hon. Amuge Rebecca Otengo 		– Present 
    36. Hon. Amuriat Oboi Patrick 				
    37. Hon. Angina Charles 					
    38. Hon. Anite Evelyn 						
    39. Hon. Anywarach Joshua Carter 				
    40. Hon. Aol Betty Ocan						
    41. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara 			
    42. Hon. Aronda Nyakairima  		- Present
    43. Hon. Asamo Hellen 						
    44. Hon. Asupasa Isiko Wilson 		- Present
    45. Hon. Atiku Benard 						
    46. Hon. Atim Anywar Beatrice 				
    47. Hon. Atim Joy Ongom						
    48. Hon. Atim Ogwal Cecilia  		- Present
    49. Hon. Auma Juliana Modest					
    50. Hon. Auru Anne 						
    51. Hon. Awongo Ahmed						
    52. Hon. Ayena Krispus						
    53. Hon. Ayepa Michael 			- Present
    54. Hon. Ayoo Tonny						
    55. Hon. Baba Diri Margaret 			- Present
    56. Hon. Babirye Veronica Kadogo				
    57. Hon. Badda Fred						
    58. Hon. Bagiire Vincent					
    59. Hon. Bagoole John 			- Present
    60. Hon. Bahati David 			- Present
    61. Hon. Bahinduka Martin					
    62. Hon. Bakka Stephen Mugabi		- Present
    63. Hon. Bakabulindi Charles					
    64. Rev. Bakaluba Mukasa Peter 		- Present
    65. Hon. Bakeine Mabel 						
    66. Hon. Bakireke Nambooze Betty					
    67. Hon. Bako Christine						
    68. Hon. Baliddawa Edward					
    69. Hon. Balyejjusa Sulaiman 		- Present
    70. Hon. Balyeku Moses						
    71. Hon. Bangirana Anifa Kawooya				
    72. Hon. Banyenzaki Henry 			- Present
    73. Hon. Barumba Beatrice 			- Present
    74. Hon. Baryayanga Andrew					
    75. Hon. Baryomunsi Chris					
    76. Hon. Bayigga Michael					
    77. Hon. Bbumba Syda						
    78. Hon. Besisira Ignatius 			- Present
    79. Hon. Bigirwa Julius						 
    80. Hon. Bintu Jalia 				– Present
    81. Hon. Biraahwa Mukitale Stephen 		- Present
    82. Hon. Biraaro Ephraim 			- Present 
    83. Hon. Birekerawo Nsubuga Mathias			
    84. Hon. Bitekyerezo Medard 		- Present
    85. Hon. Boona Emma 			- Present
    86. Hon. Bucyanayandi Tress					
    87. Hon. Bukenya Gilbert					
    88. Hon. Businge Victoria 			- Present
    89. Hon. Busingye Mary Karooro Okurut			
    90. Hon. Bwambale Bihande Yokasi 		- Present
    91. Hon. Byabagambi John 			- Present
    92. Hon. Byamukama Nulu 			- Present
    93. Hon. Byandala Abraham James				
    94. Hon. Byarugaba Alex				
    95. Hon. Byarugaba Grace 			- Present
    96. Hon. Cadet Benjamin 			- Present
    97. Hon. Chebrot Stephen					
    98. Hon. Chekwel Lydia 			- Present
    99. Hon. Chemaswet Abdi 			– Present
    100. Hon. Chemutai Phyllis					
    101. Hon. Migereko Daudi 					
    102. Hon. Dombo Emmanuel						
    103. Hon. Drito Martin 			- Present
    104. Hon. Ebil Fred 				- Present
    105. Hon. Ecweru Musa						
    106. Hon. Egunyu Janepher 					
    107. Hon. Ekanya Geoffrey					
    108. Hon. Ekuma Stephen 			- Present
    109. Hon. Ekwau Ibi Florence					
    110. Hon. Engola Sam					
    111. Hon. Epetait Francis 			- Present
    112. Hon. Eriaku Peter 			- Present
    113. Hon. Fungaaro Kaps Hassan 		- Present
    114. Hon. Gudoi Yahaya 			- Present
    115. Hon. Hood Katuramu						 
    116. Hon. Iriama Margaret 			- Present
    117. Hon. Iriama Rose						
    118. Hon. Isabirye Iddi 			- Present
    119. Hon. Jacan Omach Fred 			- Present
    120. Hon. Kaabule Evelyn Naome 		- Present
    121. Hon. Kaahwa Tophace 					
    122. Hon. Kabaale Kwagala					
    123. Hon. Kabahenda Flavia					
    124. Hon. Kabajo James						
    125. Hon. Kabakumba Masiko					
    126. Hon. Kabasharira Naome					
    127. Hon. Kaddumukasa Ssozi					
    128. Hon. Kafabusa Werikhe Michael		- Present
    129. Hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko Robert		- Present
    130. Hon. Kafuda Boaz 			- Present
    131. Hon. Kahinda Otafiire					
    132. Hon. Kahunde Hellen 			- Present
    133. Hon. Kajara Aston						
    134. Hon. Kajura Henry						
    135. Hon. Kakoba Onyango						
    136. Hon. Kakooza James 			- Present
    137. Hon. Kamanda Bataringaya 		- Present
    138. Hon. Kamara John 						
    139. Hon. Kamateeka Jovah					
    140. Hon. Kamba Saleh						
    141. Hon. Kangwagye Steven					
    142. Hon. Karuhanga Gerald					
    143. Hon. Karungi Elizabeth					
    144. Hon. Kasaija Matia						
    145. Hon. Kasaija Steven						
    146. Hon. Kasamba Mathias					
    147. Hon. Kase-Mubanda Freda					
    148. Hon. Kasibante Moses 					
    149. Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki 			- Present 
    150. Hon. Kasule Justine 			- Present
    151. Hon. Kasule Robert						
    152. Hon. Kataaha Janet Museveni				
    153. Hon. Kataike Sarah 						
    154. Hon. Katirima Phinehas 			- Present 
    155. Hon. Katoto Hatwib 			- Present
    156. Hon. Katumba Wamala						
    157. Hon. Katuntu Abdu							
    158. Hon. Katwesigye Oliver 			- Present 
    159. Hon. Katwiremu Yorokamu					
    160. Hon. Kawuma Mohamad						
    161. Hon. Kayagi Sarah Netalisire		- Present
    162. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi John 		- Present
    163. Hon. Khainza Justine 			- Present
    164. Hon. Khiddu Makubuya					
    165. Hon. Kiboijana Margaret					
    166. Hon. Kibuule Ronald 					
    167. Hon. Kiiza Ernest Apuuli 			- Present
    168. Hon. Kiiza Rwebembera					
    169. Hon. Kiiza Winifred						
    170. Hon. Kikungwe Issa 						
    171. Hon. Kintu Florence 			- Present
    172. Hon. Kitatta Aboud 			- Present
    173. Hon. Kiwanda Godfrey 			- Present
    174. Hon. Kiyingi Asuman						
    175. Hon. Kiyingi Bbosa Kenneth 		- Present
    176. Hon. Kiyingi Deogratius					
    177. Hon. Kiyonga Chrispus 			- Present
    178. Hon. Komuhangi Margaret					
    179. Hon. Kusasira Peace 			- Present
    180. Hon. Kutesa Samuel						
    181. Hon. Kwemara Ngabu William				
    182. Hon. Kwiyucwiny Grace 			- Present
    183. Hon. Kwizera Eddie 			- Present
    184. Hon. Kyambadde Amelia					
    185. Hon. Kyanjo Hussein 					
    186. Hon. Kyeyune Haruna						
    187. Hon. Kyooma Xavier 			- Present 
    188. Hon. Lakot Susan 			- Present
    189. Hon. Lanyero Sarah 			- Present
    190. Hon. Lematia Ruth 			- Present
    191. Hon. Lokeris Aimat 			- Present
    192. Hon. Lokeris Samson 			- Present
    193. Hon. Lokii John Baptist					
    194. Hon. Lokii Peter Abrahams 		- Present
    195. Hon. Lokodo Simon						
    196. Hon. Lolem Micah 			- Present
    197. Hon. Lowila Oketayot 			- Present 
    198. Hon. Lubega Godfrey 			- Present
    199. Hon. Lubega Medard Sseggona				
    200. Hon. Lubogo Kenneth						
    201. Hon. Lugoloobi Amos 			- Present
    202. Hon. Lwanga Timothy						
    203. Hon. Lyomoki Samuel						
    204. Hon. Madada Suleiman			– Present
    205. Hon. Maganda Julius						 		
    206. Hon. Magyezi Raphael 			– Present
    207. Hon. Makhoha Margaret 			– Present
    208. Hon. Mandera Amos 			– Present
    209. Hon. Matte Joseph Sibalinghana 		– Present
    210. Hon. Mawanda Michael Maranga 		– Present
    211. Hon. Mayende Stephen			– Present
    212. Hon. Mbabazi Betty Ahimbisibwe 	– Present
    213. Hon. Mbagadhi Frederick Nkayi 			
    214. Hon. Mbahimba James 					
    215. Hon. Mbogo Kezekia 						
    216. Hon. Migadde Robert Ndugwa 				
    217. Hon. Mpabwa Sarah 						
    218. Hon. Mpairwe Beatrice 			– Present
    219. Hon. Mpiima Dorothy Christine 		– Present
    220. Hon. Mpuuga Mathias 					
    221. Hon. Mubito John Bosco 			– Present
    222. Hon. Mugabi Martin 						
    223. Hon. Mugema Peter 			– Present
    224. Hon. Mugume Roland 			– Present
    225. Hon. Muhumuza David 						
    226. Hon. Muhwezi Jim Katugugu 				
    227. Hon. Mujungu Jennifer					
    228. Hon. Mujuni Vincent Kyamadidi		– Present
    229. Hon. Muruli Mukasa Wilson 		– Present
    230. Hon. Mukula George Michael 				
    231. Hon. Mulimba John 						
    232. Hon. Mulindwa Patrick 					
    233. Hon. Mulongo Simon 			– Present
    234. Hon. Muloni Irene Nafuna 				
    235. Hon. Musasizi Henry Ariganyira 		– Present
    236. Hon. Musinguzi Yona 					
    237. Hon. Mutagamba Maria 					
    238. Hon. Mutebi Joseph Balikudembe 			
    239. Hon. Mutono Lodoi Patrick		– Present
    240. Hon. Mutonyi Rose Masaba 		– Present
    241. Hon. Mutyabule Florence Tibafana 	– Present
    242. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi Muhammad	– Present
    243. Hon. Muwuma Milton 						
    244. Hon. Muyingo John Chrysostom 		– Present
    245. Hon. Mwebaza Sarah Wenene		– Present
    246. Hon. Mwesige Adolf 			– Present
    247. Hon. Mwesigye Fred						 
    248. Hon. Mwiru Paul 				– Present
    249. Hon. Nabbanja Robinah 			– Present
    250. Hon. Nabirye Agnes 						
    251. Hon. Nabugere Flavia 					
    252. Hon. Nabukenya Brenda 					
    253. Hon. Nabulya Theopista 			– Present
    254. Hon. Naggayi Nabilah Sempala				
    255. Hon. Najjemba Rosemary Muyinda 			
    256. Hon. Nakabale Patrick 			– Present
    257. Hon. Nakabira Gertrude Lubega		– Present
    258. Hon. Nakadama Rukia Isanga 		– Present
    259. Hon. Nakato Kyabangi Katusiime 	– Present
    260. Hon. Nakawunde Sarah Temulanda 	– Present
    261. Hon. Nakayenze Connie Galiwango 	– Present
    262. Hon. Nalubega Mariam 			– Present
    263. Hon. Nalubega Mary 			– Present
    264. Hon. Namaganda Susan					 
    265. Hon. Namara Grace 						
    266. Hon. Namayanja Florence 					
    267. Hon. Namayanja Rose Nsereko 				
    268. Hon. Namoe Stella Nyomera 		– Present
    269. Hon. Namugwanya Benny Bugembe 			
    270. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi Nathan 				
    271. Hon. Nankabirwa Ann Maria 				
    272. Hon. Nankabirwa Ruth Sentamu 		– Present
    273. Hon. Nansubuga Rosemary Seninde 	– Present
    274. Hon. Nantaba Idah Erios			– Present
    275. Hon. Nanyondo Birungi Carolyn		– Present
    276. Hon. Nasasira John Mwoono 				
    277. Hon. Nauwat Rosemary 					
    278. Hon. Ndeezi Alex 						
    279. Hon. Nebanda Andiru Florence		– Present
    280. Hon. Nekesa Barbara Oundo 				
    281. Hon. Ninsiima Ronah Rita 		– Present
    282. Hon. Niwagaba Wilfred 			– Present
    283. Hon. Nokrach William Wilson				 
    284. Hon. Nsanja Patrick Mabirizi 		– Present
    285. Hon. Nsereko Muhammad					 
    286. Hon. Nshaija Dorothy Kabaraitsya 			
    287. Hon. Ntabazi Harriet			- present
    288. Hon. Nyakecho Okwenye			- present
    289. Hon. Nyakikongoro Rosemary		- present
    290. Hon. Nyanzi Vincent
    291. Hon. Prof. Nyiira Zerubbabel Mijumbi
    292. Hon. Nyirabashitsi Sarah Mateke		- present
    293. Hon. Nyombi Peter
    294. Hon. Nyombi Thembo George William
    295. Hon. Nzoghu William			- present
    296. Hon. Oboth Marksons Jacob
    297. Hon. Obua Denis Hamson 		- present
    298. Hon. Obua Ogwal Benson					
    299. Hon. Ochola Stephen			- present
    300. Hon. Ochwa Derrick 			- present
    301. Hon. Odoi Oywelowo Fox		- present
    302. Hon. Odo Tayebwa
    303. Hon. Odonga Otto Samuel
    304. Hon. Oguttu Wafula Philip 
    305. Hon. Ogwal Jacinto Deusdedit  
    306. Hon. Ogwang Peter
    307. Hon. Okello Anthony			- present
    308. Hon. Maj. Gen. Oketta JF
    309. Hon. Okeyoh Peter			- present
    310. Hon. Okot John Amos
    311. Hon. Okot-Ogong Felix			- present
    312. Hon. Okumu Ronald Reagan
    313. Hon. Okuonzi Sam Agatre
    314. Hon. Okupa Elijah 
    315. Hon. Olanya Gilbert			- present
    316. Hon. Oleru Huda Abason			- present
    317. Hon. Omara Geoffrey			- present
    318. Hon. Omolo Peter						
    319. Hon. Dr Omona Kenneth Olusegun 
    320. Hon. Omwonya Oribdhogu Stanley	- present
    321. Hon. Onek Obaloker Hillary
    322. Hon. Ongalo-Obote Clement Kenneth 	- present
    323. Hon. Opolot Jacob Richard		- present
    324. Hon. Oryem Henry Okello
    325. Hon. Osegge Angeline					
    326. Hon. Otada Sam Owor Amooti		- present
    327. Hon. Oula Innocent			- present
    328. Hon. Owoyesigire Jim
    329. Hon. Ruhindi Fredrick 			- present
    330. Hon. Ruhunda Alex 			- present
    331. Hon. Rukutana Mwesigwa
    332. Hon. Maj. (Rtd) Rwamirama Bright 	- present
    333. Hon. Sabiiti Jack 
    334. Hon. Sabila Nelson			- present 
    335. Hon. Sofia Nalule Juuko		- Present 
    336. Hon. Sebuliba-Mutumba Richard
    337. Hon. Ssejjoba Isaac			- Present 
    338. Hon. Sempala Mbuga Edward William	- Present
    339. Hon. Sezi Prisca Mbaguta
    340. Hon. Ssali Baker			- Present
    341. Hon. Ssasaga Isaias Johnny 
    342. Hon. Ssebagala Abdu Latif Ssengendo 
    343. Hon. Ssekandi Edward Kiwanuka 
    344. Hon. Ssekikubo Theodore		- Present
    345. Hon. Ssemmuli Anthony
    346. Hon. Ssempijja Vincent Bamulangaki 
    347. Hon. Ssemugaba Samuel		- Present
    348. Hon. Ssemujju Nganda					
    349. Hon. Ssewungu Joseph Gonzaga
    350. Hon. Ssimbwa John
    351. Hon. Ssinabulya Sylvia Namabidde	- Present
    352. Hon. Taaka Kevinah Wanaha Wandera	- Present
    353. Hon. Tanna Sanjay 
    354. Hon. Tashobya Stephen
    355. Hon. Tete Chelangat Everline		- Present
    356. Hon. Timbigamba Linda
    357. Hon. Tinkasiimire Barnabas 		- Present
    358. Hon. Todwong Richard
    359. Hon. Tumwebaze Kagyigyi Frank
    360. Hon. Dr Tumwesigye Elioda 
    361. Hon. Gen. (Rtd) Tumwine Elly
    362. Hon. Turyahikayo Kebirungi Mary Paula
    363. Hon. Dr Twa-Twa Mutwalante Jeremiah	- Present
    364. Hon. Wadada Fermia
    365. Hon. Wadri Kassiano Ezati  
    366. Hon. Waira Kyewalabye Majegere 	- Present
    367. Hon. Wakikona Wandendeya David
    368. Hon. Kyewalabye Majegere 		– Present
    369. Hon. David Wanendeya David 		– Present
    370. Hon. Wamakuyu Mudini 		– Present
    371. Hon. Jack Wamanga Wamai 
    372. Hon. Jacob Wangolo 			– Present
    373. Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma 		– Present

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, those who were not in the House when their names were called out, please rise and we take the roll call, order by order. We will start from here - the Opposition. Please use the microphone.

    1. Hon. Florence Ibi Ekwau			– present
    2. Hon. Tony Ayoo 				– present
    3. Hon. Abdu-Katuntu 			– present
    4. Hon. Amuriat Oboi 			– present
    5. Hon. Patrick Mulindwa 			– present
    6. Hon. Andrew Baryayanga Aja 		– present
    7. Hon. Jacob Markson Oboth 		– present
    8. Hon. Dr Sam Lyomoki 			– present
    9. Hon. Emmanuel Dombo Lumala 		- present
    10. Hon. Mary Busingye Okurut 		– present
    11. Hon. Fred Badda 				– present
    12. Hon. Cyrus Amadoi Alengat 		– present
    13. Hon. Latif Ssebagala Sengendo 		– present
    14. Hon. Jack Sabiti 				– present
    15. Hon. Jacquiline Amongin 		– present
    16. Hon. Aston Kajara 			– present
    17. Hon. Musa Ecweru 			– present
    18. Hon. Monica Amoding 			– present
    19. Hon. Fred Mwesigye 			– present
    20. Hon. Rosemary Nauwat 			– present
    21. Hon. Syda Namirembe Bumba 		– present
    22. Hon. Susan Amero 			– present
    23. Hon. Jovah Kamateeka 			– present
    24. Hon. Margret Komuhangi 		– present
    25. Hon. David Muhumuza 			– present
    26. Hon. William Kwemara 			– present
    27. Hon. Ahmed Awongo 			– present
    28. Hon. Julius Bigirwa Junjura 		– present
    29. Hon. David Muhumuza 			– present
    30. Hon. Bernad Atiku 			– present
    31. Hon. Henry Kajura 			– present
    32. Hon. Peter Ogwang 			– present
    33. Hon. Tim Lwanga 			– present
    34. Hon. Rose Iriama 			– present

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any member who is not registered here? Honourable members, would you like to sit? We all need to sit in the Chamber so that we can do the counting properly. I need you in the Chamber, not in the lobby, please Members.

    35. Hon. Rose Namayanja 			– Present
    36. Hon. Kassiano Ezati Wadri   		- present
    37. Hon. Byandala Abraham 			- present 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order members.
38. 	Hon. Yorokamu Katwiremu 		- present
39.	Hon. Margaret Aleper  			- Present  
40.	Hon. Jennifer Nantume	 		- Present

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have now established by roll call and tally that 216 Members of Parliament are present.

I will now put the question - and let me inform you how we are going to take the vote. I require all Members to be in the Chamber because if we do it by roll call and tally, it will be another long process. I would like to put the question so that we do head count, row by row, to confirm the numbers, if that is possible. We can just count - when I say those in favour, you stand, row by row, so that we can determine the numbers. The Constitution requires us to determine that a majority of Members support it. So we need the numbers.

So, I will now put the question - I will read the districts all together and then I put the question to the motion. Honourable members, I now put the question to the Motion for a Resolution of Parliament under Article - 

HON. MATE: As you read, Mr Speaker, I expect Bughendera to be on the list.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me now put the question to the Motion for a Resolution of Parliament, under Article 179 (1) (b) of the Constitution for the creation of new districts.
Under category (a) the districts to come into effect 1 July 2016.

    1. Kagadi District, currently part of Kibale District, consisting of Buyaga East, Buyaga West Counties with its headquarters at Kagadi Town Council;

    2. Kakumiro District, currently part of Kibale District, consisting of Bugangaizi East and Bugangaizi West counties with its headquarters at Kakumiro Town Council;

    3. Omoro District, currently part of Gulu District, consisting of Omoro County with its headquarters at Omoro County; and

    4. Rubanda District, currently of Kabale District, consisting of Rubanda County, with its headquarters at Rubanda County Headquarters.

Those are districts that are supposed to come into effect 1 July, 2016. 

The districts to come into effect 1 July 2017 are:
    1. Namisindwa District, currently art of Manafwa District, consisting part of Manafwa District consisting of Bubulo East County, with its headquarters at Namisindwa;

    2. Pakwach District, currently of Nebbi District, consisting of Jonam County, with its headquarters at Pakwach Town Council;

    3. Butebo District, currently part of Pallisa District consisting of Butebo County with its headquarters at Butebo Trading Centre;

    4. Rukiga District, currently of Kabale District, consisting of Rukiga County with its headquarters at Rukiga County headquartes; and

    5. Kyotera District, currently part of Rakai District, with its headquarters at Kasaali Sub county headquarters. It will consist of Kyotera County, the sub counties of Kyebe, Kakuuto and Kasasa in Kakuuto County. 

	The two sub counties of Kibanda and Kifuma, formerly in Kakuuto County will be part of Kooki County constituting Rakai District.

    6. Bunyagabo District, currently part of Kabarole District, consisting of Bunyagabo County with its headquarters at Kibiito Town Council. 

Those districts are to come into effect 1 July, 2017;

The districts to come into effect 1 July 2018, are the following:
    1. Nabilatuk District, currently part of Nakapiripirit District, consisting of Pian County with its headquarters at Nabilatuk Trading Centre;

    2. Bugweri District, currently part of Iganga District, consisting of Bugweri County with its headquarters at Busesa;

    3. Kasanda District, currently part of Mubende District, consisting of Kasanda County, with its headquarters at Kasanda;

    4. Kwania District, currently part of Apac District, consisting of Kwania County with its headquarters at Aduku Town Council;

    5. Kapelebyong District, currently part of Amuria District, consisting of Kapelebyong County with its headquarters at Kapelebyong Trading Centre; and

    6. Kikube District, currently part of Hoima District, consisting of Buhaguzi County with its headquarters in Kikube Town Board.

Those districts are to come into effect on 1 July, 2018. 

Districts to come into effect 1 July 2019 are:
    1. Obongi District, part of Moyo District, consisting of Obongi County with its headquarters in Obongi Trading Centre;

    2. Kazo District, currently part of Kiruhura District, consisting of Kazo County with its headquarters at Kazo County Headquarters.
    3. Rwampara District, currently part of Mbarara District, consisting of Rwampara County with its headquarters at Rwampara County Headquarters; 

    4. Kitagwenda District currently part of Kamwenge District consisting of Kitagwenda County with its headquarters at Kitagwenda County headquarters. 

    5. Madi-okollo District currently part of Arua District consisting of Madi-okollo County with its headquarters in the trading centre; 

    6. Karenga District currently part of Kaabong District to consist of Dodos West County with its headquarters at Kidepo Town Council;

    7. Kalaki District, part of Kaberamaido District with its headquarters at Kalaki County headquarters.

Those districts are to come in effect 1 July 2019. That the headquarters of each district which is not yet a town council shall become a town council in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Act. Honourable members, that is the motion I put the question to and voting starts now -

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, in protection of the Constitution of Uganda, I would like to know whether we are procedurally moving correctly when we are entering a phase of adopting/ presuming powers to pass a law in anticipation as the Ninth Parliament. Do we have the powers to commit the next Government?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are proceeding correctly; we have proceeded like this before. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. By the look of it, it is as if all counties in this country have been given district status except a few. I do not understand the rationale – (Interjection) - please give me an opportunity. I am not yet convinced as to why big administrative counties like Terego sandwiched by all districts around it has not been considered for district status and yet geographically – [members! order] - for those of you who have gone there, Terego from here goes beyond Kakira - and you are still in Terego county and it has a large population. 

And you recently gave it a second constituency; surely I would wish to be advised. What kind of criteria are we using for creating these districts?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the minister also alluded to the fact that Government intends to grant Arua district status which is taking the whole of Ayivu County and part of Vura County. Therefore, leaving Terego in isolation, like an island, sandwiched by districts around it. What would be the fate of the people in terms of service delivery if such is not taken into consideration? That is my prayer Mr Speaker, consideration needs to be taken otherwise we are causing an administrative limbo.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are at voting stage now. Can we take this vote and then raised those subsequent issues accordingly and members I beg you. I have put the question and voting starts now. Will those in favour stand; first row -   
                       
(Members voted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the motion for the resolution of Parliament under Article 179(1) (b) of the Constitution for the creation of new districts; the voting results are as follows: Those in support of the motion – 196 –(Applause)- Those against – six Abstentions – three. Therefore the “Ayes” have it. (Applause)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I know the Minister of – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members there is a procedural point here.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure. Although the Minister of Local Government is celebrating, I think it is important that this country should move forward holistically. And development must be seen to be fair and all rounds.

We are now speaking about creation of cities in the near future; it is already budgeted for and we know that Arua is likely to be a city, Lira, Mbale and several others. However, I am asking the Minister to consider Terego for district status; it is now like an island, left there. We do not want the population to be disgruntled. We must move together as Ugandans. (Applause)

Now it looks like we are giving these districts for political reasons. Terego is now an island in West Nile and we do not know how we are going to deal with that political argument when we go to the people.

And secondly, whereas I celebrate other districts, we from Lango sub-region – I want to say, without pointing a finger at anyone – we are always marginalised tactfully because, if we are to be fair, look at the population. As I tried to present the other day, you will find that the population of Oyam deserves about three or four constituencies but there are only two constituencies. And not only that, even for the district, they now qualify to be made a district. And all documents required for the creation of districts, have been submitted to the Minister and the Minister has acknowledged that fact.

Now, for us, the Langi, we are going to go back with a very heavy heart although we have voted to escort other districts. But when we go back, we will be asked questions which we do not know how to answer. And they will look at me and say, “Why did you accept to be Opposition Chief Whip if you cannot change things on the Floor of Parliament?”

So, Mr Speaker, I am going back very disappointed – I voted “Yes” because I thought you would consider Oyam and Terego and other areas that have not been considered.

So, Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Minister of Local Government to continue being discriminative against some regions? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedural issue violates our rules in the sense that it imputes improper motive on the Minister; it cannot stand. You said the Minister is intentionally marginalising – “discriminating” actually. That is not a fair comment – it imputes improper motive on the part of the Minister. And you asked me to rule on this procedural matter. Then, please prepare it properly then I can also rule on it properly.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, if the word “marginalised” would jeopardise the positive approach, I beg to withdraw it. And hoping that my sister and the Minister of Local Government will give serious consideration to the matter I have just put before the House – (Interjections) - thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us handle this properly, hon. Minister.

MR MATTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the House for having passed the other districts and I voted in favour of them as well. However, Bughendera has been asking for the district from –(Interjection)– yes; and we have gone through all the procedures. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please follow the debate.

MR MATTE: The constitution clearly says that power belongs to the people – that is Article 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Now, over 5,000 signatures were collected to create the district of Bughendera. We went to stage No.2; we had all the sub-counties’ resolutions creating the district of Bughendera. We went at that time when the county was still under council; the county council also passed a resolution to create the district of Bughendera. Then we went to the district council. On 10 June 2010, they passed a resolution to create the district of Bughendera. 

Bughendera is highly mountainous – hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay; it has a population of over 120,000 people. Bughendera has fertile soils and can grow almost anything –(Interjection)– yes. 

Mr Speaker, Bughendera provides the cleanest water for the rest of the surrounding areas but it is not given enough water. When it comes to schools, we have a problem; most of our schools are at the foot of the mountain – not on the mountain though. Our people have to suffer moving – especially when it rains – they have to take children all the way from the top of the mountain to come to the foot of the mountain – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the point is made; the procedural point is made. Can we now capture that? I am going to ask the Minister to respond to some of these issues – honourable member, the point is taken.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also take this opportunity to thank the Minister and also thank this august House for passing this very important resolution.

However, I would like to appeal to the Minister to consider the following: We have created these service centres. I would like to appeal to the Minister to expedite the process of putting in place new sub-counties, which are very critical centres of service delivery.

Mr Speaker, I request the Minister to put it very clearly to me. For instance, I have one sub-county, Nyakitunda, with 115 LC I cells; Kikagate with 85 LC I cells – this is also another mountainous, hard-to-reach area. I would like to make this passionate appeal that the creation of these new sub-counties – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the creation of sub-counties a responsibility of this House?

MR BYARUGABA: No, I am appealing – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, no. Please, please.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker; point taken.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My point of procedure is in regard to what has been alluded to by my Chief Whip in regard to cities. Ayivu County – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we do not have any motion on cities.

MR ATIKU: It is related.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. But we do not have anything on cities here. Apart from KCCA, we do not have anything on cities here. So can we leave it for when the time is right to discuss cities and probably when it comes?

MS NTABAZI: I thank you very, Mr Speaker. I happen to come from Bundibugyo District which my colleague hon. Matte was talking about. The district officials took a resolution to split and create Bughendera District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that point was already captured.

MS NTABAZI: Yes. But I was giving information to the effect that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, please. It is not necessary now. The point has already been made that there is an issue to do with Bughendera District – is she against it? Okay. I thought you were raising the same issue that was raised by hon. Matte.

MS NTABAZI: I was giving you positive information that the issues that were against the creation of the district were about the two communities down there presented to the minister, and they were settled on Sunday by His Excellency the President.

The principle of creating a district was agreed to by the communities of Bundibugyo. The rest of the details and the technicalities will be sorted out. The only thing was that we had agreed that even if it staggers to 2020, we will have no problem. Leaving it out was the shock to some of us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, procedure.

MR BESISIRA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I move my procedural point, I would to thank the members of this House for at last having considered us –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are now on procedural issues only.

MR BESISIRA: We are very grateful for it on behalf of the people of Kibaale. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, we are soon going for elections and in these two new districts of Kibaale, if we have elections in February, it will mean that we shall need to hold another election in the same district before September. 

I do not know how we would specifically move to enable us, the first four districts, to ensure that we also take part in this election so that the election is one. This will be very expensive especially for the people who are going to stand in both elections, more so for the LC5 chairperson and the Woman Member of Parliament – and even to Government because it will be after an election in February and people are sworn in around May/June and then July – because the law provides that there cannot be a district without a Member of Parliament beyond 60 days. 

This means that by around September, we must hold another election. You cannot have a district without an LC5 Chairperson beyond six months. This means that around December, we shall be going for another election. 

I do not know how this can be handled, Mr Speaker. Is it possible for us to hold elections at the same time?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point is taken but hon. Member, when the motion was proposed that the following districts and they were the first four should come into effect on 1 July, 2017, that motion was not amended. Nobody, including the minister proposed any amendment to it; so that is it. 

Unless there are other procedures for considering this but the motion that was presented and which has now been adopted is that those districts are coming into effect on 1 July 2016. If there was an amendment to that motion, this House would have taken a decision appropriately. 

MR KAFUDA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Although I congratulate my colleagues who have benefited from these districts, it is really disappointing and painful that the government that we serve and support – most especially, this Government was supposed to extend services nearer to the people. I am disappointed that the government that I support is selective in service delivery. We raised these issues about Kasese District several times and if you look at the district, it is the second largest after Arua. If you look at its population, it is coming to almost 800,000 and I know that within two to three years, the population will be almost one million people.

Mr Speaker, the district council did pass a resolution which the minister is well aware of. I submitted the resolution to the minister and the President gave some directives to the minister. The President called me together with hon. Adolf Mwesige who in turn called me to his office. We sat and agreed on a position. The minister held some consultative meetings in Kasese at the Rwenzori International Hotel on the boundaries. 

Unfortunately, when the districts came - and in the first motion, Kasese District was there; but the second motion was amended, and it was left out and we do not know the reason why.

I wonder whether we are moving procedurally right when Kasese was in the first motion and now in the amended motion, it was not there, and no clarification is given. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members – yes, procedure.

MR NZOGHU: Further procedure. I thank you, Mr Speaker. I was born in Kasese, I grew up in Kasese and when I die, I will be buried in Kasese.

We need to be honest to ourselves. There is a report of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service and on Page 9 when the issue of the split of Kasese District came, there were contradictions in the district and then out of those contradictions, a number of petitions were brought before the committee. 

The committee could not proceed without consulting the people of Kasese. When you read Page 9, the committee noted in their finding that there was no consensus on the boundaries to create two more districts out of Kasese and the Minister for Local Government was yet to consult further with the local stakeholders on this. 

By the time the committee submitted this report to the House, there was no consensus among the people of Kasese. Mr Speaker, I do not know whether it is procedurally right for our colleague, hon. Kafuda, to derail the work of this Parliament and also to imagine that he can impose the views he has as an individual on the majority of the people of Kasese because the people of Kasese because the people of Kasese have said no to the split of Kasese. Hon. Kafuda is just a representative of one constituency out of the five constituencies in Kasese.

Mr Speaker, when you get to page 12 of the report of the Committee on Public Service that for Kasese the split is still awaiting the hon. Minister’s consultations on the decisions and boundaries and names and that consensus has not yet been built. 

Is it procedurally right for hon. Kafuda to espouse his interests as an individual yet we have done consultations in the district and people in Kasese are saying that the district must remain intact. What is it that hon. Kafuda is doing?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a procedural point, hon. members let me do this; let me capture what I have captured so far. 

From the whole debate arising from the issue of districts, hon. Minister, these are the things that I would like to take note of and see if you can speak to them. There is an issue on Tororo and it remains outstanding before us; an apparent agreement has been submitted to the House from the MPs from Tororo that they had come to some meaningful arrangement that there may be some issues that you need to follow up with Tororo or when you come to respond.

There is now the issue of Kasese, there is issue Oyam and Terego. The honourable minister should guide us on some of these issues so that we see how to move forward on this.

MR MULINDWA: Mr Speaker, the people of Kasambya brought a petition when the minister brought the motion for the creation of districts. They petitioned this Parliament to give them a chance to be considered a district. Mr Speaker, the last time we were here, I persuaded the minister to amend the motion to include Kasyambya County to become a district. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for me to get a response from the minister as to why he could not amend the motion to include Kasambya?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member on that procedural issue from Kasambya that motion was not amended and we do not have any pending motion as of now that is why I am referring all these matters to the minister.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have just successfully carried the motion to create more districts. Whereas I come from Tororo, I am not going to raise that matter again.

Raising that matter at this point Mr Speaker in my view would be giving speech in a funeral and I believe that this House is convinced that Government in some way considered all the needs that we have. I have heard of Terego, I have always heard, I have heard of Kasambya and other places. For Tororo the matter will be resolved and I believe that we shall engage the minister outside this House and we shall do this. 

I requesting for procedural guidance, on whether it would not be proper for us to give a send-off for this motion. I was just waiting to hear whether the minister is happy the way we carried this motion and give us a vote of thanks and we go to another item.

If that is procedurally permissible, we would go, after listening to the minister of Local Government. We have done a good job for him voting when we have not received a county or whatever. It is okay we cannot all get the same day, including Terego; we shall get another time my colleague.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have discovered that we all need districts and at an appropriate time I am going to move a motion that every sub county becomes a district because my colleague here has raised an issue that his county is very big, I heard my brother from Isingiro also talking that there is a sub county with 100,000 people.

I have a sub county called Buwalasi, where I am born. It has over 120,000 people. So since sub counties are demanding for service delivery –(Interjections)– I think as a Parliament we must put a stop on this; to ease this, let us give to every sub county –(Interjections)– do you know the population of Uganda? Some of you came here just to vote.

Mr Speaker, at an appropriate time, I want to move that because -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When the appropriate time comes you will do that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But in the meantime, I am putting the minister for Local Government on notice that I want a district called Buwalasi district because our population is over 120,000 people and that is the order of the day.

5.09
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. I would like to begin with the last question of Buwalasi district. This is the first time that I am hearing about Buwalasi district and the procedure for putting a request for new districts is that the requests are not introduced on the floor. On the issue of Terego – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker hon. Adolf is my good friend and I rarely put him to order but he has gone beyond. I said that I was putting him on notice - I am going to follow the normal procedures so that we bring the resolution from wherever it comes. Is hon. Adolf the Minister for Local Government in order to assume that I do not know the procedure?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now he knows that you know.

MR MWESIGE: Like other issues –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, we have not quite left the topic of creation of districts and I know that the whip of Government and even myself we have been working to make sure that people attend this particular session and the discussion is still going on. Is it procedurally right for members to be walking out when we have not yet concluded this matter? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members when we come, we come to do business of the House and the business of the people of this country when matters are still going on and the Speaker is still sitting, it does not look very good for you to leave the Speaker in the chair permanently. 

At least it is good to go and come back and continue sitting with the Speaker. Honourable members, I have sat here from 10 O’clock, I had a lunch break of one hour and I have been here since that time and many of you have been up and down going out and coming back in. the greatest support you can give me is at least to go out and come back and sit with me so that we can finish the business that is before us.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, the issue of Terego – just like my colleague from Tororo, hon. Oboth, said – would require some patience and more engagement. I would like to thank hon. Oboth-Oboth for that positive attitude that engagement must continue even after this motion has been passed.

We all know that Terego and Maracha had been amalgamated into a district. This Parliament had passed that district. The problem was the location of the headquarters. There were many disagreements until this Parliament in its wisdom very few years ago reverted Terego to Arua District. Having reverted Terego to Arua District, it takes some more studies and further consultations to get it out of Arua District and make it a separate district.

However, there is also the proposal for the creation of Arua City, which hon. Atiku pointed out. When you go in the proposal for the boundaries of the proposed Arua City, the equation clearly puts Terego out of the proposed Arua City, which is a district. When you have Ayivu, Vurra, Madi-Okollo – which is now a district – and Arua Municipality as part of Arua City, when Arua City is finally created, what remains of Arua District? These are the issues we should discuss. The world is not ending today –(Interruption)

MS WADRI: Mr Minister, we are in the Ninth Parliament. When we had the problem of Maracha-Terego District, which is district No.23 in the First Schedule of the 1995 Constitution, as amended, the point of contention was about the headquarters. You know very well that Maracha is one-third of Terego. The contention arose because you preferred to put the headquarters in Maracha, thereby disadvantaging people from the extreme end of Terego who would move for 50 to 56 miles to reach there; that was the reason.

After that had been sorted out, I do agree that Terego was unconstitutionally returned to Arua District because it was already a district approved through a constitutional amendment. There was no way it could have gone back to Arua without the necessary constitutional amendment, which was not done.

My question is, what more consultation do we really need to have? Terego is not like other counties where there are tribal sentiments. The people of Terego are one. There is no disagreement at all. 

Therefore, the point I would like to hear from you is, what consultations are you going to carry out? From the same people who are saying they need a district? From the same people who are saying they are one and have unanimously said they want a district? Who are you going to consult and on what issue? That is the clarification I would like to get from you.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I do not want to indulge in constitutional interpretation because I am not the authority to declare anything unconstitutional. However, the message I am sending to the honourable member representing Terego and to the people of Terego is that engagement and discussion on this matter of Terego District in the context of Arua City and Arua District will continue. I would like to urge him to join this discussion. I think it will be more fruitful than continuing to discuss it here. The issue of Kasese-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, can he answer these ones then you can raise that issue?

MR MWESIGE: The issue of Kasese is not as simple as hon. Kafuda would like it to appear. You could see that after hon. Kafuda’s eloquent submission, hon. Nzoghu took the Floor and questioned where hon. Kafuda was deriving the power to discuss for the entire Kasese District, which has got five constituencies. My assessment was that hon. Nzoghu does not agree with hon. Kafuda. The disagreements in Kasese are evident in this House and I would like to say that the contradictions are sharper in Kasese than they appear in this House.

It would be a big disservice, Mr Speaker, for Government to introduce a motion for creation of a district there having done our research and found that the creation of that district will leave the communities and societies more divided than they were before the district was created. As a result we take our time. 

As I said, the world is not ending today. Kasese has been there; it is there and will continue to be there. As a result, it is fair and proper that by the time this Parliament is invited to create a new district in Kasese, Government must have done its homework that the creation of a new district in an area – not just Kasese – will not escalate conflict in that area. Our findings show that we need to do more consultation in order to have new districts created in Kasese.

Bughendera has the same story. The honourable Woman MP for Bundibugyo Distract said that they built consensus on Sunday. Today is Thursday. The consensus, which was built on Sunday, has not been brought to my attention. You cannot blame me for not pursuing the consensus built on Sunday when I am hearing it for the first time on the Floor of the House.

My problem for not including Bughendera on the list of the new districts is exactly that problem. I was waiting for consensus among the stakeholders in Bundibugyo District about the creation of Bughendera District. If you are saying consensus has been built, thank God for that. I would like to have a written package of that consensus and at an appropriate time I will bring that consensus to this House.

I have already made my remarks about Tororo. 

Oyam – as I said the other day – is a new district. We are not against having a new district in Oyam. However, I think we need some tolerance to allow us study it further. 

Kasambya is something that we are also studying. This is because we have just created a municipality out of Mubende. We have just created Kasanda District out of Mubende. Therefore, we have got to re-align the equation of local governments in Mubende District.

As you rightly ruled, Mr Speaker, sub-counties – hon. Byarugaba – are not really the business of this House. This House has delegated the power to create sub-counties to the district councils and the minister. You cannot appeal to me in this House because I have an office where I sit.

If the district council has made a resolution, help them bring the resolution to the minister and the minister will approve it. There are many Members of Parliament who have done that and the ministry has obliged.

Therefore, the procedure is: let the mother sub-county accept, let the district council endorse the decision, let that decision be brought to the ministry and we assess it.Those are small things which should not bog down the time of this House.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I last time raised a constitutional provision in relation to the criteria for creation of districts. What the minister has stated in respect to Oyam does not fall within those constitutional requirements. 

Mr Speaker, I have been in this House for some time and together with the minister here, we created Kiruhura District and we have just passed a new district from Kiruhura called Kaju. However, the minister now is using an argument of not abiding by the constitutional provision that the people of Oyam have met to create a district in Oyam which contradicts his own position in creating Kaju District.

Therefore, is it procedurally right, for the minister to use different yardsticks and double standards in explaining the creation of districts and deviate from the constitutional provision which the people of Oyam District have clearly met? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is a matter for the minister; it is not purely procedural. It is directed at you to handle, honourable minister.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of criteria of creation of districts was raised by many members. A close look at Article 179(4) which is to the effect that: “Any measure for the alteration of the boundaries of or the creation of districts or administrative units shall be based on the necessity for effective administration and the need to bring services closer to the people, and it may take into account the means of communication, geographical feature, density of population, economic viability and the wishes of the people”.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, on the reading of Article 179(4), what is mandatory to be followed in the creation of districts is the issue of effective administration and the need to bring services closer to the people. 

Mr Speaker, it is on the basis of that that I am wondering whether it is not procedurally right as we had requested before that whenever the minister receives such a request, there should be a brief on the conditions for granting the district. If there was a rejection, the reason should also be clearly known; that there was no need of effective administration and the need of bringing services closer to the people. That is where the controversy has been that whereas this article provides for only those two, the other is not mandatory because it may consider other issues. 

Therefore, to avoid the controversy which has been embroiled in all through this debate, I am wondering whether from now on wards, the minister should not always show the reason why they granted or rejected a proposal so that when they have not brought, it does not become a question of individual Members of Parliament to say that his or her appeal was not considered. I would want to know whether it is not procedurally right in that dimension, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That should be something the minister should take up. Hon. Ekanya, what is the matter? Is it a procedural issue?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of Tororo has been in this House; Cabinet even approved the principle. The day we were supposed to vote, the minister withdrew waiting for us to agree four years ago. Since the other day we signed documents agreeing, the district council already approved it and the minister may need to reflect on his memory. 

All the documentations and everything are there so that in the subsequent meeting of Parliament, this matter is just brought for a resolution. It is because it does not require the district council. At the district council, it was done, Cabinet approved it and it was only waiting for us to agree. We agreed and all of us signed the document. Therefore, now the ball is back to you, honourable minister. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, finally close this matter.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable members for considering and passing the motion for the creation of new districts and for having performed your constitutional role. I commend you for that and I look forward to continue working with you in making the districts you have just passed and those that you passed before meaningful to the lives of our people.

For colleagues where we have had disagreements on the floor of this House, please, bear with me because those disagreements are normal. As time goes on, we will do our best to harmonise and my office is open to any colleague who wants the discussion to continue on the issues that have been raised on this Floor.

This is not the end of the world and it is not the end of Uganda; Uganda will continue. These districts are ours and it is only proper that the discussion continues even after here. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I have a small communication before we take the next item. I communicated earlier that you were on recess when you were called back and when this happens, normally, Parliament has to do something about the round trips to bring you back. I told you we were handling it and it is going to be handled properly. If it does not get done today, by tomorrow, it will be done. Therefore, just stay calm. I had told you about the other matters also, they are also being handled.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATION BILL, 2015

Clause 10

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 10, Chairperson. Is the member of the committee able to proceed today? I see proposals from the committee that we cannot handle this without the presence of the Chairperson. 

Honourable members, we have exactly 30 minutes. I am looking at the size of the amendment being proposed, we may not be able to finish it within the 30 minutes. We also have the matter for closing the Financial Year 2014/2015. That financial year has not been closed yet. 

We have supplementary schedules 1, 2, 3 that have come from the committee and now we need to go to the Committee of Supply to consider those so that we close them. They are in the other financial year. I do not know how to proceed because we will not be able to finish in 30 minutes. I intend to rise at exactly 6.00 p.m.

With such circumstances, we may need to stop on this clause 9 and see how to proceed later.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.34
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_).

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.35
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled: “Non-Governmental Organisations Bill, 2015” and it has been deferred for further consideration.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.35
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.: 1, 2, AND 3 OF FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these schedules were presented to Parliament and were referred to the committees on National Economy and Budget. Why don’t we move the motion substantially to the committee of supply?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the supplementary was presented and sent to the committee and the committee was to report on what took place. We have the report of the committee and the minority report as well.

These schedules No. 1, 2, and 3 are more sensitive than the NGO Bill. If we are in a hurry, we better take some time and come back to discuss it later. There are issues that we need to deal with.

If the committee is supposed to present now – this is the mini-budget, it should come and include the total presentation. If we do not have time, I would request you Mr Speaker that we get an appropriate time to discuss this budget.

They have already spent; when they come, we either approve so that they charge their accounts or it will be charged on individuals who made the mistake.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought that they need to submit and give us the framework on which we can discuss this matter. That is what we are doing now; to receive the report and see what to do with it.

I was going to ask the chairman to present in 10 minutes and the minority report in five minutes. We will then see how to proceed. The reports are the old ones that have been on the Ipads for a long time. Chairman, you have 10 minutes to present.

What I would like to ask is should we move to constitute ourselves into a Committee of Supply to receive these issues? Let the minister move the motion and then we can receive the report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, procedurally we have a report. We cannot go to the committee for supply when we have not received the report and debated it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this whole schedule is only handled by the committee for supply; it is like the budget. To receive the budget, you go into a committee for supply. However, the motion to go down to supply the figures is a subsequent motion from the big committee. That is when the Speaker will go down and begin processing and supplying the figures.

However, we now move as a committee of supply - moved by the minister so that we can receive the report on the supplementary and then we see how we can proceed from there.

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I move that Parliament do resolve itself into a committee of supply for consideration and approval of the supplementary schedules No. 1, 2, and 3 of the Financial Year 2014/2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by West Budama North, Nyabushozi, UPDF; Gen. Aronda-Nyakairima and Member for Bunya East. I think let us now just proceed with the report. Mr Chairperson, you have 10 minutes.

5.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to present the report of the Budget Committee on the supplementary schedules No. 1, 2 and 3 for the Financial Year 2014/2015. Given that I have 10 minutes only, I will not take you through the introduction and the methodology. However, I should hasten to mention that the three schedules are all presented in this report.

Part one, presents schedule one, part two presents schedule two and part three presents schedule three. They are analysed accordingly, particularly presenting the justification for the expenditure under the various votes.

I will take you straight to the schedule that summarises all these figures on page 24. It is table no.11. That table presents supplementary expenditure under schedule one for Appropriation, which amounts to 268, 372,175,702. Still under supplementary schedule No.1 we have Statutory Expenditure amounting to 578,832,585,103 which brings it to a total of - if we add the funds for appropriation and statutory, we get a total of 847,204,760,805.

Under supplementary schedule No.2, the total for appropriation is 137,010,534,014. The amount for Statutory Expenditure is 10,000,000,000 which yield a total of 147,010,534,014.

Schedule no.3; total for appropriation is 128,138,590,874. There is no Statutory Expenditure under schedule no.3. That total therefore, still remains 128,138,590,874. 

When we add the three schedules, we have a total for appropriation amounting to 533,521,300,590 and the amount for Statutory Expenditure is 588,832,585,103. The total involving the amount for appropriation and Statutory Expenditure is 1,122,353,885,693. 

In terms of percentages to the grand total - the amount for appropriation yields a percentage of 3.37 percent which is slightly higher than the 3 percent shilling set by section 12 of the Budget Act; statutory is 3.72 percent.

All this money has been sourced from what we have presented in table no.12 on page 25; contingency and savings in the budget amounts to Shs 740,382,023,362. There is external financing amounting to 31,049,380,900.

The third is appropriation in aid amounting to 5,027,000,000 and finally re-allocations within the budget amounting to 345,895,481,431 which is a total of 1,122,353,885,693.

Mr Speaker, the committee makes the following observations on page 26.

The committee noted with concern the continued funding of Ministry of Defense through supplementary expenditure in almost all supplementary requests. This practice is both a result of underfunding and inability to predict some of the emergency classified expenditure. The Government should critically examine the budget of this ministry with the view to making it more efficient and effective.

The committee noted the declining impact of Uganda Development Organization to the cotton industry. As farmers still struggle on their own with very minimum support from the organization; the committee commends the move towards prize stabilization as it is a step in the right direction.

The committee recommends that the scope of this intervention be widened to cover other important crops that suffer seasonal prize instability such as maize and beans and that a proper institution arrangement is established to strengthen accountability and greater effectiveness.

The committee noted that some court awards were being paid directly by the treasury through vote 130 instead of the known procedure which is through the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs explained that this was due to court awards with Order of Mandamus that compelled the secretary to treasury to pay directly and immediately or get arrested.

These cases arise due to insufficient funds allocated to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for clearance of court awards as they fall due. According to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the accumulated current actual liability now stands Shs 376.4 billion while the contingent liability is at Shs 4 trillion.

The committee noted with concern the continued payment for arbitration in the cases of Tullow and Heritage. It was however, noted that the arbitration was going on well and the Ministry was doing well saving Government some cases. 

The committee noted that since 2011, 2014 and 2015, the Ministry had received and expended Shs 30.3 billion with key expenditure items being; legal fees for external legal counsel, arbitral tribunal fees, Per Diem, travel costs, witness fees and administrative costs.

The committee noted with appreciation the arbitral award of $4 million in cost and settlement of a dispute in favor of Government of Uganda against Heritage Oil and Gas Limited. The committee further noted the outstanding bill to external legal counsel in respect of the Tullow arbitration cases of $803,926.5. The amount was not budgeted for as it is manifested after completion of the budget process for 2015/2016.

The committee notes with concern the worsening trend in supplementary statutory expenditure in the three schedules totaling to Shs 588 billion or 52 percent of the total Supplementary Expenditure of Shs 1.122 trillion in the financial year 2014/2015. Article 155(4) stipulates the process for the approval of estimates of statutory revenue and expenditure by Government.

Article 154 states that: “No monies shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except -” the withdrawal has been approved by the Auditor – General and in the manner prescribed by Parliament. The practice has been to secure approval of Parliament for statutory expenditure during the course of the budget process. The Constitution does not clearly specify any provisions for supplementary statutory expenditure and the Ministry of Finance does not appear to have an explicit mandate of authorizing supplementary expenditure in the manner like they have been doing.

The committee is of the view that the Speaker of Parliament provides guidance on how Government should access money intended for future supplementary statutory expenditure from the consolidated fund.

The committee was informed that the provision for pension and gratuity of Shs 131 billion could not be budgeted for during the normal budgeting and appropriations due to the problems which were going on in the Ministry of Public Service. The new policy is to decentralise payments of pension and gratuity to make individual accounting officers directly responsible for the actions relating to their votes.

The supplementary request was, therefore, to provide for the funds under the decentralised votes as detailed in supplementary schedule 1.

Observation No.7, the committee was concerned about the huge cost of maintaining and sustaining the UPDF operation in South Sudan. Members were informed that according to the agreement Uganda entered into with South Sudan, the host country was to provide fuel for operations and medical expenses to the UPDF personnel. The other requirements were to be met by the Government of Uganda. 

The committee established that, despite the agreement, Government of Uganda was meeting all the costs of the operations, including those highlighted in the agreement.
For example, in supplementary schedule 2, fuel amounting to Uganda Shs 1.2 billion and medical expenses amounting to Shs 2 billion was incurred by the Government of Uganda.

Observation No.8, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries received a supplementary funding of Shs 12.3 billion to pay for liabilities relating to the construction of five valley dams. The committee established that the initial cost of the contract for the construction of these dams was Shs 3.3 billion and the work was undertaken by SPENCON as the contractor for the project.

The committee noted that the increase in the contract sum was due to time extension and interest due to non-payment of the contractor.

The committee noted with concern the huge difference between the actual contract sum and the supplementary expenditure.

Observation No.9, the committee established that the bulk of supplementary expenditure in the third schedule was mainly for payment of electricity arrears due to Umeme, amounting to Uganda Shs 60 billion or 47 per cent of the total expenditure in the schedule.

These accrued from the office of the Prime Minister, the Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prisons Services and Mulago Hospital complex. These institutions were about to be switched off and the government had to intervene to avoid a potential catastrophe. 

The committee learnt that previous arrangements of settling accumulated arrears through the escrow account in Bank of Uganda will not be possible as the account had been depleted.

The committee observes that this expenditure should have been foreseen and budgeted for in the normal course of budgeting. 

Observation No.10, regarding vote 130, the committee scrutinised details of court cases paid out and noted a total claim of Uganda Shs 78,144,841,000 and not Shs 80 billion as earlier reported in the schedule.

There was also Shs 10.3 billion paid to donors as a result of accounting officers failing to provide adequate accountability; so, the government was called upon to make good.

The committee recommends a special audit by the Auditor-General on this expenditure item with a view to recovering the money. For the time being, this Shs 10.3 billion will be excluded from the Appropriations Bill. The total amount to be included in the Appropriations Bill under vote 130 shall accordingly reduce from Shs 403.148 billion to Shs 390.993 billion.

Observation No.11, the committee noted that the supplementary expenditure was mainly financed from contingency and savings in the budget accounting for 63 per cent of the funds expended into supplementary in the financial year 2014/2015.

While reallocations within the budget accounted for 31 per cent. The committee was concerned about the lack of evidence of agreement on the reallocation of funds from one vote to another and proposes that in future, such reallocations should not be done without prior consultations with the affected votes.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should address the problem of perpetual underfunding in the Ministry of Defence, to minimise the problem of the recurring request for supplementaries. The issue of budget efficiency and effectiveness of this ministry should be critically examined.

Recommendation No.2, the committee recommends that Government prioritises clearance of outstanding court awards and other domestic arrears. 

The committee recommends that that Ministry of Finance in collaboration with the Attorney-General, present to the House within one month a costed plan for clearing all outstanding court awards for incorporation in the Medium Term Expenditure Framework.

Further, the committee calls upon the government to bolster the capacity of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, in the handling of court cases with the appropriate recruitment of personnel and their remuneration.

Recommendation No.3, the committee recommends that Government hastens the policy to make individual accounting officers, responsible for costs associated with the cases under their jurisdiction, as a measure to minimise the worsening state of debt obligations associated with court claims.

Recommendation No.4, the committee scrutinised details of courts cases paid out and noted the total claim of Shs 78,144,841,000 and not Shs 80 billion as reported in schedule 1.

There was also Shs 10.3 billion paid to donors, as a result of accounting officers failing to provide adequate accountability. And for the time being, the committee recommends that Shs 10.3 billion be excluded from the Appropriations Bill.

The committee in observation No.5 recommends that the total amount to be included in the Appropriations Bill, under vote 130 should reduce from Shs 403,148,000,000 to Shs 390,993,000,000. 

The committee further recommends a special audit by the Auditor-General, on Uganda Shs 10.3 billion refunded to donors as a result of ineligible expenses under this vote. The persons responsible should be made to account.

Recommendation No.6, the committee takes cognisance of statutory expenditure and accordingly recommends prudent and sufficient allocation of funds to those institutions charged with responsibilities of dispensing, not only justice but also for the prudent management of society.

The committee further calls upon the responsible accounting officers of the affected votes to have cordial pre-budget meetings with all the key stakeholders.

Recommendation No.7, the committee recommends that the Speaker of Parliament provides guidance on how Government should access money intended for future supplementary statutory expenditure from the Consolidated Fund.

Recommendation No.8, the committee finds the payment by Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries of Shs 12.3 billion as liabilities for the construction of five valley dams as outrageous and recommends that the Auditor-General conducts further investigation into this payment and advise Parliament on the course of action.

Recommendation No.9, the total amount that required appropriation in schedule 1, 2 and 3 amounts to Shs 533.521 billion and this translates into 3.37 per cent of the total approved budget for the Financial Year 2014/2015.

The committee is proposing to offset this figure by Shs 12.3 billion allocated to Ministry of Agriculture, giving a total for appropriation of Shs 521.208 billion or 3.29 per cent of the overall total budget. This figure exceeds the allowable threshold of 3 per cent by 0.29 percentage points, which comes as a result of the third schedule expenditure.

The third schedule was largely about payment of Umeme arrears which the committee observes was an emergency. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that a sum of Shs 521.221 billion, be approved by the august House as supplementary expenditure for the Financial Year 2014/2015. The details are in Table 13 below.

The total supplementary statutory provisions in the schedules amounts to Shs 588.803 billion. The committee on scrutiny of the expenditure found out that Shs 1.855 billion was not paid as part of court awards with order of mandamus in the provision of Shs 10.337 billion was not agreeable to the committee for being ineligible expenditure. Thus the committee offset the two items leading to the new statutory provision of Shs 576.64 billion, which it recommends for approval.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker, I beg the House to adopt this report and approve the supplementary expenditure as reflected in table 13 below for the Financial Year 2014/2015. This table 13 presents supplementary expenditure broken down by votes, institution, recurrent and development expenditure and the total. In effect, it constitutes the figures that we recommend to be supplied.

I will not be going through those details; I think they will be read out at the appropriate time of supplying these figures by vote. What I may mention once again, is that the sub total for appropriation is as follows; recurrent Shs 360,554,529,737 and the total for appropriation under development expenditure is Shs 154, 654,600,030 and the overall total is Shs 521,207,123,293. That is the total figure for appropriation.

While the figure for statutory expenditure approval is for recurrent Shs 576,635,301,875 and the figure for development expenditure is not there. Therefore, the overall figure for statutory expenditure remains the same, which is Shs 576,635, 301,875 and these give us a grand total expenditure including statutory of Shs 1,097,843,225,168 which we present for approval.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. I beg to mention that we have a minority report on the three supplementary schedules by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I thank you very much.

Allow me to lay on Table the reports of the budget committee on the supplementary schedules 1, 2 and 3 for the Financial Year 2014/2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full take of the report. There is a minority report; this would be the proper time for the honourable member to present it.

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have heard the chairperson laying the report. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that he also lays the minutes of the committee meetings?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the minutes of the various committee meetings of the budget committee. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let he records capture the minutes of the committee meetings.

6.07
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I have always said, this report is presented in good faith to refocus the attention of the Ministry of Finance to adhere to relevant laws pertaining to public finance.

Article 156 (2) (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for supplementary estimates to be laid before Parliament for any monies expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated. On this basis, supplementary schedule 1, 2 and 3 were referred to the Committee on Budget. I appreciate that the committee did adopt my submissions on holding officials responsible for inefficiencies in construction of valley dams and management of donor funds; very serious issues, which were going to be ignored by the main committee. 

However, some were not adopted hence my dissenting opinion. Mr Speaker, areas for my dissent base on rule 194(1) and (2) the following;
    1. Misleading total appropriated budget based calculations, noncompliance with Speaker’s ruling, absence of reallocation consultation evidence, non-compliance with status of forces agreement in Southern Sudan, payment of external debt and interest on bonds, treasury bills and loans, untimely payment of court awards, payment of pension and gratuity depleted as escrow accounts, facilitation of resident district commissioners, outstanding obligation of AGOA, rebuilding of Uganda’s image in US congressional caucus and continuous abuse of classified expenditure and also the Cotton Development Authority and the committee’s failure to deduct the figures identified as errors from the total amounts presented to the House this afternoon.

Mr Speaker, section 12(1) of the Budget Act, which has been retained intact in the new Act stipulates that the total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed three per cent of the total approved budget of that Financial Year without prior approval of Parliament. The approved budget is the public funds authorised for public expenditure from the Consolidated Fund by an Appropriations Bill of any given financial year.

It is imperative to note that the Appropriations Bill or Act does not contain statutory expenditure. For purposes of emphasis, the Appropriations Act excludes statutory expenditure. I have before me the Appropriation Act, 2014 fully signed by His Excellence the President and the figures there approved as appropriated is Shs 13,207,304,930,000. That is the factual situation as contained in the Appropriations Act.

Mr Speaker, on this basis, therefore, it is totally misleading for the majority of the committee to report to this Parliament that the supplementary expenditure has been calculated on the basis of Shs 15.8 trillion, which is a sum total of both appropriation and statutory expenditure against the law. However, this can only be tenable if the law is amended, which up to now has not yet been done.

The table contains summary of the supplementary expenditure on page 4 and I would like the Members to go through. You will see on table 1, that the recurrent is Shs 6 trillion, development is 7 trillion and appropriation total is 13, 203, 000,000,000. On that basis, the main report whether erroneously or for a particular purpose, which I have not yet identified included Shs 2.6 trillion, which is statutory giving a grand total of Shs 15 trillion.
 
More still, even if Parliament were to accept the stipulated calculations that sought to accommodate supplementary expenditures scheduled 1, 2 and 3 within the statutory 3 per cent as indicated in the main committee report, still it exceeded three per cent by 0.37. Even based on the wrong figure, it still exceeded and it is not deducted from the figures calculated, which is dishonesty on the part of the main committee.

The committee only recommends rejection of only Shs 24.472 billion including ineligible expense of Shs 10.3 billion. Valley dams expenditure of Shs 12.3 billion and order of mandamus unutilised fund of Shs 1.8 billion of the excess of Shs 58.8 billion. Why does the main committee report still recommend approval of Shs 34.078 billion if their argument is supposed to be accepted by this House?

Paragraph 3.2, non-compliance with the Speaker’s ruling this is a matter I have repeated to the House every time the budget report is presented, when the Speaker sits down and goes through the rules, Constitution and law and guides the House and we continue to abuse the guidance of the Speaker, Mr Speaker, it is only you who can judge the behaviour and activities of the Ministry of Finance. I only pray that the committee should not have complied with that error.

Paragraph 3.3, is the absence of re-allocation and consultation evidence. Section 12(3) of the Budget Act, which we have retained requires that prior to any reallocation of funds, consultation with the affected ministries, departments or agencies shall be under taken. This means it is mandatory, therefore, that the evidence must be provided to accompany the request. Mr Speaker, supplementary 1, which represents Shs 142 billion and supplementary 2, which represents an additional amount is not accompanied by the evidence so required by law.

Therefore, the House should not approve reallocated funds in the supplementary schedule 1 and 2 amounting to a total of Shs 217,757,184,146. Its approval as recommended by the main report would tantamount to unlawfulness, which will damage the image of this institution.

Paragraph 3.4, non-compliance with the status of forces agreements: Mr Speaker, I would not like to dwell at length at this but it is very clear that there is an agreement, which I have attached to the report, which clearly states that the host Government would take charge of the fuel and medical costs. However, in this supplementary, the fuel and medical costs is again included which now tantamount to duplication of payment. If the host country had failed to pay, evidence should have been provided and that would have been a matter between two countries but it should not involve this House.

Paragraph 5, Payment of external debt and interest on bonds treasury bills and loans - On the 29 May 2015, Bank of Uganda was capitalised by Shs 860 billion through a resolution of Parliament to handle monetary operations that include external debt. Mr Speaker, I moved that motion - bonds and treasury bills and loans. Nonetheless, capitalisation of Bank of Uganda for monetary security requires a resolution of Parliament under section 14(2) of the Bank of Uganda Act.

The request by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under Schedule 1 for Vote 130 Treasury Operations relating to external debts and interests on bonds, treasury bills and loans should be requested for through resolution of Parliament. The ministry failed to convince the committee that the Shs 323 billion was not catered for within the Shs 860 billion that was approved by Parliament by resolution.

Mr Speaker, untimely payment of court award, mandamus is an order issued by court against a tribunal, a public body or official requiring it to perform a duty that it has failed to perform. On this basis, the following should be noted;

First, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development failed to present to the committee the dates when the first claim of court orders were made and we had made a request as a committee. The various respondents of Government failed to pay court awards in time after repeated requests by applicants and the cases translated into orders or mandamus arising from known court awards and could have been budgeted for. 

For instance, in the case of Kakyomya farm & Anor vs Attorney-General and Treasury Officer of accounts, demands for payments were made first on the 17 May 2010 and the second demand was made on 12 January 2012. There is a procedure of seeking issuance of mandamus; first the respondent of Government should have failed to satisfy payment of court awards.

Second, the applicant made a notice of motion seeking orders or mandamus in court. These were not presented to the committee as evidence. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was not able to present the order of mandamus to the committee to verify these claims. Court orders are budgeted for through the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Legal officers are in a position to track court orders and include them and capture them in the Budget – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you intend to read the whole report?

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, since this is a known matter, let me skip to another matter. The main report was read in full. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I know we are time-pressed but courts awards are the most lucrative business in the Government of Uganda. I would like to suggest that – at least only court awards because – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this document is on the iPads; we cannot again read the whole text of what we already have on the record. I was urging the honourable member to give us the highlights of the minority report because we have them already.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I agree with you, Mr Speaker. But the only reason I am raising it is because we need – you see the Hansard is not read by the public; you have heard about “mandamus”; if we show you the list of those who get mandamus and are cleared while the rest suffer. Secondly, these court orders are just the day of day. As a member of Budadiri West, I would request that at least we deal with – let the member read the orders; people are listening in – then the others we can skip.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, my order still remains; please, summarise the report.

MS OGWAL: Yes, Mr Speaker, I will oblige. To summarise the report, it is important to note that the funds amounting to Shs 78 billion spent on mandamus orders be deleted from the total figure.

Payment of Pension - I am sure you have read that. I do not want to repeat it.

Depletion of escrow accounts is important. The escrow account is depleted only if the amount budgeted for is completely exhausted – that is when the Escrow Account can be presented as depleted but in this case, the committee requested for the Minister of Finance to give us a print-out so that we see how the Escrow Account was depleted. That evidence was not presented to us, which means there could have been something that was hidden from the committee.

Facilitation of Resident District Commissioners

Mr Speaker, the main report has rightly acknowledged that this should have been budgeted for because it is an administrative expenditure of monitoring and does not need to come in the supplementary budget.

Outstanding Obligation of AGOA

Mr Speaker, maybe, before I go to that, my proposal in this minority report is that there were other issues that were brought to the attention of the committee, which included the spread of the animal diseases in Nakasongola, which required vaccination, which, if that Shs 2.5 billion, being used for monitoring by the RDCs was used for vaccination, it would save the animal population in Nakasongola because the disease is now spreading up to Teso and even the western region. We could have saved the animal lives in that region by spending that Shs 2.5 billion
	
On the issue of AGOA, the committee visited the AGOA office and found that there is a private company called Fine Spinners (U) Ltd, which has occupied the premises of the previous owner – the story of which you know; it is a long story.

So, this minority report is asking this House to clarify whether this Parliament can continue to finance private businesses or can we be assured that this Fine Spinners (U) Ltd is a parastatal organisation, which Government is supposed to fund through the budgetary line.

These are issues I am trying to raise through, Mr Speaker.

Rebuilding Uganda Image

Mr Speaker, I would like to emphasise this to the people of Uganda: For the Government of Uganda to spend Shs 614 million of taxpayers’ money to say, “sorry” to the US Congress for having passed the Anti-Homosexuality Bill, is an insult to the people of Uganda. And therefore, I am surprised that this has come up on the supplementary budget yet there is no evidence to prove that such expenditure was made and to whom. For example, where was the seminar held; who were the Congressmen who attended. Where did the government of Uganda spend their hotel bills? We need evidence and reasons why we should apologise for having passed that Bill.

Cotton Sector

Shs 10 billion is being requested for purchase of 2,000 metric tonnes of cotton in order to ensure adequate supply and stability of cotton prices. Mr Speaker, this is a joke, particularly to the people who come from the cotton-growing areas. I have just had a chat with the Minister of Defence, hon. Kiyonga, who comes from Kasese, which is also a cotton-growing area. He does agree with me that cotton production has drastically reduced. And yet, every year we are budgeting for the cotton sector. And we are not only budgeting for the cotton sector, the Cotton Development Authority is getting funding through tax levy and getting funding by taxing farmers – what they call “cotton seed levy”. And this levy is known to be an illegal tax, which has been discussed by this Parliament every year. But the poor farmers have continued to be charged that cotton seed levy.

Mr Speaker, I would wish the committee to take note of the main report when it says that the cotton industry is declining steadily despite the intervention made by Government.

Above all, for us who are Members of Parliament, we have been told that cotton seeds for farmers are given free but cotton farmer’s all-over Uganda buy cotton seeds for Shs 3,000 per kilogramme. So, we want to know what happens to the money that the government budgets for buying cotton seeds. These are issues, Mr Speaker that I am trying to raise.

Allocation, therefore, cannot be approved, Mr Speaker. And there is some data which you can read for yourself on page 11, which confirms what I am talking about and you can see whether it is justifiable for this country to spend Shs 10 billion in addition to other billions that we have already given to the sector.

Continuous abuse of classified expenditure – this is known. We are all aware and I believe that the relevant committees will take note and follow it up but I want to summarise by recommending that the main report should have done this Parliament a favour that after acknowledging that some spending has been included in the supplementary budget erroneously or by mistake, the committee should have deducted the figure but it did not.

And I want this Parliament to take note of item No.1, which is reallocation. This definitely lacks evidence; it is against the law. It must be deducted – and that is Shs 217 billion.

You come to the medical and fuel expenditure for our operations in South Sudan. This is a duplication of payment; it is erroneous and must be deducted. Otherwise, somebody is taking money from the Treasury through the back door.

Item No.3, external debt – I am reading from page 12 – external debt interest on bonds, treasury bills and loans. I have already explained that this Parliament has already passed a resolution for the recapitalisation of the Bank of Uganda and therefore, this figure of 323 must be deducted from the total account demanded. 

Order of mandamus, Mr Speaker, you must forgive me for giving details because there are many of us who do understand but what I am trying to say is that the ministry should capture the expenditure and put it on the budget so that this Parliament is not burdened by somebody not doing their job.

On the issue of AGOA, anybody can go and inspect. The office is just left with a secretariat and this Parliament is allocating money for maintaining a secretariat office and a private company called Fine Spiners Ltd. Definitely, somebody is not doing Uganda a good job. So, this Shs 300 billion must be deducted from the total figure that the main report is requesting for.

On the Cotton Development Authority is a lie. Anybody from the cotton growing area will confirm this and so, the Shs 10 billion must be deducted. 

The Shs 614 million for building Uganda’s image because of us having passed the homosexuality Bill and yet we still want to pass that Bill – a request has been made to you, Mr Speaker, that the matter be reconsidered because the people of Uganda want that Bill passed because homosexuality is spreading in this country and damaging our young population. (Applause)

The people of Uganda are demanding that Bill should be passed. And now for us to tell the people of Uganda that we have actually spent Shs 614 million when we have no medicines in the clinics and when we have no facilities, it makes us look ridiculous in the eyes of the population of Uganda.

I am pleading with this Parliament that this figure of Shs 614 million be deducted from the total figure, which has been presented by the main report.

Therefore, what I am  begging this Parliament – I even if you want me to kneel down because I am talking the truth by the guidance of the Holy Spirit to stand in this Parliament because I swore by the Bible and I must tell this country the truth whenever I stand at this microphone. 

I beg to move that the Shs 635,464,194,276 be deducted from the amount the ministry is asking for through schedule 1,2 and 3. I beg to move. (Applause)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are the reports; the main report and minority report of the committee that have just been presented.

The issues are very involving. The first issue and point of divergence between the two reports is on the basis for calculating the 3 per cent. 

The minority says that it must be extracted from the Appropriation Act, 2014. That should be the basis on which you do your calculations to see whether the 3 per cent is excess or not but you must base yourself on the figures in the Appropriation Act.

The second area of contention is that some things should not have been included but the majority report has accepted them. The minority report is saying to a total of Shs 635.7 billion should not be included in this supplementary schedule. In other words Parliament should not allow and the people responsible should be made to account for those while we take the actual figures minus the Shs 635.7 billion. 

Those are the two issues that have brought the contention if I capture them correctly.

Honourable members, if we are able to analyse these two issues, we can move forward. But if we are not, then we suspend this matter. 

If we are able to agree on what basis - where do you calculate to say that it is 3 per cent, what figure do you take? If we agree on that, then we can move forward. There are also issues on this other one, which the honourable member is saying that some of them should have been budgeted but they are not and so they should appear at all in the supplementary estimates because the people who spent it, should be made to account for it. Have I summarised it properly? 
I will now let the chairperson first explain the issues and then we see how to conclude this matter. If we are going to debate and finalise, then we will do that but if we are not able to, we shall then see how to move from there. 

6.37
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. About the departure on the basis used in the calculations, the Budget Act section 12 (1) as clearly stated, indicates that the 3 per cent is calculated on basis of the total approved budget.

When we sit in the committee of supply, we supply both figures for appropriation and for statutory expenditure. In other words, the total approved budget comprises both appropriation and statutory expenditure and that is what the law envisages – that when you are calculating the 3 per cent, the denominator should be the total approved budget as we approve it during supply because we supply both appropriation and statutory expenditure.

So, I do not know where the problem is interpretation is because the law is very clear and she has stated here – 3 per cent of the total approved budget. It does not say 3 per cent of the total appropriated budget. (Mr Ekanya rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me have the shadow minister for Finance before I take the member for Budadiri West.

6.39
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geofrey Ekanya): I thank you. I think that this matter has bedevilled this House for some time and I am persuaded to buy the argument of the chairperson of the committee. But if we do that, then the issue of statutory expenditure also becomes very serious meaning that we have to look at the other “leg” because when we are considering the total approved budget, it includes statutory. 

The other argument now is that then we have to look at how the government can, through using the Auditor-General or whatever means draw funds for the statutory institution – does that become part of the supplementary requirement for approval? That raises an issue that may require a bit of more research as the committee says that it requires detailed analysis of the laws that we have. 

It is a very serious grey area because the total approved budget includes statutory expenditure but then with supplementary, we are looking at the Appropriations Act and we are saying that statutory should come here. So, there is a conflict. In case we are to go that way – that the 3 per cent should not include statutory expenditure, then it should not include the statutory. It is a very simple explanation. You cannot have it here and then reject it here. It must either be both when totally approved, which we include as to consider the supplementary to include statutory. That is a serious issue.

The other issue is that even if we are to look at the total here for the supplementary 7.09 and we are talking of 3 per cent, we have to less the 3 per cent from this total of supplementary and then we move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we have a supplementary on statutory?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From what the honourable member is saying, it is as if to suggest that there is also a supplementary on statutory expenditure. If it is not there, then there is no conflict and you just have to stick by what the law says and we are okay.

6.41
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, what is the total budget? You have said that the total budget statutory plus appropriation – I am yet to go that side but where does the 3 per cent go? If the 3 per cent is on the total, then also it must go in line of appropriation 3 per cent, then 3 per cent for statutory expenditure, if you have budgeted for Shs 10 billion and you discover that you need more money for statutory deduction, again, you cannot go beyond 3 percent. If you are going to interpret it like that as you as are saying, then on the appropriated you cannot go beyond 3 per cent.

You cannot get the total of the entire budget, then you go and spend 90 percent on appropriation, it cannot work.  Let me put these figures in context.

Assuming the appropriated is Shs 10 billion then statutory is Shs 5 billion, the total is Shs 15 billion and you want a supplementary. You cannot go for more than 3 percent of Shs 10 billion of the appropriated and you cannot go beyond 3 percent of the Shs 5 billion but if you decide to use Shs 15 billion then you take the 3 per cent and you take the whole of appropriation up. It is wrong, that is strictness now. 

We never appropriate statutory; we appropriate that is not statutory. In that context, even the three percent of statutory does not come here because the three percent is on the amount that was appropriated and I want to agree with hon. Cecilia Ogwal that the three percent which the committee should be considering - because what we are going to appropriate here is not statutory. We are going to appropriate the money which is not statutory and it should be on 3 percent. That is the issue I wanted to raise.

Mr Speaker, we will be making a mistake to say that the three percent is on the total and it is not spread evenly or proportionately according to what is appropriated and statutory. In that context it would require us to go back and study these figures further.

We have Shs 13 billion; what is 3 percent of Shs 13 billion, which was spent on those figures in that light. What is three percent of the Shs 2.6 billion, which is on statutory if it is beyond this, Government has erred it cannot be allowed to be charged on our accounts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the provision of the law as I am being guided says the three percent bar is on the total budget and there is only one total budget not two; and there is only one three percent referred to in the total budget. I do not see anyhow where we have the latitude to begin splitting it. I do not see it. Attorney-General -

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I have carefully listened to the contentious issues, I have heard the submissions on them and there is little disagreement if any. The main thrust is under the Budget Act, section 12. It is clear that the 3 percent is on the total budget; that means appropriated and statutory. I am listening carefully to the submission of hon. Nandala-5Mafabi. 

MS OGWAL: Order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, wait, please, let us listen. Let him conclude the presentation. We are all trying to listen here to understand what is going on.

MR RUHINDI: I am still shocked that there was supposed to be a point of order in any case because – (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let the learned Attorney-General finish what he is saying then we will talk about it.

MR RUHINDI: I thought I listened carefully even to hon. Ekanya and I heard him restating the position that the 3 percent is on the total budget, which means appropriated and statutory. It is not only appropriated.

I was still listening carefully to the submission of hon. Nandala-Mafabi - if I understood him he seemed to be saying that since we do not approve statutory, you cannot, therefore, come here for supplementary for what you do not approve. That is something I was trying to listen to but the only challenge I am trying to resolve in my mind is whether there is effective legal provision to back up that submission. That is what we may actually have to study a little bit more.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I wanted to put the facts clear. I think I had not seen the law well and the Budget Act talks about 3 percent of the total appropriated in section 12 of the Budget Act that is appropriated not approved. (Interjections)

The law is clear and it says appropriated because the President signs appropriation but we approve a total budget which includes statutory. The law is clear, I can read it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I read the law?

MR EKANYA: Yes, the Budget Act is there, section 12 says total appropriated but we approve a total budget, which includes statutory. I think we need to stick to appropriated which is three percent not approved. The law is there and clear. You can quote the law; I have quoted the law.

MR LUGOLOOBI: She actually quoted the very provision in the law section 12 in her submission.

MR EKANYA: I was persuaded to move to your side because I had read it because it had been quoted wrongly but I have looked at the law. 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I want to withdraw the order I raising against the Attorney-General because I thought the Attorney- General was going to misguide us by saying that the expenditure can come to Parliament for what we do not approve but he clarified and therefore, I have withdrawn the order I was going to raise.

But I want the Attorney-General to look at section, which I have marked for you. The supplementary is based on the appropriated budget not approved budget. It is here we have for 2014 signed by His Excellency the President, the figure is here approved - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that provision is not as clear as you want to say. This is what it says; “the total supplementary expenditure that requires  additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed 3 per cent of the total budget.” Therefore, it is not as clear as the honourable members are trying to make it look. 

The operating word that is guiding the 3 per cent is the “total budget” not the “appropriated figure”. The text of the law is very clear and the rule of interpretation says that is what should be taken unless it leads to absurdity. In this case, I do not think it does so. If there is a problem with the law, let us deal with the problem in the law. However, we cannot read the law any other way except as it is appearing. 
	
The 3 per cent is making the declaration on the “total approved budget”. It says, “shall not exceed 3 per cent of the total approved budget for the financial year without prior approval of Parliament”. Therefore, what is the approved budget? Is it the same as the appropriated budget?

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I know we are reading from the same- We should not approve anything over and above what is appropriated by Parliament and shall exceed 3 per cent-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shall not exceed 3 per cent of what?

MS OGWAL: Three per cent of the total approved budget for the financial year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Precisely.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, even if it is so – (Interjections). I am -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member’s point is that even if you are to say so, it is still excessive.

MS OGWAL: Exactly. That is what I am trying to say. Even if we are to compromise for the purpose of moving forward that what the Speaker has stated is correct, which I would like to agree with, still the total percentage comes to 3.37 by the figure, which the main report has stated. Therefore, we are still in excess of the 3 per cent. If you read page 4 of the minority report, I have presented both scenarios that even if we are to go by that figure, we are still in excess by 0.37, which must be removed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is precisely the point. Therefore, the issue of the basis of the calculation is resolved by the provision of the law. The outstanding issue is that even if it is so, it is still in excess by 0.37 per cent. Therefore, the 0.37 should be discounted and that would be it.

The second issue is that of the eight items listed in the minority report – reallocations, medical and fuel expense in South Sudan, external debt; orders of mandamus, RDCs’ facilitation, AGOA, Cotton Development Authority, building Uganda’s image in the US – the member has recommended that that should also be removed from the supplementary. 

If there is agreement on those, honourable members, let us remove these things and supply what should legitimately be supplied and we move forward. Let them sort out what the balances are so that we do not waste time on these things. If it does not fit within the law, it cannot fit. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, let us turn to page 31 and read recommendation No. 9, regarding the 3.37 per cent, the committee has recommended off-setting that figure by Shs 12.3 billion allocated to the Ministry of Agriculture. That would leave a figure of 3.29 per cent not 3.37 per cent. We have explained that this excess of 0.29 per cent is largely as a result of the schedule 3, which was largely payment to umeme because they were disconnecting Mulago Hospital and other vital institutions. 

The figure could have been envisaged in the budget but the Government did not have the money then. That is the argument we received. However, at that time umeme was disconnecting these institutions and the escrow account was empty. Therefore, they had to be forced to pay. Those are the figures in the schedule 3.
 
On that basis, we felt that that expenditure was of an emergency nature. (Interjections) We are recommending that on that basis, the 0.29 per cent should be accepted under those circumstances.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, escrow account is an account to which you go for emergency. How was it created for Umeme? That is where I want to go specifically. If after 30 days an institution has not paid money, then Umeme would pick money from the escrow account. I have seen the budgeting. Utility bills are ring-fenced. It means when the month ends, whether you have consumed the Shs 10 million budgeted for Umeme, it will be transferred to Umeme. It is up to the entity to reconcile. 

You cannot tell us about Mulago because when Mulago money goes to Umeme, it goes in case Mulago falls short and they do not pay. That is when they go to the escrow account. The manager of the escrow account is not Mulago Hospital but Ministry of Finance. Therefore, you cannot come and tell us that there was not enough money to pay utilities and that is why it had to go there. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not go into things that may not help us. The point here is can this Parliament, even by supplementary, appropriate something beyond the 3 per cent in the law? Can we?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If we cannot, do the figures and remove the excess of the 3 per cent so that we supply and go home. Whatever is beyond 3 per cent cannot work. (Applause) It is as simple as that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, there are some things on which I would like to seek your indulgence. There are also issues that the committee has raised. It is not Umeme, which is the problem. For example, under recommendation No. 4 – which hon. Cecilia Ogwal also raises – Shs 78 billion was paid for court orders and they could not submit the list to confirm.

Shs 10.3 billion was paid to donors because people could not account for money. This means Shs 10.3 billion had been stolen and the Government is very clear that it was stolen and they paid donors. If you total this, it is a lot of money. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, you can see that you cannot use an excuse of Umeme because there are so many clear facts here. For example, Shs 88.5 billion, which went out not necessarily with the approval of Parliament. This is very bad.

Secondly, if you read again the figures of classified expenditures; we have Shs 100 billion which went. As much as we do not look at it, we have been budgeting here for classified. However, this three supplementary have Shs 100 billion.

Therefore, you may talk about Umeme when money went in a wrong side. I cannot see here according to the rules on supplementary, it says “for reallocation to take place, the ministries concerned must concur.” I have looked through the report and I have not seen what the Ministry of Education and Sports said so that their money could be reallocated to another institution neither can I see what the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries. 

Therefore, Mr Chairman, I think we need to do further surgery to these documents.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is what is coming up clearly. 

Firstly, there is an excess of 0.37 beyond the 3 per cent and that adjustment cannot be done here now. The committee has to go back, interface the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and harmonise those.

Secondly, the issues that have been raised about those queries, you also need to come back clearly to guide us what this Parliament can accept and what it should not accept, to harmonise these positions so that we can move forward properly. 

The excess now can be handled under other provisions of the law because the law does not leave a vacuum. I remember a similar situation arose last financial year and we took what we could and left the others to be handled under another provision of the law. That is within the law. There is no problem with this. Honourable minister, do you want to say something?

7.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with you that the issues raised by the minority report and some issues in the majority report need more harmonisation. They require the Ministry of Finance to come and give more clarification to the committee. Therefore, making a decision now would put us in a very difficult situation. I beg that if you allow, we can again go -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I can tell you the decision that this Parliament will make. It will only supply appropriation to the extent that it does not exceed 3 per cent. That is what the law tells us to do. Anything that is beyond 3 per cent, we will not be able to supply. It will be handled under other provisions of the law.

We can only supply within 3 per cent. That is what the law says. We will not be inventing a new situation when the law is not yet amended.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, on procedure, we did summon the Ministry of Finance and we went through all the issues that we have raised. First of all, the issue of escrow account, which is very obvious; we asked them to provide us a printout from the account and they failed to do that. 

Even if you call the ministry, I do not know whether they will come up with the printout of the account and all these other issues that we raised. Much as we can engage the Minister of Finance, the chairperson of the committee knows that we called and pleaded with them and they failed to comply. 

Much as the minister has asked, I do not know whether they will be able to comply. As far as I am concerned, that is what we did. I personally tried to plead using some lobby approach but I failed. Therefore, I wish you all the best, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: After today, I am sure they will heed the call because they know exactly what will happen in this House. 

MR JACOB OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I am an ex-officio member of the Committee on Budget and what the Opposition Chief Whip is saying, we had deliberate efforts through the chairman who is now being engaged by the State Minister of Planning-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have some order. It is going back to the committee anyway. Therefore, the intelligent people should go to the committee and advise the committee on how we should proceed with this matter.

MR OBOTH: You have guided so well and this would be one of the best decisions this House could take. 

These same matters were raised. There was going to be no need for the minority report. I was in that meeting. Hon. Lugoloobi, the chairperson, made an attempt. We prevailed over him to call right there the Ministry of Finance. We could give him an opportunity to report back on what he got the other time. Maybe, there would be no need even to adjourn that the minister will have any other- 

This House has the mandate to make surgery according to the law and if that surgery is hurting the other side, you should know you cannot go through a surgical process without pain. (Laughter)

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, let me thank the chairman of the committee and hon. Ogwal for the minority report. 
	
Mr Speaker, I also would like to thank you for the wise advice you have given and I appeal to my colleagues that let us allow Government to go back. We shall come back here for the 3 per cent acceptable supplementary budget, which is within the law and we shall also come back on the other 0.37 per cent as an another explanation.I would appeal that you allow us to go back and come here with the acceptable figures within the law and then we shall also give an explanation on the other figure, which is above the law. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairperson of the committee, this matter is referred back to you as a committee. Handle it with the ministry, harmonise those figures and come back with the figures so that we can appropriate by supplementary supplication. The rest, we shall also see how to handle it within the provision of the law.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we have raised some more issues in the report. There are many issues the committee has also raised in both the minority and the majority reports. If you allow the Ministry of Finance to go and answer only that, they will answer. However, you can see there are issues like what hon. Ogwal has raised of the escrow account, on which they had asked for information and it was not provided.

For us to process this faster, all the issues in both the majority and minority reports should be dealt with at the ministry and committee levels so that we harmonise the figures in addition to what they have raised. When they come here, we are able to take an informed decision. If you say only figures which hon. Byandala –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: I would like to give you information because this information which is contained in this minority report was presented to the committee and to the chairperson. Indeed, as hon. Oboth, who is a member of the committee said, we did implore the chairperson to engage the ministry on these issues. We all agreed. If your read from the main report, they have agreed on reallocation and medicals - all these things, but they did not deduct from the total amount. What we would have been left with which will not even require adjournment, is just deduction of the 0.37 per cent. However, they did not even deduct this. What do we go there to see and do? We have talked to them and some of the Members here. We are stressed and we do not know what else to do. I therefore, think we are just jamming this country – (Interruption)

MR NANDAL-MAFABI: Thank you very much for the information. I heard hon. Oboth talking and when you hear something from hon. Oboth to the contrary, you know it was a serious problem.

If the chairperson who is supposed to represent the interest of Parliament goes back – I heard him trying to defend a figure; a percentage, which is against a law and yet you are our chairperson. In, you are telling us that as Parliament, we should assist you to break the law.  (Interruption) 

MR LUGOOLOBI: Mr Speaker, the figures or the report I have presented is a report of the committee. It is not my personal report.  Is it in order for the honourable Member for Budadiri County West to insinuate that the figures that the figures I am presenting are my personal figures? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not in the dispatch box as a Member for Ntenjeru North. You are there as Chairman of the Committee on Budget. Therefore, all references to your name is in that capacity. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you for the wise ruling. Next time, I would like to request my chairperson - when he gets up to – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you should also wind up so that we can go home. Honourable members, with those I think it will be proper for us – Let us stop that matter the way it is and then, we see how to come back to this and we can conclude. We close the last financial year so that we can make progress with the rest of the things. There is a document, which I will allow the honourable member to state what it is and the lay it. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE ALTERNATIVE BUDGET TO THE BUDGET OF THE FY 2015/2016; THE ALTERNATIVE BUDGET OF THE OPPOSITION FOR ACHIEVEMENT OF SOCIAL, ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION, EMPLOYMENT AND UNBIASED REGIONAL GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT IN UGANDA

7.14
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geofrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In compliance with the Constitution, I beg to – due to the changes in the Public Finance Management Act and the political calendar, that you allow me lay the alternative budget to the budget of 2015/2016; the alternative budget of the Opposition for achievement of social, economic transformation, employment and unbiased regional growth and development in Uganda, presented by Geoffrey Ekanya, Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to request that at an appropriate time, you will allow me to read the budget.  According to our rules, the practice has always been that I read if the House and calendar permit.

Lastly, I would like to request the Minister of Finance that section 11 of the Public Finance and Management Act requires the Minister to issue a cash flow expenditure after the approval of the budget but to this date, the Minister of Finance has not done that as the accountable officer and that is why we have to write to the pension and salary throughout the country. I beg the Minister to comply with this section of the law. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the points have been noted and I thank you for coming to heed the call from Parliament to come and make some decisions. I think we have not done badly. The loans that were required for negotiation that are taking place this same month have been given our approval.

The people who are going to negotiate can ahead with the negotiations with resolution of Parliament. That is very positive and I thank you all for making it possible for it to happen. The rest of the decisions which we have taken of course, are in the public interest. I congratulate you. This House will now be adjourned again sine die until we are called back. Thank you. 

(House rose at 7.16 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 

