Friday, 9 September 2005

Parliament met at 10.53 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back to the last sitting of this week. I will alter the Order Paper to make provision for consideration of a loan guarantee to Phenix Logistics. That is the alteration I have. Otherwise, we did receive yesterday the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. We can now consider it briefly. The debate is open.  

10.56
MR FRED RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this report and to commend the work of the committee, particularly the acting chairman who has ably done a good job by fitting in the shoes of the incumbent chairperson. I have about three observations to make. The first relates to the layout of the institutions involved in the justice, law and order sector under the Sector Wide Approach.  

I wish to submit that the justice, law and order sector is a very useful tool in the administration of justice but hitherto this has been operated under an administrative framework. I have a feeling that it is not properly put in terms of its binding nature. We need to strengthen the mandate by evolving a legal regulatory framework for the justice, law and order sector, and even other sectors through which this arrangement is implemented.  

Two relates to the revised laws of Uganda, which are –(Interruption)

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought the point hon. Ruhindi was making is very fundamental. I think it would help in terms of follow up if you could put a little more muscle on this justice, law and order sector. How can we strengthen this sector through a stronger legal framework? What do you have in mind?

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, National Political Commissar. Over the past few days I was attending a workshop of the Law Reform Commissions in East and Central Africa. The acting chairman of the committee was with me. There was a very good presentation of this matter of the justice, law and order sector. I suggest that rather than wasting much time, which we do not have now, we could go and put together what we think can be beneficial in this particular area and come back to the House.

The next point I wanted to raise relates to the issue of the revised laws of Uganda. When you go to many of our work places here and upcountry, very few offices have the revised laws of Uganda. If we talk in terms of strengthening the capacity of our legal officers in court to do a good job, we must give them these tools. We talked about this some time back. I want clarification from the chairperson of the committee whether this element has been included in the budgets of the relevant ministries so that legal officers can access – not only legal officers, even administrative officers need to know the law of the land or to apply it correctly.  

There are some cases, which have been lost as a result of this lack of awareness. The substance may be the same but you may find some differences like in sections; you may quote a wrong section of an enactment and lose a case, and yet this set of laws costs only Shs 2 million. There are also some laws coming out, which have been revised up to 2004; those also need to be accessed and these people should be well equipped.  

Finally, I want to amend - if you look at page 24 of the committee report under 3.10.2, item 4, relating to the Constituency Development Fund (CDF) - if I may borrow a leaf from an area I am aware of, that is Kenya. In Kenya I have interacted with Members of Parliament. I represented your office, Madam Speaker, at a retreat of Members of Parliament of Kenya relating to their House’s procedures. 

During my interaction I found out that their CDF is doing wonders in Kenya, actually their CDF is five percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The only difference is that through a chain of developments they now have an enabling legislation, which caters for the CDF; but everything must have a beginning. You cannot begin at the end. There must be a beginning and I have no reason to depart from what the committee has proposed, except to put it in a better way so that it may be well received and accommodated.  

Therefore, I wish to move this amendment that it should read: “The Constituency Development Fund of Shs 2.95 billion that has been earmarked for Members of Parliament should be released to members on clear instruction as a pilot project pending its regularization through formulation of appropriate guidelines or enactment of an enabling legislation.” That will be more accommodative and better applicable. With those few remarks Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, do you have any objection?

MR AHABWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Ruhindi. I request that you possibly write it down for us so that we appropriately note it and look at it just now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have no objection in substance, do you? You have not objected. Do you just want the formulation?

MR RUHINDI: Okay, I will write it, Madam Speaker, and pass it to him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can write it and send it down.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

11.03
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. I also join my previous colleague in thanking the committee for a good report. There are two items I would like to raise. 

I think I would not be selfish if I started with the Parliamentary Commission budget. I have repeatedly rejected the idea of the Ministry of Finance treating Parliament as a mere ministry. We are the third organ of the state in terms of independence, operations and even the future or the vision of the state. From time to time when we pass our budget here the Minister of Finance tends to encroach on what has been passed here on the basis of this business of the resource envelope. 

Our independence is guaranteed in the Constitution, equally so our budget. Our budget has to be protected that once it has been passed by Parliament no other party shall temper with it. So, Madam Speaker, when government comes here with their proposals on how to raise revenue and then we compare revenue and expenditure then we approve in whatever terms they have presented; they should respect us. I do not see why we should be crying –(Interruption)

MR KAYONGO: That issue came up during the debate in the committee and we raised it with the Minister of Finance. The representative of the Minister of Finance said - because there were so many queries - he said, “Parliament makes laws and Parliament appropriates funds.  If Parliament does not want to appropriate funds for itself it should not cry.” Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honorable colleague for the information except that sometimes we are limited in the language called English in terms of understanding. I did not follow what you were saying. (Laughter)

MR KAYONGO: The onus is on Parliament to appropriate funds to the commission, which you are talking about. The idea came and we said, “Why does Parliament ask for the percentage instead of itemizing it?” Just take a percentage because this budget right now is about 1.6 of the national budget. If you take for example four percent, it is up to the commission to find how to rearrange all the activities of Parliament to fit in the four percent. Does the Executive agree to that? That is the question.

MR AWORI: Thank you my honourable colleague. Now I have comprehended. What you are saying would be a wonderful idea. So I think from next year and hopefully some of you, not me, will be back here in the Eighth Parliament, we should –(Interjection)- I am not going to stay here. I am going upstairs. (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker. Really in the Eight Parliament we should attempt to do exactly what my honorable colleague has advised that we go in for the percentage and thereafter we see how to spread out whatever has been accorded to us. 

This is the reason I am raising this particular concern. We have a problem with this building. The Sergeant-at-Arms has brought to our attention that there is a problem with the lifts. We could have the Speaker and Deputy Speaker electrocuted because of the faulty wiring situation obtaining in this facility. The money has not been approved. As for these august Chambers, to your right upstairs it is leaking terribly. Who knows, it might collapse anytime. Nothing has been done. We see in this Bill, which has been brought before us for supplementary, there is no provision for electrifying these concerns.  

Madam Speaker, for us to go on voting the old fashion way of ayes and noes; “Awori, yes or no”; when there is an electronic system, which could answer this concern, I feel disgusted. Really they should provide money for electronic equipment. We must have a scoreboard to simplify our voting system. You press yes, no and press abstention. This equipment costs less than half a million dollars. I do not see why they cannot give us this equipment. 

Accommodation: I am glad the committee has confirmed and recommended that we go outside the precincts of the august House to obtain office space for members. Indeed we look forward to an expanded august House next time round, but I do not see why honourable colleagues should keep sharing offices like school children. You want to talk to your constituency in confidence but your colleague is seated there! 

We should get additional office accommodation for honorable colleagues to consult their constituencies or to consult the research assistants. There is no provision, we have noted with concern that some of us come here not well prepared on a particular item but we need research assistance. I do not see any provision for this particular service. We need more research assistance.  

The library, Madam Speaker, is like Kings’ College Buddo Library and even the Buddo library is bigger than the Parliamentary library. Definitely, we need a bigger facility, better equipped; not only books but even the electronic information.  

Talking about accommodation, in other countries where there are limited resources they are now even providing residential accommodation for MPs who come from very far places. Some of us like to maintain certain level or certain standard of living. With my limited Shs 240,000 per day it cannot provide me with the kind of accommodation I am used to in the village. I lead a very high standard of living in the village but you bring me to Kampala and then I have to go to – I do not know how to call this other place. I do not want to say it in case some of us go to such accommodation.

I am saying, just like the Federal Government of Nigeria, they have provided two bedroom flats for Members of Parliament who come from places very far away from Abuja. Likewise for us, anybody who comes from more than 100 kilometres or 200 kilometres from Kampala should be provided with accommodation. We have these Bukoto flats and National Housing Corporation flats, which we are about to give away to some foreign government. Why can’t we acquire them? We deduct from our allowances to pay for them so that as long as I am in Kampala doing government business, I have guaranteed accommodation - I have seen some of the places where our colleagues live - so that should be taken into consideration.  

On the question of the scoreboard for voting, one time your office promised that a donor government was going to give us a scoreboard for voting. I do not know whether that should be included in the budget or should we look forward to receiving this donation from the Italian Government as one time we were told by your colleague?  

Judiciary: corruption is an important point to consider when you are looking at the Judiciary. The Judiciary should be insulated from all kinds of temptations that might interfere with their independence of mind in determining a case. The kind of salaries we are giving to judges are just incredibly poor; we are exposing them to serious temptation of favouring a particular item or a particular case. To pay the judge a miserable Shs 4 million, even if it is tax-free, is not enough. Judges should be getting more money than the miserable Shs 4 million a month.

One time I was interviewing a private practitioner in law to be appointed to the bench. I said, “Look my good friend, why are you abandoning such lucrative practice to go and sit on the bench? You are making over Shs 20 million a month in private practice but we are going to pay you not more than Shs 6 million, even if it is tax free, plus a miserable car, plus a miserable maybe driver and an escort.” He said, “Look, I have to sacrifice for the nation.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Awori, are you suggesting that all the drivers of the Judges are miserable people and their cars are also miserable?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, when I say “miserable”, I mean these people are poorly paid, these drivers and escorts. No police escort or driver for a Judge makes more than Shs 200,000 a month. This is miserable pay, which will make a miserable public servant. That is what I meant by saying “miserable”; actually I meant their terms of service are miserable. Likewise, when I talk about the miserable terms of pay –(Interruption)

MR BAMWANGA: I am seeking a clarification from hon. Awori who said that he talked to a friend of his who was leaving a lucrative business to go to the bench. All Ugandans know very well that hon. Awori one time aspired to be the President of this country when he stood for elections and he has said he is aiming for higher positions. 

I want to get clarified as to why hon. Awori, who has been aspiring to be the President, is still sticking around as a Member of Parliament with a miserable salary. Is he justified to say that the judges are miserable by serving this country when he is also here getting miserable salary instead of being a President of this country? Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you. That is a wonderful question.  Yes, I am aspiring to be a President of this country. I tried and I am still - the reason I am trying is not for cash –(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I just want to be guided as on how you are going to facilitate us to make presentations to this House? A number of colleagues have matters before this House they want to present; I am wondering whether there is a time frame that you are going to allocate to each of us to debate this morning? I am getting worried that if each of us takes as long as hon. Awori we may be here until 9.00 p.m., like yesterday. I just seek guidance.

MR AWORI: Point of order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are about to conclude on this item of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. I think we agreed that we use three minutes each. So hon. Awori, please, conclude. You have already used your three minutes.

MR AWORI: Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I withdraw my previous order after your ruling, but definitely he has no business to tell the Speaker how to run the House.  

On the Judiciary, as I said, the terms of service are miserable for these distinguished members of the bench. I can also mention that when they retire these people are subjected to a miserable life. I recall one retired Chief Justice; they took away his car and they could not even give him another car. They took away the house and he could not find another house quickly until one law firm came to his rescue.  

The bail issue: I hope people in charge of law revision will look at it. The Magistrates Court Act should be revised. I am surprised the committee did not address that particular concern. We should change the threshold of when a magistrate can give bail. We are congesting the prisons with cases, which could have been settled or given bail by magistrates at a certain level. That matter should be looked into.  

There is the question of the Human Rights Commission. It is high time we set up a human rights court to look into a number of the cases on violation of human rights. I am referring specifically to cases of domestic violence. To me they are not just criminal but also a violation of the human rights of the gender in our society. I take a case of rape and defilement. These cases of defilement and rape should be removed from the ordinary courts of law and put under human rights court so that determination can be made immediately and suspects don’t stay in prison forever. 

Last but not least, I call upon the Attorney-General to look into the terms of service of state attorneys. We have had questions and issues of state attorneys probably conniving with private attorneys so that a case can be settled out of court. I do not want to go into allegations, but it is a matter with which the Attorney-General is very familiar and he can address it. Thank you.

11.22
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I just have one clarification to seek. I have been following the presentation since yesterday and I have come to realize that in the past two financial years the line ministries in relation to Ministry of Justice and Constitution Affairs have been greatly under funded. What we call democracy has one of the key pillars: is a government able to have law and to have those laws enforced? Any society that does not have capacity to enforce law and maintain justice and peace in the society is a failed state. Probably that is why the Government like of Obote and Idi Amin failed because their capacity to maintain law and order was often questioned. 

I just have one question, which I want to be addressed by the Minister of Finance. Why don’t we give all the money this particular ministry has asked for without any cut so that the Ministry of Justice, Directorate of Public Prosecution, the Judicial Service Commission, the Law Reform Commission - we should give them 100 percent of their request and we see the kind of society Uganda would be other than cutting their budgets as if it is a joke. This thing is like NAADS, fisheries; we can tamper with it. But when it comes to justice, law and order, until you are behind bars that is when you will appreciate that these departments have to be facilitated fully.  

My chairman of the committee recommended that the budget of the Parliamentary Commission be retained as it is without any reductions. Why don’t we hold the same standard for all the other ministries? Why do you give an exception to this particular department? That is a simple clarification I am seeking. At a proper time I will move that the budget be retained the way they requested for it. Thank you.

11.29
MR JOHN KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Year in and year out I get worried to note that government does not appear to associate certain importance to those ministries or departments in the economy of this country. 

One of the departments, which is totally forgotten in this regard is the Administrator-General’s Office. Apparently nobody understands that this is an office, which is very important in the economy of this country. So, on page 2 they are talking about rent arrears and commitment for relocation of the Administrator-General and Uganda Registration Services Bureau. I do not know how many times the Administrator-General’s office has been shifted because the rent is not being paid. The Administrators-General office is so important because it handles property of Ugandans. They think their property is not important because it is for the dead. It is important to the economy and to the citizens who are entitled to it. 

The Administrator-General’s office is one of the nightmares in this country. You do not want to go there to see the kind of suffering that goes on there. The facilities are not there, the services are not there; it is not spread out in the countryside. Somebody who loses a relative when he is in Kabale has a nightmare getting the estate administered. Surely, government should put some importance in this matter. Let this office be spread out. Let it be treated with some respect. It is being shifted from place to place; its books are just scattered all over the place. When you want to go to check on records there, they cannot be found and that affects the economy of this country. So, I pray that something is done about that office.

Land tribunals, I am afraid this is something, which I think was a mistake. We established land tribunals without understanding the importance they play in the economy of this country. Now when you visit land tribunals, at least in my area, the land tribunal in my area handles five districts. So matters of the district are handled on one day in a week. The land tribunal sits at 2.00 p.m. so all people from Masaka District assemble at the land tribunal in Masaka at 2.00 p.m. on Tuesday. You find the whole place flooded with people, advocates, and the tribunal cannot handle; it is overwhelmed. Then the next day it goes to Rakai, then it goes to Sembabule, Kalangala and sometimes they do not have the facilities to get there. 

So what has happened is that land disputes are getting out of hand. Before you know what is happening in this country land is going to cause riots in this country. We may have to find a way of handling these affairs. 

I do not think the land tribunals are in a position to handle this matter. We may reconsider taking land tribunals back to the Judiciary. It appears nobody cares about who should handle land matters. It looks like everybody can handle land matters yet it is not the case.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much honourable member for giving way. Land tribunals were established really to handle land cases very fast and that is why they had been housed in the Ministry of Lands. It is this House, which shifted them to the Judiciary. So, I think we may consider removing them and bringing them back to the Ministry of Lands. I want to inform you that in Masindi district the situation is no better. They are supposed to cover three districts in three days in a week but as you noted, these people only sit for one and a-half days and they do sign for three days. Unfortunately, many times the chair is not there and when members turn up there is no quorum and the cases are piling. They are even worse than previously when they were no land tribunals.

MR OMARA ATUBO: I think land tribunals were specifically instituted because of the special status land occupies in the life of people and the special tribunals were expected to work speedily. The problem is not lack of manpower in the land tribunals. In my legal practice I also appear before these land tribunals. The problem is not so much the manpower as really the facilitation. 

Now if you say you are going to take back the land tribunals to the normal judicial structure, the Judiciary now as I speak, the ordinary chief magistrate, the ordinary magistrate, grade I, is dealing with criminal matters, is dealing with ordinary civil matters, is dealing with administration causes, is dealing with all sorts of cases. Hon. John Kawanga, my proposal on this is to continue with the special courts called land tribunals but look at their problem and address it as it is. I support the land tribunals. I want the problems to be addressed rather than to propose that the land tribunals revert to the normal judicial court.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are told that resident district commissioners are supposed to intervene in cases of land disputes but the problem is that these RDC’S are not facilitated at all and as a result land disputes are growing bigger and bigger. In fact people are pulling out pangas to cut one another. 

If you take an example of what is happening in Mpigi, almost everyday there are cases of people being evicted from their land. I do not know whether it is a deliberate way of frustrating government, but I think government must come out and take a real decision. Otherwise, the situation is becoming very explosive.

I am also wondering whether the Attorney-General can come out with a statement to make the position of the RDCs as far as land disputes are concerned clear. Has he been given the mandate to mediate, or if he has not been given, what should people do? Because this is a very urgent situation unless government comes in we are going in for real trouble. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OCHIENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I basically also want to emphasise my sister’s information. I participated a lot during the formation of these land tribunals because it was under our Committee on Natural Resources. The whole thing got messed up after finalising what was supposed to be a quasi court system for the public when it was again shifted to the Judiciary. The Judiciary seemed not to be prepared even to handle these matters. 

As I speak today we have had so many probleMs What happened is that these tribunals were made somehow more lucrative. So basically those who were vying for posts in the Judiciary under the mainstream, which we found a little bit lacking, also decided to shift to land tribunals.  

At the end of the day they are basically using what they used to do in the mainstream judiciary to follow up what is happening in the land tribunals. They have created a lot of technicalities and now the peasants are just there. When you go there the whole thing is a big problem. I have basically a lot of problems in my area because of this kind of arrangement.

MR KAWANGA: The kind of remarks that have come out illustrate the amount of confusion that is in this land administration matter. For example, some members forget why we shifted this sector from the Ministry of Lands to the Judiciary; there was a reason. There must be an appeal system; land registration is a legal matter. 

For example we were supervising the chairmen of the tribunals. In short, there should be a fresh study of this whole land administration matter otherwise we are in a very big crisis. He is talking about the RDCs coming in; they have no legal cover. In fact sometimes they help but in other cases they cause more confusion.  

After the RDC has made a ruling, you go to the district land tribunal. The ordinary person will say, “The representative of the President has spoken how can the chairman of the land tribunal now come in?” So it is this level of confusion that –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much hon. Kawanga John Baptist for giving way. I would like to know from you whether you think that the recent constitutional amendment we made to establish special corruption courts under the portfolio of the Inspectorate of Government is not going to cause the same problems; what is your view?

MR KAWANGA: My simple answer is, it appears we take decisions without having thoroughly studied them. In these very intricate matters people make moves without studying the implications of how the whole thing will finally work out and that is why we may end up with the kind of things that we are talking about. I hope things will work out, but I think the Attorney General and everybody concerned should look at these two items for the good of the economy of this country, justice, peace and good governance. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.34
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will draw your attention to page 28 of the report where there is a summary of the request made by the Ministry of Justice and others. How much has been availed to these ministries, departments and variations? I find it a little strange when you look for example at the amount of money that the Ministry of Justice had requested for. They had requested for Shs 81 billion and they are being allocated about Shs 50 billion. 

You can have a look at the shortfall. If you look throughout the whole table, it seems these ministries are not going to function. Having been one of the public officers who worked in that ministry I certainly know the problems of that ministry. So I find it very strange that this ministry and even the Judiciary Department are never accorded the types of funds that are needed to make sure that the functions of these institutions are implemented properly.

I want the Attorney-General to explain to me the following. What do we mean by “statutory”? This is something that has disturbed my mind for a long time whenever we are budgeting. I want him to be very clear on what we mean by “statutory”. When the chairperson was presenting the paper in his report he was saying this is not subject to parliamentary approval and yet when you talk of “statutory provisions” it is automatic. Take for example quota awards. I can see this year they have been granted about Shs 1.2 billion yet there are billions and billions of money, which cannot be paid and yet they are statutory.  

At the end of every year I see other ministries particularly those so-called sensitive ministries are allocated more funds in the form of supplementary and these supplementaries are not resource supplementaries. They are funds that have already been utilised in those other ministries yet those institutions, which are supposed to have access to Consolidated Fund through statutory provisions, are never allowed to actually access these funds. So, I would like the Attorney-General to explain why. Is this a constitutional matter that is supposed to help these ministries like Justice and others ministries yet you limit them? Are they not supposed to have access to these statutory provisions? Are they allowed through the so-called supplementaries?

Number three, the chairperson talked about the shortfall in salaries. This is a matter that stings and pains to find that you budget, you know you have a number of workers in a given ministry, they are 100 or 300, you do not provide salaries for these people and you say there is a shortfall. I do not understand, I thought salaries come first! You cannot come here and say there is a shortfall in salaries in a given ministry. We should really provide these funds.  

Fourthly, I also want the Attorney-General to explain to me who benefits from this Consolidated Fund without necessarily passing through Parliament. I have seen much money getting out of the Consolidated Fund without proper procedure.  

Lastly, I want your guidance, Madam Speaker.  After we have debated these reports, many committees have presented recommendations, they have recommended adjustments - I can see on the Order Paper adoption of reports - when are we going to adjust these figures as Parliament? I want your guidance here because they have made specific recommendations. 

For example, for Ministry of Defense they have made certain recommendations. In Agriculture and other sectors they have made recommendations. How are we going to handle this? Are we just going to adopt the report, we finish -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the same Order Paper you will find there is Committee of Supply. This is when we shall do that.

MR SABIITI: So we shall be allowed as Members of Parliament to propose adjustments?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have been doing that before and I know how we are going to do it. Just conclude your remarks. We are going to do it.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much.  

11.40
MR WILLIAM WOPUWA (Bubulo County East, Mbale):  Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for its report. I have one or two question to ask. On page 24, paragraph one, the issue of renting for Members of Parliament outside this place so that we occupy Udyam and Bauman House; my view is that we are the owners of this place and we have a space behind here. In fact when the President is around here you feel very inconvenienced. 

The other day I was coming to Parliament and I met a PGB person in uniform. He was asking me, “Tambuwa?”  I did not know what tambuwa means. Later on I learnt that he was asking me to identify myself so even when I am in Parliament and the President is around I am required to identify myself. So, I suggest that since the President’s Office is already using Bauman House and Udyam House, let them move so that we can be a bit more free. (Applause)

MR AWORI: Thank you my honourable colleague. From time to time I have brought it to the attention of the Minister of Foreign Affairs that one embassy, which was on Parliamentary Avenue was about to vacate their building and it was available to this government should they wish to have it. Formerly we have tried it, I do not know why the Government failed to approach the British High Commission to show interest in that property, which is very convenient for us, and could have been the right accommodation for either the Vice-President or the Police headquarters. 

Why is it that when free things come we do not grab them but we always go for expensive things? So my honourable colleagues, these people who are actually a security risk to Parliament can go elsewhere and we move there.

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, that point has been ably made. I think the message is that it is better if the President’s Office moved out so that we can be free. 

I also wanted to make an observation on -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I support my colleague hon. Wopuwa on that issue. Madam Speaker, you do realize that this renting of premises outside is going to increase costs in terms of security and yet we have a tenant who is not even paying rent? They should ask us to repair that building where the Vice-President’s office is. So, with the attitude of the Minister of Finance, we are not going to be assured of money to rent premises outside this place. The best advice is for the Vice-President and his team to move and Parliament remains in one place. It is easy to control and provide security in this place.

MR WOPUWA: Lastly, on the CDF, I support the committee’s recommendation, as amended by hon. Ruhindi. If you went through the normal financial transactions of this CDF fund here, the procurement process, by the time it becomes complete for you to have the output it will be May 2006 and many of us will not benefit from that CDF. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.44
MS SAUDA NAMAGGWA (Woman Representative, Masaka):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report but let me make one general observation. There has been a shortfall in almost all the budgets of the institutions covered. I am wondering how these institutions can carry out their planned activities. Therefore, I call upon government to work out a way of trying to save so that the institutions get their budgets.  

I feel a bit uncomfortable when you look at the institutions and find that they are all driving new cars but when you look at their budgets, the budgets that could make them carry their activities, the budgets are lacking.

Secondly, let me talk about the Parliamentary Commission. I am glad that the Chairman of the Commission is here, hon. Ben Wacha. I would have preferred to send him -(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am happy about the elevation of my status to the chairmanship of the commission, but I am actually not the chairman of the commission. The Chairman of the Commission is the Speaker of Parliament, but I am happy that you -(Laughter)

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, hon. Ben Wacha. The way you are active I think you help the Speaker so much. You deserve to be recognised that way. 

Madam Speaker, I feel a bit uncomfortable to make a comment that actually the Parliamentary Commission has been having an invisible hand in terms of its work. Hon. Awori talked about the library. Really we do not detect the presence of the commission. Since we started this Parliament we have been having old computers. You can go there and look at the computers yet if you moved to any of the offices of the commissioners you will be walking in another world. So I hope they will give us some attention so that annually the commission gives us one new computer to update our station, but we are suffering so much.  

This happens also in the dinning room. We do not know who the supervisor is. You can go there and spend an hour just waiting for the service. This shows the commission does not care about the place we get our meals from. We feel we are a little bit inconvenienced. So I hope the commission will at least help us so that when we hand over to the next Parliament there are some improvements.

Madam Speaker, I have stood up several times to say that these dishes at the front or at the entrance are really degrading our institution; the dishes where we put our keys. When you get a visitor they ask, “Should I find you where that bakuli is?”  That bakuli has degraded our standard and I hope the commission will get something better to put at the entrance so that there is something to welcome our visitors. The word “bakuli”, for me as a woman I use it in the kitchen when I am washing or cleaning my fruits, but you cannot put it at the front desk to welcome the visitors. I hope you will upgrade our standard.

This is for the Attorney-General. There has been information on the radio since yesterday calling upon students who have reached 18 years of age to go and register. I am wondering whether the Attorney-General has provided enough funds to ensure that this exercise is done properly.

Secondly, in my constituency people have started to ask about the roadmap in terms of campaigns. When are the people going to start campaigning? There is a big concern in society that probably the parties are not allowed to start their activities in time. Can the Attorney-General advise us on this because we have this question coming up all the time?  

Lastly, I just want to emphasise the voters’ register issue. The Attorney-General should ensure that he provides enough funds to have the voters’ register amended. I also request him to ensure that he uses the parish chiefs or the sub-county chief so that they fully get involved instead of leaving the work to the Electoral Commission alone who do not have good knowledge about the areas of coverage. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WACHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thought I should take this opportunity to answer what the last honourable member who took the Floor has just stated. If you look at page 25 of your report, under paragraph 3, the first paragraph will answer everything that hon. Saida Mugerwa has just stated. It says, “In the financial year 2004/2005 –(Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, I am the Woman Representative of Masaka District and my name is properly recorded in the directorate of this Parliament. I am Sauda Namaggwa Mugerwa; I am not “Saida”. I beg your pardon.

MR WACHA: I thank her for that information. The hon. Member for Masaka - I think you are going to follow - in financial year 2004/2005, Shs 2.75 billion was approved for the development budget of the commission. Out of this only Shs 1.597 billion, which was expected from donors, was not received. 

The local component was only 36 percent. Because of the 64 percent, which was not received, the commission was unable to purchase vehicles, security equipment, computer equipment, furniture and press equipment. If it were possible for the commission to access all its budgetary requirements under his development budget then everything that my honourable colleague has just stated would have been availed.  

Secondly, the issue of our building, this particular building, all the members will have noticed that in the North Wing when it rains, water goes through all the floors. We have been trying our best to get money so that we repair the North Wing; this has not been possible.  

Thirdly, the issue of trying to access money for rent is a stop-gap measure. If we do not have other rooms the next Parliament is going to be in a mess because while now we can have members sharing office accommodation per district, with a Multi-party Parliament this is not going to be possible. It is not going to be possible because under those circumstances the interests differ. If hon. Babu can share with Aggrey Awori that is their arrangement; we must take this into consideration.

The issue of the kitchen has been a big problem to the commission. We have tried to get other people to come and manage the kitchen but so far we have failed. However, this is a matter, which is going to be handled by the next commission. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe you could also update them on the Italian electronic voting system. Hon. Awori wanted to know about it.

MR WACHA: I will get more information about that later and circulate the information.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

12.07
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. May I begin by thanking the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the good job they did to analyse our policy statement and to review the operations of all institutions associated with the ministry to understand the conditions in which we work.  

I would like to thank honourable members, those who have been able, for their contribution on this sector.

I would like to thank hon. Ruhindi for proposing that we strengthen the mandate of the sector by designing a regulatory legal framework. I do not think we should take hon. Ruhindi to task because he has made this proposal. That is a good proposal, which I will go away and study and if possible build on it. If it is not possible, we will come back and report. Otherwise, I welcome the proposal.

A revised edition of the laws of Uganda is available but it is not a free good. It is available to whoever wants it at Shs 2 million. We have tried to avail it to the duty stations, which hon. Ruhindi had in mind, but we have not been able to cover the whole country. Once the resources enable us we will be able to do so. 

On the other hand, the law requires legal practitioners to have a reasonable number of books. I have not checked with the Law Council but I should imagine that a set of the laws of the country in which you have a legal practice would be among the reasonable number of books that you need.  

DR NKUUHE: I see in this statement you have trained a lot of judges and staff in information technology, but how come those books cannot be accessed on-line?  

Secondly, how come when we pass these laws, if you try to get a copy you cannot because they say it is against the law? We cannot even put a copy of our laws on our own website because they say it is against the law. I wonder, honorable minister, how that is possible. I thank you.

DR MAKUBUYA: This is a new point, which I was not aware of, that it is illegal to put the laws on the website. I will go and investigate and find out where the illegality comes from, but my understanding is that physical copies of the laws are available to whoever wants, through Uganda Publishing and Printing Corporation; and that one unfortunately is not under my ministry.  

I would like to inform hon. Awori Aggrey and this Parliament generally that we have made special considerations in the emoluments of the Judiciary. I think this needs to be recognized because amidst low pay in many places by Uganda standards, we have attempted to remunerate the Judiciary to a reasonable level. Emoluments are always under study. We will do more when the resources permit.  

I am not in position to comment exhaustively on retirement benefits but I know that we provide retirement benefits for judges and judicial officers. How it is working out in practice is what I am not in position to comment on authoritatively, but I am prepared to come back at an appropriate time with another statement on this.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Minister, for yielding the Floor. I take this opportunity to request you that while you are doing your research prior to your coming back to the august House, please look into the state of affairs surrounding the immediate past Chief Justice. You cannot treat a highly placed officer of the Judiciary in such a fashion, especially regarding his terminal benefits. Indeed take time to look into it. I do not want to get into details, otherwise I will get personal.  

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my honorable friend, hon. Awori Aggrey, for this intervention. Among other things it is this kind of consideration, which made me say that at this moment in time I am not in position to make an exhaustive statement on the retirement benefits. I agree that, God willing, I will definitely pursue the inquiry among the lines proposed by hon. Awori Aggrey.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Okumu-Ringa): Madam Speaker, matters relating to terminal benefits to public servants is a function of the Ministry of Public Service. And in respect of terminal benefits, which accrue to the former Chief Justice, he was paid his gratuity, what we call CPG. I cannot disclose the quantum but what could be done is only to come up with a new system of remuneration to retiring Chief Justices or people at a certain level. Apart from that, based on the current laws, he has been paid.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, sorry, I will be very brief this time. I have heard such statements before when people are suffering in retirement. Only a month ago the same minister came here with a miserable statement about retired Presidents and to date he has not come back to tell us what these people are entitled to. So, how can you promise me that you are coming back later to tell me about the retired Chief Justice? Is he in order to continuously mislead the august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not sure about the deception. Please, explain quickly.

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Madam Speaker, the information I have given in respect of retirement benefits for the former Chief Justice is accurate. If the House requires that it be laid on the Table, that can be done. However, again that is a private matter; the quantum and what has been paid is a private matter.  

With regard to the emoluments for former heads of state, this matter was referred to the relevant committee of Parliament. We are waiting to be summoned in order to iron out those matters and bring them back to the Floor of Parliament for decision. I thank you.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to renew my commitment that I am going to study this matter in detail and come back to Parliament. I do not think we should deal with it in a summary fashion.  

There is a proposal from hon. Aggrey Awori that we give power to magistrates or we increase their jurisdiction in granting bail. This is another matter for studying.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order in line with the dress code of an hon. Member of Parliament, specifically rule 62 on the dress code of our female Members of Parliament. Is it in order for Hon. Tiperu, a female Member of Parliament to wear a blouse and skirt? I wanted to know whether hon. Tiperu, who has just ran out, is in order to come to Parliament dressed in a manner - moreover she is the Parliamentary Imam. Is she in order, in her absence?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, being a Friday I think she is not properly dressed because she is supposed to be going to the Mosque. We have put air conditioning in this Chamber so, I would advise her to put on a jacket; otherwise she might get cold. So she is out of order.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, an honourable member was asking whether to increase the power of magistrates to grant bail requires study. We would study it as soon as possible and again if it is possible we will come back with appropriate amendments. If it is not possible we will report. 

Secondly, whether or not we need a human rights court, we need to study the current Commission on Human Rights and we see whether it is not playing an effective role in this. However, as I said these are proposals and my experience advises me that we do not have to dismiss these proposals summarily. We will take off time and resources and study them and on what is possible we will advise accordingly. 

Terms of service of state attorneys, we already have authority to work on improving the terms and conditions of service of state attorneys. My ministry is working together with the Ministry of Public Service on this matter. I commit myself to expedite this process to the extent that is within my power. 

Hon. Kawanga raised important points on the Office of the Administrator General. First, I would like to agree with hon. Kawanga that this is a very important office in the economy because it is dealing with property. It is a very important office socially because it is dealing with arrangement upon death. However powerful we maybe, whichever levels we achieve, we must always come to the burial mat. We must always submit to the burial mat and the consequences of the burial mat must be dealt with. I think it was wise to set up this office and the recommendation is that we attach more importance to this office. I would like to commit myself to attach more importance to this office. I hope you get the same commitment even from other people. 

The land tribunals and the question of land disputes and the role of the RDC whether we should take land matters back to the ordinary courts and so forth; first, I tend to agree with hon. Omara Atubo that whichever organ you assign this responsibility to will not deliver if it is not facilitated. His recommendation was, “do not return the land tribunals to ordinary courts”. He gave the reasons, with which we are all familiar. He says that we should facilitate them and this is where we should all make a commitment that we facilitate them.

Hon. Kalule Ssengo wanted me to clarify on the role of RDCs on land matters. I agree to clarify, but not today. I will come back with a comprehensive statement on this matter in this Parliament and the Committee on Government Assurances should record this under my office. I will come back as soon as possible because this is an urgent matter. Wherever you go it is mentioned so we need to clarify as government and I undertake to come here and clarify. 

Hon. Kawanga made a recommendation that a fresh study of how to deal with land disputes should be made and the proper department to handle them, in the interest of justice, peace and good governance, should be identified. Madam Speaker, who am I to disagree with this wise recommendation? I cannot disagree with it. Certainly, we will undertake it and again advise. You see, this is an important matter in our country; land is a fundamental resource to all of us. It is at the root of many problems and it is supposed to be a solution to many of our social probleMs So, I cannot dismiss this proposal, no. We are going to take it up.  

This terminology of “statutory” expenditure, which hon. Jack Sabiiti raised, I think there are experts here who can explain what “statutory” is and I will ask the Minister of Finance to assist me on that one. 

On the question of access to the Consolidated Fund and the procedures you go through to access the Consolidated Fund, again I would ask the hon. Minister of Finance to assist to clarify these matters.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the word “statutory” comes from the word “statute”, which I believe relates to law. The Attorney-General is our adviser on matters of law. I find it difficult for the Attorney-General to shift a matter, which he should explain to the House, to a minister who has nothing to do with the role of Attorney-General. I do not understand it. If anything I think the Attorney-General should be the right person to explain it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but we are dealing with the Budget. The Budget belongs to the Minister of Finance.  If he chooses to use certain terminology, it is up to him to explain to us what it is.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling. On the Electoral Commission this is hon. Sauda Mugerwa – otherwise I will have a problem -(Laughter)- I think that the Electoral Commission has a plan of action for updating the electoral register. It is not just for students but for everybody. 

I made a statement here in Parliament last week on the transition. I have nothing as of now to add to that statement but in terms of facilitation of the Electoral Commission the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has covered this matter on page 18 and 19 of their report. I have nothing to add to this coverage.

Lastly, I received a note from hon. Reagan Okumu here and it is related to resident judges.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you very much, Mr Minister, for giving way. This issue of the Electoral Commission in the report, we are informed that the Electoral Commission wants Shs 74 billion and what is being given is Shs 44 billion. We know they have to go through general elections to cover presidential, parliamentary and chairmen LC V. 

When the minister says he has nothing to add I do not know what he means exactly. I want some clarification because Shs 74 billion compared to Shs 44 billion, there is a big difference and that difference needs to be looked for if elections are to be properly organised and carried out successfully.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we shall hear from the Minister of Finance on that one.

DR MAKUBUYA:  So, Madam Speaker, as I was saying, hon. Reagan Okumu raised the issue of the Resident Judge for Gulu. I think there is one or two other areas. This is a matter, which we are working on with the Judiciary. We will have positive results in the next few weeks.

I would like to repeat that I am grateful to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for understanding these challenges, which the sector faces. 

I would like to thank honourable members who have managed to intervene and to ask for clarifications. I know I have made the commitment to come back and clarify some matters. Otherwise, I really appeal to honourable members to support the report. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Attorney-General.

12.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the honourable members and the chairperson of the committee for this report.  

There are two issues that touched the Ministry of Finance that I want to respond to. The first one is the Electoral Commission. It is true that the Electoral Commission did ask for Shs 74.895 billion to be able to carry out this work. The Minister of Finance did inform this House that he would be able to provide Shs 30 billion for that purpose. All this information is contained on page 26. Madam Speaker, the issue of funding the Electoral Commission is a continuing matter. What happened is that the Electoral Commission did present its budget here to the committee. The Minister of Finance did inform you what is affordable and the committee has looked at what these people need the money for.  

We in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would like to see that the elections are carried on but we want to ensure that they are carried out within the means that are affordable to this country. It is, therefore, the intention that we will want to study in detail these amounts of money plotted against the activities that they intend to do and ensure that the constitutional duty of the Electoral Commission to deliver an election to this country is done. To that effect, Madam Speaker, our conclusive response is that as of now we will want to seek authority to be able to give the amount of money that we can afford to this commission but continue to discuss with the commission with the view of ensuring that they carry out the election as mandated by the Constitution.  

Similarly for the Parliamentary Commission, on page 26 of the report there is also a variance of what is desirable and what is affordable and the same explanation goes that we will continue to engage the Parliamentary Commission in discussions and see how we can resolve this matter. For now it is our prayer that the process of appropriation goes forward and in the course of time because of implementation, if there is any further consensus between the two parties, they will be communicated to this House through the usual mechanism.

Madam Speaker, I was asked to say something about statutory expenditure. “Statutory expenditure” is a term that is defined in the Public Finance and Accountability Act, which is Act No. 6 of the year 2003, and it says; “Statutory expenditure means expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund by the Constitution or an Act of Parliament, including this Act, but it does not include the expenditure of monies appropriated or granted by an Appropriation Act or Supplementary Appropriation Act.” I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, some of the things we are doing now we said we would do in the Committee of Supply. Let us conclude these reports, adopt them and then go to the Committee of Supply then we can deal with the details, which you want to talk about.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, there were issues, which were raised in regard to the Parliamentary Commission: the leaking roof, the offices for Members of Parliament, and their pensions. I think we need some response and probably from the Leader of Government Business because I do not think that the commission would be in position to make any commitment since the people who dispense the money are the Executive. I am concerned as a person because I am the biggest user of lifts in this building and if the roofing is leaking and leaking into the lifts, I do not want to die in one of these lifts in this Parliament. So we need commitment on those three outstanding issues in all fairness to this Parliament, thank you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, almost in line with what my colleague has said, if you look at this report and I am going to point out page by page because the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development only picked out two issues: the Electoral Commission and Parliamentary Commission, but when you look at the issues that require the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to respond to, you will realise that right from page 4, the whole report is a lamentation. Court awards are in arrears, compensation in arrears and that has a terrible image on government. When government is defeated in a court of law, it should be the first institution to show and the rest to follow.  

If you look at page 8, you will find land tribunals have been inadequately funded and it was noted that blur, blur, and there is a gap of Shs 1.2 billion and if you continue in this report you come to page 11, additional funding is required, that thing is indicated or no response is mentioned and if you continue in this report again, still on page 11, you find that the conference will cost this much, there is, therefore, a critical financing gap of Shs 190 million and you can go down every page there is an unexplained funding.  

So, I want the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to really respond to this if we pass this in – if you go further you find that the human rights tribunals, out of Shs 800 million awarded to the human rights tribunals, only Shs 93 million has been paid out and if you continue in the same report, almost page after page, literally every item that has been reported in this report has a gap. The issue I am raising with the Minister of Finance, either the parent sector ministries must show their priorities and what you report here is what is agreed but if we continue to report, “This is missing, this is not met”, what are we passing really?  

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I raised a question of statutory revisions so that the Attorney-General throws more light but let me throw a question to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. If you look in this report, they have budgeted for court awards, they have current court awards at Shs 2.3 billion, and court awards arrears of Shs 1.2 billion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is Shs 10 billion; I think it was corrected yesterday.

MR SABIITI: And if you go down, 3.1.5 statutory, the ministry is supposed to pay Shs 18.4 billion. If this is statutory and it is paid directly from the Consolidated Fund account, why are they allocating Shs 1.2 billion to be paid this financial year? If you look at the supplementary, which has been circulated to us, you find ministries, which are not supposed to have access to the Consolidated Fund account, continue to encroach on the Consolidated Fund account. 

Take for example the Ministry of Public Service, pensions are supposed to be statutory, they are supposed to pay direct from the Consolidated Fund account but you find that for example Vote 02, State House, accesses Shs 22 billion, which would have been accessed by the pensioners. I am asking the Attorney-General to explain why areas that are supposed to be charged on the Consolidated Fund are not? I want him to explain.  

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has failed to explain, he just comes up and reads the law but does not tell us why salaries, for example, pensions - the Parliamentary Commission is supposed to have these monies direct from the Consolidated Fund account and all these you find supplementaries after supplementaries of ministries, which are not supposed to access the Consolidated Fund account. Could the Attorney-General explain this to me? What does it mean? Why are you not implementing this law, this statutory provision?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Government please explain from whichever side.

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Having heard the definition of statutory expenditure, can the hon. Jack Sabiiti clarify on which ministries he says are not supposed to access the Consolidated Fund? If statutory expenditure means expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund by an Act of Parliament by the Constitution but not including expenditure of monies appropriated under the Appropriation Act, can he explain what he means when he says ministries, which are not supposed to access the Consolidated Fund?

MR SABIITI: Those are his words, Madam Speaker.  What I said was that there are departments, which have items, which items are charged directly to the Consolidated Fund account for example pensions, Parliament and others, including salaries for judges. When supplementaries come we find for example State House has been given Shs 22 billion from the Consolidated Fund account and they are coming here to tell us to approve it because it has already been used yet we had given about Shs 40 billion to State House in addition and pensioners are not getting their pensions because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development refuses to pay them their pensions. That is why I want the minister to explain why this happens?

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank my honourable colleague, hon. Jack Sabiiti, for giving way. The concern I want to pass on to hon. Jack Sabiiti is that yes, it is true that the sector of the Presidency is one of the sectors, which normally comes back with supplementary budgets. But it is also true that that sector does face a lot of erratic activities and yesterday when we were presenting our report, that was one of concerns, which I put to the Floor of this House that it is very unfortunate that this sector, among others, puts in a request and is reduced to half and in the financial year they have to definitely meet those kinds of activities. So I think we need to look at it from a gross perspective other than looking at it from only one sector. That is my information.

MR RUHINDI: Clarification!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you clarifying on who should get statutory and who should not or you are seeking clarification?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I think the concerns raised by hon. Jack Sabiiti need to be put in the proper perspective. I think his worry is that if expenditure is charged on the Consolidated Fund and is really a constitutional requirement does it not evoke an element of prioritisation? It is not that other ministries or departments are excluded from enjoying benefits from the Consolidated Fund but those ones, which are directly charged on the Consolidated Fund constitutionally, should take priority.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development explain this, please?

12.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think hon. Ruhindi Freddie has helped out hon. Sabiiti Jack because he was mixing up issues –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, order.

MR MUSUMBA: I think the legitimate question that he would be asking is, if there is an item that is chargeable on the Consolidated Fund, why is it that it is not being paid from the consolidated other than when it falls due? I suppose that is the question he wants to know, that is how I understood it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think he has said that constitutionally there are some bodies that are charged directly to the Consolidated Fund so he is asking, “Why don’t they take the first call?” That is what he is asking.

MR MUSUMBA: But the Consolidated Fund –(Interjections)– if I can be protected from hon. Awori Aggrey.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order members!

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you. Before you can charge anything onto the Consolidated Fund, it must have money. Therefore, before we can say, “This item now should be charged against the Consolidated Fund,” we consider the aggregate call on the Consolidated Fund because even the amount you appropriate here is also chargeable on the Consolidated Fund. So, the entire process of financing all the Government activity at the end of the day goes to that one basket called the Consolidated Fund. 

To that effect, therefore, even when something is to be charged on the Consolidated Fund, it is still our duty to manage the process and the proceeds in the Consolidated Fund. There are things like salaries, even a salary of a judge, before it is chargeable onto the Consolidated Fund, it must be known that this is the salary of the judge then it can be charged on the Consolidated Fund.

The honourable member also said I had failed to explain what statutory expenditure means, maybe I need to emphasise that there is no explanation better than what is written in the law. I cannot be better than the law or more authoritative than the law in explaining a matter that has been defined in the law and the law has been read and it is a public document.

Madam Speaker, the other issue, which I was called upon to explain is, “Why is it that I have not commented on every page?” That is according to hon. Kamuntu. Okay, every item on every page of this report. Let me say that -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think it was not every page; there were certain specific shortfall areas, which he wanted you to comment on.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, first of all, the majority of the items here when it came to the final recommendation, the final recommendation was not consistent with what is in the Appropriations Bill. However, what was being raised and indeed is a legitimate concern of the Members of Parliament is that, when the departments - those departments come to the committee, they raise other issues that they would prefer to have funded so that they do better in their various sectors. They have been highlighted and we have taken note, and it is a continuing discussion between those departments and ourselves to see how they can be addressed in due course. Therefore, it is not that we have ignored, in fact we have taken note and we will continue the dialogue between the ministry and these departments to see how some of these can be accommodated.

The leaking roof for example, Madam Speaker, you know very well that the Parliamentary Commission is in continuous discussion with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on matters of how it will be facilitated. So, it is not that we have not taken note, but the dialogue continues. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is true that we do continue to have discussions but last year your ministry described our relations as being strained on budgetary issues. So I do not know whether the situation has now changed and after we pass the Budget whether we shall be able to make changes.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the statement by the minister is one way of avoiding to give a commitment to this House on matters relating to Parliament. These are critical matters. If the roof is leaking and affecting everything, if you allow it to continue you are going to pay much more money because you may have to replace the lifts and things, which would otherwise have been saved in time.  

The issue of offices is very serious and a reality.  This Parliament is going to be much bigger in the Eighth Parliament than it is today. Members should have facilities to enable them to perform.

On the issue of Members’ pension, hon. Musumba was in Mbale with us before the President and the Prime Minister, and the President made a commitment for this financial year. Now everybody is beating about the bush and we are making no progress and at the end of the day we are going to adopt this report with a lot of things without receiving commitment from the Executive. Honestly, if we are going to have a good relationship, the Executive should come clean on these basic issues. Thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I think you should help us here. As a commissioner -(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, as we move along with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we have a problem. These honourable ministers, senior brothers of ours, lack consistency. One comes today, another one is outside the country and whoever comes is not really responsible. Let us have a particular minister here whom we know can attend to these matters. We have hon. Rukutana today, tomorrow we have hon. Kiwanuka, and another person the other day! We want consistency. 

MR MUSUMBA: Well, Madam Speaker, we are all here now, can the honourable member tell us what we should do? Should we all line up here? I am here and I was here yesterday. Does the honourable member have a preference? All the Ministers of Finance are here and we are –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You gave my colleague the privilege of answering questions but in the process he continues to mislead the august House by saying all Ministers of Finance are here, I can tell you, where is hon. Kasenene? Where is hon. Kiwanuka? Aren’t they Ministers in the Ministry of Finance. Is he in order to continue misleading the august House? If he does not know his colleagues, let him tell us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you do appreciate the difficulty we have for instance with regard to the Parliamentary Commission. The changes to Parliament are this financial year in March, April and June before the new financial year. That is the problem we have here. The elections are going to be held and we are going to get new members. I do not know what we are going to do. That is the question we are asking. It is real and it is not very far; it is just a few months away.

MR MUSUMBA: Anyway, before hon. Byanyima got the Floor, I was informing you that as part of the leadership of the Parliamentary Commission, you may realise that there are parts of the discussions that go on between the commission and the ministry that may be pre-mature to bring in the public domain at this point.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague made it quite clear about consistency. Consistency is totally absent in the ministry. Could we have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to answer us instead of the Minister of State for Finance, Planning? 

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank, Madam Speaker. We have addressed this matter of the requirements and needs of the Parliamentary Commission. It has been a difficult matter for us because of the limited resources that we have and pressures that we have, and we have attempted in our discussions with the Speaker and Members of the Parliamentary Commission to try to arrive at the compromise that will enable the commission to receive additional funds, but this has not been possible.  

So, I am not sure that it is possible to find more money at the present time because this money is not available and we do not know where to cut. But what I can say is that we would attempt to ensure that where there are emergencies, funds would be found somehow. Some cuts will have to be made perhaps in the development area, to meet emergencies but this is extremely difficult. So I ask members to bear with us. Perhaps there might be some increases in collections as they were last year, which would enable us to look again at this matter but at this present time I think we have to face a fundamental part of the resources that are available to the country.  

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is unfortunately not a magician who can create money where there is no money; and the only way to do that is to go to the printing press and print the money. I do not think he wants us to go to the printing press in order to be able to meet expenditures. We are a poor country and money is simply not available and the growth of the economy dictates –(Interruptions)

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, the Executive comes here with policies and decisions to help Parliament make laws, and the Executive decided to increase districts. That in itself means more constituencies will be created. Didn’t the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development put in the financial requirements for that policy? How do you increase districts and you do not consider allocating funds to Parliament to accommodate additional Members of Parliament?

MR MWANDHA:  Madam Speaker, the minister says where there are emergencies, they will act. In other words, he says we should manage by crisis but you see if you have limited funds, you have to prioritise. However, there is no evidence that there is prioritisation according to what my colleague has just partly said. If you know you have to do a, b, c and the amount of money is x, y, z, isn’t prioritising the thing to do? One of the ways actually is to cut your costs, but the minister is only talking in terms of getting more revenue. Suppose we do not get more revenue, what happens? 

When it comes to the issue of the members’ pensions, the longer we take to make a decision, the more expensive it is going to be for the Government because this is a contributory scheme. We should have started contributing in January but we have not yet started, which means that eventually when government decides that we should have this scheme running, it will have to pay something, which is in the proposed law of the public service and that expense will be higher than what was originally anticipated. 

So this is false economics and I think it is important for people to look at issues and make sure that we save money here and there rather than always thinking in terms of raising revenue. It is because that revenue may never come and as he said that he is not a magician, he is not going to make more money by way of magic.

DR SURUMA: Is it in order, Madam Speaker, to say that allocating scarce resources to almost unlimited man is false economics? I think the honourable member probably could take a lesson or two from me, since I am a professor of economics, that what we are talking about is not false economics. The economy means that we have demands on the Budget perhaps of Shs 5 trillion and we only have Shs 2.3 trillion in our Budget from our collection. And the question is: how are we going to meet the balance of Shs 2.7 trillion?  

As honourable members know, we have been depending on foreign borrowing and foreign grants in order to meet the additional needs that we cannot meet from our own resources. This House does prioritisation. You decide eventually who will receive what funds and who will not receive the funds? So I think it is important for honourable members to really recognise the critical shortage of funds that we face and the fact that some demands cannot be met.  The demands for higher wages, far beyond the increase in income of the country, are not possible unless we go to the printing press.  

In the 1980s and early 1990s we used to go to the printing press in order to meet expenditure. We stopped that and we have an economy, which is growing reasonably well and it is respected and we are able to get some inflows and some foreign direct investment. If you were to go back to the printing press, the whole situation would become turmoil. The economy would stop growing, scarcities would come back and the economy would collapse. So I think discipline has to start here. In fact, we have to face the fact that we do not have the money that we would like to have, and I would like to appeal to honourable members to really face these facts.  

I would like to see every Ugandan having social security so that when time comes and they are too old or they are disabled they are able to get some income that enables them to keep going. This is my vision and certainly hon. Members of Parliament deserve to have some income when they stop being Members of Parliament, when they are too old, or for whatever reason. I respect that. I have been working very hard to make some compromises that will make it possible for this scheme to come into being. So I would not like to portray the view that you are insensitive to some of these demands and needs.

On the issue of districts, we have said that we will finance a few of those that have come into being. We have cut drastically the requirements that are needed to operate these districts or removed many of the positions so that those, which are coming into being, will be financed in the most cost effective way and take minimum resource. But my understanding is that we are trying to meet the needs of the people and satisfy the wants of the people and that is the purpose of the Budget. We cannot ignore the needs of the people, people start eating rats and you turn away as if it does not matter? It does matter so –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please wind up, we have got to close this report and go to other reports.

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to indicate that we are sensitive to the requirements and needs of the Members of Parliament and various requests, but simply do not have the money to meet all these requirements. Thank you very much.

1.03
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would want to thank all the members who have made contributions and I would want to also thank the ministers who have made responses and they have made my role much easier than it was going to be. 

I think most of the issues were directed to the respective ministers. I do not think I have a lot to comment on except that I will have a few corrections or a few amendments to my report when I am given the opportunity to make them.  

However, to answer hon. Ruhindi’s concern about the laws, whether they are budgeted for government legal personnel, I have information that the Ministry of Justice has a limited budget of about Shs 30 million annually to purchase these laws for the ministry, especially those revised in the year 2000. 

I also have information, which is also reflected on page 15 of our report, that the Law Reform Commission has revised laws from 2001 and 2004. They require facilitation to print them. This facilitation is worth Shs 637 million and once they are printed they will be able to sell and raise revenue to the tune of Shs 500 million. So they are requesting this facilitation so that they can come with those laws. And also to combine it with hon. Nkuuhe’s concern, these laws are sold as a set. They are 13 volumes and the Law Reform Commission sells them at Shs 2 million, so it is not true that they are inaccessible. They are available.

MR RUHINDI: The money generated by the Law Reform Commission after printing the books and selling them goes to the Consolidated Fund and it becomes a big problem for it to access it to continue production of those volumes. Is it possible to leave it to them so that it becomes a revolving fund in the corporation rather than remitting the money directly to the Consolidated Fund, which becomes very difficult to access?

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much, hon. Ruhindi, for that concern, which has been the concern of the committee as well for quite some time. However, the limitation is that the law does not allow it. There are selected institutions that have been accepted to use this non-tax revenue at source but as far as the Uganda Law Reform Commission and some other institutions, which generate revenue for government are concerned, there has not been that provision in the law. Actually they have been trying very hard to se that a law is put in place for them to retain the funds rather than sending them to the Consolidated Fund. Certainly I would recommend it myself and that is a government issue.

Hon. Awori Aggrey, I think your concerns are genuine and that is the reason the committee is recommending seriously that the budget of Parliament be passed as it was presented. And whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laments on the money he has at his disposal or not, the reality is it is the same government, which allowed a Multi-party political system to come into force; you had the option to say no. It is the same government, which has the original mandate to provide for new districts, which Parliament only works on because it is a legal requirement. You had the mandate to just say no to the creation of these new districts, and many others. 

For us here at Parliament the truth is you are likely to have about 330 Members of Parliament; we are now 304. So what happens to the sitting arrangement here, that is number one? What happens to the way offices are occupied? What happens to the constitutional requirements for the leader of the opposition who must be facilitated and in protocol who is supposed to be No. 5 or 7, who will have secretaries, an office, a big salary, vehicles and escorts? All these are real expenditure issues. So to me you have simply to find money for these activities.

I think something else that I thought I should respond to is hon. Kawanga’s concern about the office of Administrator-General that seems to have been neglected. Page 4 of our report, in Table 2, No. 4, this has been dealt with that the Administrator-General’s office and the Uganda Bureau of Registration Services have been relocated to some good premises. 

So the issue here is not that they are neglected. The issue is that there is no money to pay for the rent of the premises they have occupied. This is what we are asking for, that this particular item is not being catered for in the Budget and therefore some money should be found to pay for the rent.  

Land tribunals: of course this one we also mentioned on page 8 in our report that the Judiciary had requested for Shs 4.3 billion to handle these tribunals. They revised it downward. Of Shs 3.1 billion as ked for, they were only allocated Shs 1.2 billion. They could not even reach the original level of Shs 1.7 billion when these tribunals were in the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. So there is a problem there.

 The non-performance of these tribunals I think is not that they are under the Judiciary, I also do not agree with that viewpoint. The issue is that if there was money, if there was facilitation for them, they would handle their work expeditiously. Most of them actually are idle, and they do not do the work because they do not have facilitation. They cannot move because they do not have the means to move.

Hon. Sabiiti Jack, on the shortfall on salaries, I think this one is not the current salary level that we are talking about. If you could look at Table 2 on page 4 of our report, these are revisions upwards in various that they thought they would make but because there was no provision for that in the budget, it becomes a concern. It is not that they are statutory and, therefore, they must be paid their wages that they are not getting. This money is just intended to increase their pay. 

I think, Madam Speaker, those are the few areas I should comment on. Otherwise, I am waiting for your guidance on how I should move my amendment that I have on the report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Amendments will be moved when we call for adoption. I hope you have now got the text. Have you got the text of your amendments now? Commissioners, do you have the text of your amendments? If you have, we are going to call committee by committee. Then you can introduce it when we call your committee.

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware we are considering various committee reports and there are some amendments to the text of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs, and Legal and Parliamentary but the others basically remain the same. As I did indicate, we shall deal with the figures deeply at the Committee of Supply. So I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Works, Housing and Communication be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee on Natural Resources be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee on Social Services be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I invite the chairperson to make the two amendments we agreed on yesterday? Commissioner Zziwa. 

1.15
MRS MARGARET ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I wish to make an amendment by rephrasing paragraphs under Luweero Triangle, on page 24. I wish to move that paragraphs 1 and 2 be deleted accordingly and the following text be inserted: 

“The committee was concerned that the mandate of the Ministry of Luweero Triangle is to rehabilitate, reconstruct and develop the war affected people and the Districts of Luweero Triangle. This mandate, however, is far from being realised considering the heavy under funding the sector activities and programmes face. This should have called for affirmative action for the Triangle in order to mitigate the effects of war but it seemingly is not forthcoming. The committee undertakes to visit the districts of Luweero Triangle to assess the effectiveness of the sector.  

The committee recommends that government improves on the allocations to the Ministry of Luweero Triangle to enable it to become more functional and felt at the grassroots. Otherwise, the Ministry of Luweero faces the challenge of its programmes being integrated in the respective district programmes.” 

That is the new phrasing, which is –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is another one? Okay, let us deal with that one first.

MRS ZZIWA: Okay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know you have perused the report and you listened when the chairperson was presenting and you were here during the debate. So, that is a new formulation. I put the question that the report of Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS ZZIWA: The next amendment is on page 41, with regard to the Uganda AIDS Commission. Madam Speaker, the second paragraph of 6.6 should be deleted and the following inserted: 

“The committee was, however, informed that the operations of Uganda AIDS Commission would not be directly affected by withholding of this fund. Other sources of funding like the Bush Fund of US $129 million, and the World Bank Fund, are still on course and Uganda AIDS Commission is also in discussions with other donors to secure more funding to continue supporting the HIV/AIDS activities.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know. Is that okay?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, this amendment does not in anyway cater for what the NPC suggested last evening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Commissioner, the way the text was phrased yesterday sort of gave the impression that we do not care even if that money is withheld, we have got other sources. Yet I do not think that is what we intended to portray. So, can you put it in another way?

MRS ZZIWA: I actually thought that by moving the way I have moved I was trying to mitigate the “I do not care” attitude about the Global Fund, which maybe had come out in the text, but also bring forward the fact that the Uganda AIDS Commission - because it was a statement of fact that it would not be directly affected by the withholding of the Global Fund. It was a statement of fact.  

Two, it was also put on record that the Uganda AIDS Commission can at least still access the Bush Fund and the World Bank Fund and is also trying to look for other sources to continue supporting the HIV/AIDS programmes and activities. That is what exactly I have tried to relate here because the Uganda AIDS Commission asserted that the issues of the Global Fund fall directly under the Ministry of Health. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The mischief the NPC was trying to correct yesterday was that the statement was drafted as if even when the Global Fund was not there we can go ahead with the Bush Fund. So the statement the chairperson hon. Zziwa has read is positive. Maybe we just need to add another line over and above that statement, like “meanwhile Parliament is still interested in the investigations into the Global Fund”. That will show the positive concern because your statement still indirectly says even if the Global Fund is not there, we can go on. What you have just read now.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, I was seeking clarification from the chairperson. The amendment she is moving gives the impression that government has lost interest in the Global Fund. My understanding would be that while effort is being pursued to normalise the Global Fund resources, the pursuit of funds under the World Bank and what is available is only an interim; it would not necessarily replace the Global Fund. 

If the intention is that efforts are continuing to for the Government to explain itself to the Global Fund so that funding can be restored, there is no way the envisaged fund from the World Bank and other donors would replace the funding under the Global Fund. Because the funds under the Global Fund were also part of the -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me hear from the vice-chairperson. Oh! You have not finished?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: And, therefore, any framing of a statement should take into account that position, which actually now it does not do. Thank you.

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Madam Speaker, I would like to give this information. The issue of the Global Fund was not in the policy statement of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee. So when it was raised as a matter of concern within the committee, the minister was referred to the Ministry of Health where the Global Fund is administered.

Secondly, the commission informed the members that, “If you want any details to do with the Global Fund, it is already on the Internet, you can download the information that you want on that”, and it was left at that. However, the addition that the committee put in its report was a reaction that since that fund is operating in the Ministry of Health, their operations will not be tampered with.

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, the vice-chairperson actually has stated the situation as it pertained in the committee and I want also to call upon the members that they should not take this amendment in isolation. They should read it within the context of the whole 6.6 as it appears. 

So in effect what I was trying to do was to improve on the feeling, which can come out of reading that paragraph, which sort of means that government, or the Uganda AIDS Commission, is not bothered or is not affected in any way if the Global Fund was withheld, yet the honourable NPC yesterday mentioned that in any case the providers of Global Funds are actually also related or associated to the Bush Fund among others. That is why I rephrased it in the way I rephrased it. I thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, as you know, I was here yesterday when this matter was being debated and given that there is an ongoing inquiry into the Global Fund and the sensitivity of the matter touches our relations with the international community, may I propose that at this point we expunge that particular paragraph from the report while the House waits for an appropriate address on the matter by the appropriate authorities when the time to discuss the Global Fund comes? I do not think the report will suffer anything if we expunge that part, but at the same time I think the report could be misunderstood if we retain something that is not clearly articulated on the matter. That is my proposal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one attracts me except that supposing the report remains completely silent and this is a matter of common knowledge? Why doesn’t the committee say that we urge government to expeditiously follow this matter and report to Parliament so that they know we are aware about it and we are interested? If we keep quiet no one will understand us.

DR NKUUHE: I want to support this position also because of the fact that this fund was suspended. I think the concern of Parliament is that we are concerned it was suspended, but we want to see it restored. Keeping silent is not helpful at all. So that we say we are concerned, investigations are taking place and we are waiting for this. That meanwhile we would like to see this restored quickly so that our people do not suffer from actions of a few selfish people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay?

MRS ZZIWA: I want to go with your advice Madam Speaker. We should delete that paragraph 2 and replace it with, “The committee urges government through the relevant …” –(Interjection)- yes, that is what the Speaker has –(interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The committee is acting on our behalf.

MRS ZZIWA: I apologise, Madam Speaker. It should be: “Parliament urges government, through the relevant ministry, to expeditiously handle the matters pertaining to the Global Fund and bring this issue to an amicable conclusion.” (Laughter) I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay?

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I think the chairperson should have used the words “expeditiously investigate and report to Parliament.” The word “handle” can mean anything. So I would want to request her to replace the word “handle” with the words “investigate and report to Parliament.” Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  And maybe you could remove the word “ministry” because we have that investigative body. Let the Government investigate expeditiously and report back to Parliament. I think that will cover it.

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, I want to accept the amendment and I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report, as amended, adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you are expected to have formulated something on the Constituency Development Fund.

MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker, page 24 of the report observation 3.10, I would want it to be replaced as follows: “The Constituency Development Fund (CDF) of Shs 2,950,000,000 that has been earmarked for Members of Parliament should be released to members as a pilot project pending its regularisation through formulation of an appropriate legal framework.” I beg to amend.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): No, Madam Speaker, the effect of the amendment seems to imply that the process that is being proposed is not legal. Maybe the chairperson may want to revisit that amendment.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I had passed it to the chairperson as an amendment I had earlier proposed. I do not know why the proposal was like this that the Constituency Development Fund (CDF) of Shs 2.95 billion that has been earmarked for Members of Parliament should be released to members on clear instructions as a pilot project pending its regularisation through formulation of appropriate guidelines for it or enactment of an enabling legislation. This brings into the picture that this fund may be queried, how it has been disbursed, how it is accounted for on clear instructions in this pilot phase then later we should consider whether we have guidelines for it or an enabling legislation.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, while I agree with my honourable colleague’s phraseology. The last part looks like it is conditional and I will go along with the concerns of my colleague in charge of finance. Once we put conditions then it looks like at the moment it is irregular and illegal. So why do we not just make it to be released immediately? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I do not know whether you really read the text of the report on this matter. If you read the text of the report I think you might appreciate hon. Ruhindi’s amendment.  

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, this is not the first time Parliament has a constituency fund. I know many parliaments have a constituency fund and I understand even this very Parliament before it was interrupted used to have a constituency fund. I think what we need to do is to say the money should be released and guidelines be worked out by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on how the fund will be utilised because otherwise, -(Interjections)- no. The thing is, everybody will know it is a constituency fund. Every electorate will know that his Member of Parliament has a constituency fund so even if there were no guidelines you have a responsibility as a responsible Member of Parliament to account for this money.  

So, I think it is important that when we release this money we should have guidelines worked out by Parliament itself and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is the right committee to work on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I think that is what hon. Ruhindi is saying.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, the appropriation law that we are making now does legalise this money that we are talking about. That is one.

Two, what is required is regularisation. We do not have again to resort to the law. The latter part of his amendment - we do not have to but we have regularisation governing accountabilities. We have a law; it exists. So maybe the guidelines he is talking about is to account to the clerk here, the process is there and, therefore, I do not see why we should go around about the law and whatever.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, what are you proposing?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, we are proposing that money should be released immediately.  Accountability is a condition for all public resources. We shall account for the money in accordance with the provisions of accounting procedures.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker, I just want to point out two points that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will be very happy to release the money in accordance with fiscal considerations meaning that we have to make sure that first of all the money is there and so we will ensure that the money is released expeditiously –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I can appreciate the fact that my honourable colleague is new in the august House, he has been away but really this matter was established by this august House. It was a recommendation from the committee, we have been debating it and at no given stage has the Government ever expressed doubt that the resources will be available. Is he in order to come at such a late stage to express doubt on the availability of the resources and giving us conditions?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I looked at the policy statement, which was issued here following negotiations and deliberations and I am aware that you provided for this money. So you are out of order to express doubt about its existence.

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, I am not expressing doubt at all about the availability of these monies. The payment will be done in accordance with macro-economic considerations, and prudently. It is because we have some constraints but we will make sure that the money is paid in a prudent manner. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the chairperson, maybe he has a solution now.

MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker, in my view we are not discussing the merits or demerits of having this fund. At this stage we are trying to find the best way to handle it. It is not that we are discussing the merits and demerits of the fund. It was very clear in the policy statement of the Parliamentary Commission –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure because I am beginning to lose track of what we are trying to do. We are not negotiating the availability and all. Why does the honourable chairman not read to us the report the way he wants it to be in the Hansard and we continue with business as it is on the Order Paper? We are attracting a lot of debate on an issue, which is straight forward, an issue which is finished. It was just a matter of terminology on how it should appear in the report but now we are opening too many debates and too many fronts and –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairpersons, just make your proposal and we Vote.

MR AHABWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Beatrice Kiraso for that remark.  

I now proceed to propose an amendment to my earlier amendment that the Constituency Development Fund (CDF) of Shs 2,950,000,000 that has been earmarked for Members of Parliament should be released to members immediately on clear instructions as a pilot project pending its normalisation through formulation of appropriate guidelines.  

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to guide my colleague that I think the gist should be on a matter of releasing as far as the operational accountability is concerned. Hon. Hope Mwesigye and I were sent to Kenya to study the whole system we have a draft for that. So, the details of that if it is approved the committee, which will be set up by Parliament, will set the procedures.  

MR AWORI: Amendment. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to go along with the amendment of my honourable colleague, the chairman, but stop at “released immediately”. In terms of accountability to justify my amendment, I am saying we have got standard procedures established in the books on how to account for public resources; you cannot take public resources without accountability. It is superfluous for us to repeat in the motion that we shall be accounting for a, b, c, d when there is a law in place to define on how to use public resources.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to agree with the amendment as proposed by hon. Awori Aggrey except for the word, “immediately”. What does it mean? I will get a cheque - we can say expeditiously, however, all the details I do not think that we should say in the report that this is a pilot project or anything like that. Let us just say the CDF will be released to the Members of Parliament expeditiously. What happens thereafter, Madam Speaker, you will guide the House. 

MR AHABWE: Madam Speaker, in view of the progress on this amendment, I will not hesitate to go along with the new amendment proposed by the hon. Minister of State for Finance, Planning.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But of course you are deleting the whole paragraph?

MR AHABWE: Therefore, I propose that we delete that particular phrase and replace it as follows –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ahabwe, you agreed with the proposal, which was very clear from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is your proposal. I will write it here as your proposal. Do not worry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs be amended as proposed by the chairperson.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report, as amended, adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I invite the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to wind up?  

1.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I want to wind up by thanking all the committees for reports that have been well done and we have taken note of all that has been put in here and the dialogue is going to continue. I thank you.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

1.49
VOTE 001 – Office of the President, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 33,272,749,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 001, President’s Office, for the financial year 200/2006. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 001 – Office of the President, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 3,026,415,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 001, President’s Office, for financial year 2005/2006.

MS KIRASO: Madam Chair, I have a point of clarification on the Vote for – no I am sorry it is not President’s Office, it is Foreign Affairs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 002 – State House, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 15,356,333,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 002, State House, be provided for financial year 2005/2006. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 002 – State House, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 33,631,591,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 002, State House, be provided for financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 003 – Office of the Prime Minister, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 3,647,605,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure for Vote 003, Office of the Prime Minister, for financial year 2005/2006. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 003 – Office of the Prime Minister, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 99,416,296,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 003, Office of the Prime Minister, for the financial year 2005/2006. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 004 – Ministry of Defence, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 336,762,112,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 004, Ministry of Defence, for the financial year 2005/2006.

MR OKUPA:  Madam Chairperson, I wanted to hear from the Minister of Defence on the issue, which was raised by the committee about the controversial soldiers’ housing allowance. There was a strong recommendation that this money should be stopped from being deducted from here to go into the development fund. I would be very reluctant to support this unless this issue is sorted out because they are emoluments to the soldiers and also there was the issue of a pay rise of 10 percent, which has not been paid.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, what was proposed does not directly affect the aggregates. This is an internal administrative arrangement that can be done within the Ministry of Defence, and which we shall take on board. It does not affect the aggregate.

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The amount involved is Shs 664 million per month, which rises up to Shs 7.2 billion, but this amount of money is appropriated as allowances. The ministry has been advised to make a statutory instrument to indicate when this money arrives as an allowance then it becomes a development fund statutory. It can be done within the ministry.  Therefore, that amount does not affect the totals we have here. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total of Shs 336,726,112,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 004, Ministry of Defence for the financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 004 – Ministry of Defence, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 13,556,104,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 004, Ministry of Defence, for financial year 2005/2006. 

 (Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 005 – Ministry of Public Service, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 3,523,669,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 005, Ministry of Public Service, for the financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 005 – Ministry of Public Service, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 8,855,935,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 005, Ministry of Public Service, for the financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 006 – Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total –(Interruptions)

MS KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, following the decision taken by this House to transfer funds owing to the East African Legislative Assembly from the Vote of Foreign Affairs to be placed under the Parliamentary Commission, we have identified that that money is US $882,828 and when changed at a rate of Shs 1,825 that money comes to Shs 1,611,161,000. I would like to move an amendment that that money be transferred from that Vote, thereby leaving a total of Shs 16,671,856,000 for the recurrent budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to the Parliamentary Commission.

MR NSHIMYE SEBUTULO: I am not very sure whether this House decided that that money be transferred this year because it was indicated that we had already omitted about 25 percent from our Vote-on-Account and we had always felt that instead of over congesting our allocation, the whole amount would be taken for the East African Community rather than dissecting it portion per portion. So, I need to be clarified on whether a decision was taken for this financial year. We thought that we will do that the next financial year but since we had partly performed by remitting money, this would bring some financial confusion.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I am not even sure whether this is a matter for appropriation under the law. There is money that is with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The assignment of how this money is managed is something that can be handled administratively. I do not think that it is like a fresh appropriation or a head under which specific appropriation has to be done. 

My view is, and it reflects what was discussed here, that the two government departments continue discussing and see the most efficient way in which this money is going to be administered. We in the Parliament are to give guidance that this ought to be done because we think there are more advantages to the money being administered here. May I propose, therefore, that we proceed with the figures as they are but the recommendation of the House to have the two departments or ministries relating to each other on this matter to continue? I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, I agree with you because among other things, whereas the commission is aware of the desire that the Legislative Assembly Vote be transferred to here, we have not been appointed to the situation where the whole community Vote will come to Parliament. So at this stage let us agree that it will be moved administratively. We have not discussed the question of taking the whole community budget to Parliament. 

MS KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, by the time this issue came up to the Budget Committee through the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the discussions, which took place between our colleagues the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly and the Commission, it means that already there was something wrong. Something was not being done the way they thought it should be done. That is why they are coming to Parliament. 

So when the minister says that, “Let it be done administratively”, I do not understand it. Because they failed to do it administratively, that is why it came to us. It is not my concoction, and we even went further to identify how much money is due to the East African Community, how much of that is a component due to the East African Legislative Assembly, and this we have been doing together with the officials of the ministry. It is not my doing, so I thought –(Interruptions)

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, there are three parties here, three new developments. If the Ministry of Foreign Affairs had a problem with the East African Parliament people, that matter had not yet come formally to the attention of Parliament. Now that it has and Parliament has pronounced itself it as it did in the report, the second point is that if this was happening without the knowledge of the Ministry of Finance, now it has. Finance now is informed that there is this problem and the Parliament has made this recommendation, which introduces a third party to this discussion. They now become tripartite.

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, hon. Musumba for accepting the clarification. He has made his statement that the information has now come to the Ministry of Finance, and yet the Chairperson of the Budget Committee said that when they were transacting business there were negotiations and they were working together with the Members of the Ministry of Finance, I thought that the technical team in the Ministry of Finance had already briefed the political wing of the Ministry of Finance. You mean what the chairperson of the committee says was not there? 

CAPT. BABU: Madam Chairperson, this is not something new. It is been like ping-pong: “Should it be the Ministry of Finance to pay all this or Ministry of Foreign Affairs to pay our international obligations?” There has been a suggestion that each line ministry should pay its international obligations because there have been some problems now and again, and in both methods there have been probleMs 

The argument that has been brought by the honourable member is quite highly appreciated, and what the Minister of Finance has said is right because he has been discussing with each ministry on how we can take care of our international obligations and a point has been made. They should leave it to the Minister of Finance, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and this Parliament to decide who should take care of these international obligations. We are going to find this very easy. The same with my ministry, we would like to take care of our international obligations. Thank you very much.  

MS KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, this is a bit misleading, because to me international obligations include our subscriptions to these international bodies. The East African Legislative Assembly was talking about including the payments, which are due to these people. May we look at a possibility of removing the whole Vote of the East African Community for that matter, if it is going to make it easier? I have the figure here; I will read it out for you. We do it so that our colleagues may stop suffering at the hands of Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  

MR NSHIMYE SEBUTULO: Well, if the Ministry of Finance can undertake to remit this money, we do not mind if it goes to the Ministry of Finance.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, we need to move faster; we should not spend too much time on this. I have said that we are now aware that there is need to ensure that the money that has otherwise been going to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on account of the East African Legislative Assembly needs to be administered in the Parliamentary Commission. This is just a matter of issuing accounting instructions. We do not require an amendment to the Appropriation Act for this purpose. It is not new money and we have taken note. This is a decision that has been made by the House and we shall implement it. Thank you.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem; if this money is going to the Parliamentary Commission, what is wrong with appropriating this money under the Parliamentary Commission and reducing it from Ministry of Foreign Affairs? Is it a big do?

DR SURUMA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make two brief points. One is that we have been informed to make sure that, like all the other parties being paid outside, we can remit money directly to the beneficiaries so that if there have been any delays, those delays are removed.

Secondly, and this is important, if money is in foreign exchange, we do not want to turn it into shillings and then turn it back into dollars because that puts undue pressure on our foreign exchange rate. So we would not wish to change this money into shillings on account of the Parliamentary Commission and then reconvert it. We would rather remit it directly without turning it into Uganda shillings. This is a technical matter, which we should be allowed to deal with and make sure that the proper beneficiaries get their money without any delay, and we can do this administratively. Thank you.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: The Ministry of Finance has said that they do not want to change money; the Parliamentary Commission only has a local account. Does the Parliamentary Commission not have a foreign account on which money can be transferred to and the Parliamentary Commission would be able to deal with the East African Legislative Assembly directly? 

The complaint is quite clear, that these Members of East African Legislative Assembly have been mismanaged as far as foreign affairs is concerned, and they belong to Parliament. Therefore, there is nothing wrong in bringing money here. That can be done later but it does not necessarily mean that Parliament cannot operate a foreign account. I do not agree.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this Parliament also transacts business abroad, so we are familiar with how this thing is done. We do not really require a foreign exchange account. Let us agree that we –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I think the Minister of Finance was in the House, he should know the reasons why it has become necessary for transferring the funding of East African Legislative Assembly functions to Parliament’s account. Partly it was to be consistent with our partner States, and partly because the Ministry of Foreign Affairs handles so many other things. It is not that there is anything; it is just to be consistent with the rest. 

Secondly, listening to the beneficiaries, they would feel better managed under Parliamentary account and in your case, it is nothing, you have the entire envelope, it is just a question of saying from this to that and the total sum remains exactly the same. I do not see any difficulty in that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when they were approached by the East African Legislative Assembly, the Parliamentary Commissioners had no objection to the Vote of the East African Legislative Assembly being moved here. We have no objection at all. So there is no question of transferring one Vote from one side to the other –(Interjections)- if you undertake then you follow it up administratively.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate your statement, but we are all targeting the same thing.  The difference is that whereas when you appropriate here you appropriate Heads; that is what the Constitution says. You appropriate monies on Votes and Heads, which are not detailed here. We have taken note and by accounting instruction this matter will be dealt with the way you want. We should just preserve this the way it is and move on. We shall undertake to execute that matter. This is what I am saying.

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Chairperson, I thank you very much. The problem I am experiencing here now is that we are introducing red tape in politics. I beg your pardon - what I am experiencing is that we are introducing bureaucracy in politics, which has never been possible. 

The problem with administration between Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Finance and the members is that they do not get their money in time even when they have got running commitments, yet the Parliamentary Commission has been effective. We are not complaining. We are saying that since the administration has failed, the politics has taken over so Parliament directs that the money be transferred from that Vote to the Vote of the Commission and I beg that you put the question.  Thank you.

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: I need some clarification. I must express my ignorance. The money is for the East African Legislative Assembly, yes? Whether you give it to Agriculture to pass it on or to Defence, the money is for the East African Legislative Assembly. Madam Chairperson, what good reasons are there not to give that money to Foreign Affairs? Is Foreign Affairs incompetent or are they cheats? Can you put the question so that we can save time? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I do not think am bothered about the reasons because they have been well presented in our reports. Honourable minister, what is wrong in transferring that amount to the Parliamentary Commission and then you can do your administrative things and make your instruments later?

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the issue is very simple: we have undertaken that since it is the directive of this House, we shall transfer that item from this Vote to the Parliamentary Commission Vote. But the hon. Minister of Foreign Affairs has said that out of the money that the East African Legislative Assembly is entitled to, they have already made some advance. Those advances must be deducted. If you appropriate it under a different Vote it will be difficult. This is not the first time that we have administratively transferred an item from one Vote to another. It can be done and we have undertaken to do so. So, I do not see what we are urging about.

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, are you sure you can see me?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, I can.

MRS ZZIWA: I was proceeding from the submission of the honourable minister of appropriating according to Votes and in effect saying that he may not be able to transfer only monies for the East African Legislative Assembly but for that matter he will be able to transfer the whole Vote of the East African Community. Let the whole Vote of the East African Community be moved to the Parliamentary Commission. For instance, for the issue of the 25 percent, as you transfer the amounts the 5.3 then you deduct the 25 percent, which you had already remitted to Foreign Affairs.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the East African Community has so many activities: the Assembly, the Judiciary, projects, contracts. What does the Parliamentary Commission have to do with projects under the East African Community? You cannot transfer the whole Vote. It will be mixing beans and peas! 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable commissioner, on behalf of the commission, I have no desire to administer the balance of the community budget. I am interested in the Legislative Assembly because that is what we are requesting for. I am not interested in the other one. 

MR MUSUMBA: We have made an undertaking that we will transfer –(Interjections)- if I would be allowed by hon. Ekanya and others, we have made an undertaking in this House. You are in the Chair, Madam, we are part of this house and we are part of this government. Why do I get the feeling that you do not seem to believe that we will do so? We will do so; we just want to do it tidily.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, we believe you. Just give us a time frame and we will move. That will solve the problem.

MR MUSUMBA: We are going to start the process as soon as we leave this place. 

MS KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, may I request that in the next supplementary schedule, which should come before this House for approval it indicates the technical transfer of this money leaving Foreign Affairs and coming under the Parliamentary Commission?

MR MUSUMBA: May I propose to the hon. Chairperson of the Budget Committee that once this is agreed upon, when we come to the supplementary schedule we will consider the supplementary schedule when it is before this House and see whether that position is tenable; because we are not yet discussing the supplementary? We are talking about the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly getting their cheques timely. That is the bottom line. We are going to put in place a mechanism, immediately we leave this place, to ensure that this happens through the Parliamentary Commission. So, I do not see how the supplementary issue is coming now. When we finish appropriation and move maybe to supplementary, we will consider how relevant this position is.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee is right. Once we appropriate this amount under Foreign Affairs and later transfer to Parliamentary Commission at a time when it is required to present a supplementary request to this House, we shall present it as a technical supplementary, which is a non resource-based supplementary. But it cannot be now, it will be at that time, whether we are advised or not we are procedurally bound to do that. Of course it cannot be at this particular time. It will be at the time when government is seeking a supplementary in this House.

MR NSHIMYE SEBUTULO: Madam Chairperson, I want to propose that since we have already remitted about 25 percent of our obligation to this east African Community, which includes a component for the East African Legislative Assembly, as the idea suggested to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, let Finance and Parliamentary Commission administratively work out how much more is due to the East African Legislative Assembly so that it is remitted to the commission. I think that will be the best solution. And let them give a time frame –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, the position is that the balance of 75 percent due to the East African Legislative Assembly is hereby transferred to the Parliamentary Commission. Yes, the 75 percent remaining. The balance of what is due to –(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Chairperson, I want to propose that the suggestion by the Minister of Finance seems to be reasonable because it is very difficult to talk of the exact figures now. I am not sure that the Minister of Foreign Affairs is exact when he talks about 25 percent; and he has not talked about whether it is 25 percent of the whole Vote for East African Community or just the East African Legislative Assembly. So what seems to be the problem? 

If Ministry of Finance can go and administratively handle what is desired, then the report, which we have already adopted and as the Chairperson of the Budget Committee said, this will be reflected as a technical supplementary at the time when they present it. What is the problem then? 

The matter can be handled administratively as we know has been the practice where technical supplementaries have been affected. This is internal reallocation. Normally, even in the Ministry of Defence for example, we may wish to transfer money from one programme to another, we seek their support or their approval, which they give and then they come for approval in Parliament via that supplementary, which is technical. Normally, that is the position. Why would it not work this time round?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I think you have understood the process and the procedures. 

So I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 18,283,017,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, for the financial year 2005/06.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,400,000,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, for the financial 2005/06.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 5,086,858,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, for financial year 2005/06.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 20,590,000,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, for the financial year 2005/06.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 31,567,026,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the financial year 2005/06.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 129,666,571,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the financial year 2005/06.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 29,780,570,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 009, Ministry of Internal Affairs, for the financial year 2005/06.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 3,948,163,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 009, Ministry of Internal Affairs for the financial year 2005/06.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 11,411,385,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 009, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the financial year 2005/06.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Shs 81,766,310,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 010, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the financial year 2005/2006.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 011 - Ministry of Local Government, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 12,983,873,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 011, Ministry of Local Government, for the financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 011 - Ministry of Local Government, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question, the total sum of –(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Madam Chairperson, I am sorry to come in now. When we were looking at Local Government, the Chairperson of Social Services Committee said that the primary school teachers’ salaries are budgeted for under the Local Government and yet there was a deficit of Shs 3.5 billion. There was also an issue related to grant aiding and the Ministry of Finance was supposed to come out with a position so that teachers can be assured that they are going to be paid. I am worried but maybe if we go ahead like that the position will remain as it was. 

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Madam Chairperson, the Ministry of Public Service manages the payroll in the service and it is true that the consultations, which were held between all stakeholders, which included His Excellency the President, reached an agreement that primary school teachers’ salary will be a minimum of Shs 150,000 per month. 

It was also agreed that this payment would be with effect from 1st July this year and I am happy to report that teachers are getting their pay based on that figure. We were also assured that the Ministry of Finance was going to front load. Front loading means that whatever is in the Budget will be implemented as it is. If there is any shortfall then funding will be provided and indeed there is a deficit of Shs 13 billion. In actual terms Shs 13 billion may reflect payment of salary during the 11th and 12th month. All the twelve months, including May and June of the financial year are there. So, the Minister of Finance has assured the Ministry of Public Service and we agree that there will be no shortfall in the management of the payroll for teachers.

I would like to add that my ministry pays salaries and wages on the 28th of every month and we have adhered to that process and we are doing very well. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether we should put this under the Local Government or wait and bring it under Education. These matters were raised by hon. Wopuwa, they were also raised by the Committee of Social Service, which had put some recommendation but this was on recruitment of teachers. If you may allow me to read this paragraph: 

“Recruitment of teachers in newly grant aided secondary schools: in a joint meeting between Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Public Service and Ministry of Education and Sports, the committee was not provided with satisfactory explanation on the utilization of Shs 9.9 billion approved for the last financial year 2004/2005 for teacher recruitment and grant aiding of schools. 

For instance, out of the agreed 76 secondary schools, only 56 schools were grant aided. Out of 1,976 teachers expected to have been recruited, only 829 were recruited and accessed the payroll. And in financial year 2005/2006 no funds have been provided for both grant aiding and recruitment of teachers and those grant-aided schools did not have head teachers and deputy head teachers.  

The committee recommended that the Ministries of Finance, Public Service, Education and Sports should provide clear explanation to Parliament on how this money was spent.”  

So, these were the three issues, which we agreed upon here that should be explained before we appropriate this issue. Unfortunately the chairperson is not here but the members of the committee are here. So, can we have those issues clarified before we appropriate these monies?

MR MUSUMBA: First of all I want to say that what the Minister for Public Service has stated is true and that is how we have agreed to proceed with regard to the point raised by hon. Wopuwa.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, you are saying that there is no shortfall? 

MR MUSUMBA: No, we are front-loading any shortages and have them addressed through a supplementary as we go along. 

MR WOPUWA: Madam Chairperson, just a bit of clarification. In the other position we said that the Ministry of Finance should assure the country that the 26 secondary schools that were not grant aided were going to be grant aided because the other teachers who had been appointed under that arrangement, when they went there, again their appointment letters were withdrawn. Are the schools going to be grant aided; those that were not grant aided this financial year?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, the issue of the Shs 9.9 billion for grant aiding and recruitment of teachers, which the committee was not given explanation for; that is the explanation we want to hear from the Minister of Finance, as we agreed. Can we hear from them? Over to you, hon. Minister of Finance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, Public Service, explain where the money went.

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Madam Chairperson, indeed there was an inter-ministerial committee meeting called by the chairperson responsible for social services. My ministry, that of Education, and of Finance and Economic Planning attended and my ministry was required to give an explanation and indeed I gave detailed information regarding how Shs 9.9 billion, which was appropriated for the financial year 2004/2005 was utilized and the paper was laid on the Table. 

I have a copy of the letter, and I would like to give the following explanation. The money was used to recruit staff and between July 2004/2005 1,479 teachers were recruited in secondary schools and they were well remunerated. Again during the same period, 169 teachers accessed the payroll. So a total 1,649 secondary school teachers accessed the payroll through recruitment and those who are outside, who are not yet computerized to receive their remuneration.  

Out of the Shs 9.9 billion, my ministry, through the wage bill, utilised Shs 6,471,810,120 and in our explanation we have reported and it is documented that the balance of about Shs 3.4 billion normally when it is not utilized at the end of a given financial year, it goes back to the Treasury as part of the pool fund in the Consolidated Fund. That is the explanation and I would like to state that as far as my ministry is concerned, mine is the wage management sector. If the funding is available, people on the payroll are verified and they are paid.

In addition, let me use this opportunity to assure the House that my ministry is working on a cleaning up exercise of staff in the service and we have been given a time frame within which to complete this exercise. We hope that in the next financial year our update of staff in the service will be more up to date and be available by a click of a button on the computer. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR SABIITI: I hope what the Minister of Public Service is saying now answers the questions raised by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education.  I wish the minister were here because recently a circular went out and it was put on radio that there is a shortfall of Shs 3 billion as salaries for teachers and, therefore, the ministry will not recruit more staff because they do not have money to pay even those who are already in service. So, I would like the minister to explain this to us so that when we are in our constituencies we are not confronted with these issues.  

MR MAYENDE: I thank you, Madam Chairperson, and I want to thank hon. Jack Sabiiti for raising that issue. The truth of the matter is that at the time of budgeting, like hon. Sabiiti knows, we use certain figures and as far as we are concerned the budget ceiling that we are given vis-à-vis the numbers of teachers that we have, we anticipated a shortfall and we have agreed with the Ministry of Finance. 

So, we are closing that gap because we have an exercise of verifying the teachers and like the Minister of Public Service has indicated, we are cleaning up. We anticipate that there will be no teacher who will remain unpaid. I want to assure you honourable member and the House that all teachers will be paid. 

The only difference is that we were given figures with a ceiling, which we are in a way relating to the actual people on the ground in the secondary schools and primary schools and we want to assure you that no teacher will remain unpaid. Thank you.

MR BESISIRA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am referring to a letter written to you on the 7th of September, from the Uganda Local Government’s Association in relation to the suspension of graduated tax.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: A letter written to me?

MR BESISIRA: Yes, to the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. It was distributed to members –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Read it, because I have not seen it.

MR BESISIRA: It is not copied to anyone. It says: “The Rt Hon. Speaker, Parliament of Uganda, Kampala. The Uganda Local Government’s Association has started the implementation of graduated tax suspension on local government services this year. The study is corroborated by information at the Local Government Finance Commission, Ministry of Local Government, support for decentralization in Uganda and district and urban finance department.”  

Madam Chairperson, my concern is in the following line: “Whereas on 8 June 2005 government suspended graduated tax and promised to compensate local governments with Shs 30 billion for the graduated tax loss, subsequent communication, from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shows that the Shs 30 billion is for salaries of political leaders, that is Shs 7.24 billion wages of decentralized staff, Shs 20.64 billion, salaries; and start up costs of new districts is Shs 2.12 billion.”

Madam Chairperson, this circular was even sent to all Members of Parliament. The implication of this is a crisis in local governments particularly with respect to the following: failure to remit 65 percent to the sub-counties, inability to meet core funding obligations, lack of finances for meeting of councils and committees, inadequate finances for administration, planning, auditing, budgeting, personnel and maintenance of local government assets generally weakening local government services and decentralization.  

It goes further to say that, “Uganda Local Government’s Association requests that Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, through you, Rt Hon. Speaker, to intervene – (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I apologize, I did not want to interrupt my colleague but I am at a loss at the procedure. We are adopting at this particular point. There were ministerial policies and statements, which the relevant committees properly examined and everybody had the chance to make presentations so that all these policy considerations could be handled and decisions taken at that stage. The committees made all the investigations and presented their findings and came up with reports. They reported on these figures. These are the figures that the committees came up with after thorough discussion of all the policy matters, and we are now approving them.  

Is it really procedurally proper to reopen debate on issues at a point when we cannot revisit the budget framework? I thought what we should be doing now is to see whether what the committee recommended is what is contained in the Appropriation Bill. Now it is as if we are reopening debate on matters, which we cannot handle at this stage. 

Madam Chairperson, I think however serious the matter is, there is a future time to consider it. At this time we should restrict ourselves to the figures because these are in accordance with the committee reports. Suppose we found that something was not due? What would you do at this time? Much as I did not want to interrupt my colleague, the procedure we are adopting falls short of what ought to be done at the point when we are dealing with the Appropriation Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ignatius Besisira, what was your recommendation as the committee on this matter? 

MR BESISIRA: Madam Chairperson, we made the same recommendation, as this letter is saying, that we should get assurance from the Ministry of Finance, that what is stated in this letter is not what is going to be done. If you are going to give Shs 30 billion to the districts and then use it to pay off political leaders with Shs 7.24 billion because there is a circular to this effect - there is a circular from the Ministry of Finance, it is very bad. I do not have it here but there is a circular to that effect. 

It is a circular sent to all, actually it was a reply to the Minister of Local Government. It is very bad and the ministers are not here, but it was a reply from the Ministry of Finance that this is how the Shs 30 billion was going to be spent. That is why we are concerned. That is why the Uganda Local Government Authorities is concerned. All I want is assurance that this Shs 30 billion is somewhere and I want to know where it is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, the Ministry of Finance proposed certain ways of using this money and ULGA proposes a different way. That is why you are saying it is not it. They wanted it to be utilized in a different way.

MR BESISIRA: Madam Chair, this was compensation.  It is compensation of the money they were collecting locally as graduated tax and what it was doing is what the Uganda Local Government Authorities Association are saying here, 65 percent was remaining at the sub-counties. But now if the ministry is turning round and saying that because they are the ones giving it, possibly they are changing the law, because it is compensation from central government to the local governments. To me it should be going to the local governments, 35 percent to the districts 65 to the sub counties and continues to do the work the graduated tax was doing.  

If it is not going there and you are saying that it should pay - because in the Budget Speech government committed itself to pay the political leaders aside from this. It is part of the Shs 30 billion; it is not pegged to Shs 30 billion.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chair, it is true that graduated tax was removed. It is also true that there was an undertaking by government to compensate the local governments for this tax, and we got several figures from the local governments as to how much used to be the tax that they collected. All over a sudden the figures went up. 

However, we decided to use this. Maybe it is more or less the one that is least unreasonable. We got Shs 47.7 billion. But let me also take this opportunity to tell you that the actual records of how much those local governments used to collect have never been submitted to us. Also, the amount of money called the cost of collection was never submitted to us, because there was a cost involved in the collection of this money. Anyway, we agreed on Shs 47.7 billion. 

However, it is the intention of government to compensate fully this amount over the medium term. For this year we have been able to raise Shs 30 billion, but in the course of this year we are also going to work with the Local Governments Finance Commission to ensure that the local governments find – we should devise alternative ways in which they can raise additional revenue, but for this year we have Shs 30 billion.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. The Ministry of Finance should not also come up with arbitrary figures; they should have put the onus on local government for these figures.  

Secondly, the Local Government should police even the costs for collecting that money. Evidence has shown that the costs are higher than the revenue. So, the moment you remove the tax, the revenue is gone. In fact I do not see any reason why we were sending this money there. This money should have been taken to Ministry of Health to help people who are dying. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable Members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 33,292 -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Chair. As my Colleague raised the issue of this Local Government, I had a talk with the chairman, Kabale district. The biggest problem that these districts are facing is the co-funding factor. If the Minister could at least give assurance, because the co-funding money is known, if he can give a commitment that the Ministry of Finance will meet the co-funding money, then the issue of councils and administration of these councils could be looked into after that. The co-funding factor is so crucial to the sense that some projects may stop.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Chair, I would like to give information to this House that as long as local government is complaining - we have several sources where they have been getting the money from, like money from charcoal markets, but they are just tying themselves to graduated tax. So, why must we have all the fears as if taxes from landing sites, for us who come from lakes, are terminated? They should not play around with us and think that we are doing disservice to them. Thank you.

MR BESISIRA: Madam Chair, local governments are established by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. They are given authority to do certain things, one of which is to collect tax. This is one form of the tax they were collecting from, which they were getting revenue. Is it in order for the honourable member to say that these local governments are playing around with this Parliament when these local governments are the ones that oversee about one third of the budget of this country? Does he mean that these people were not collecting any money? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But honourable member, you are now saying that they collect money and you are also suggesting that they have an alternative. What he is saying is that in addition to graduated tax they have other sources of income and should not act as if life and death is determined by the graduated tax. That is what we are saying.

MR BESISIRA: Madam Chair, graduated tax was contributing about 90 percent of local revenue. It is about 90 percent; I am talking about facts. Do not think about Kampala; you are thinking about Kampala. I am thinking about Kabale, Kibaale, Bugiri, Rakai, those are the districts I am looking at. Graduated tax catered for about 90 percent of their revenue.

CAPT. BABU: Madam Chair, thank you very much. We have been getting remittances of government to local governments in the whole of Uganda, and they send us those papers every month. Between 90 to 96 percent of most of the local government budgets have been financed by the central government through conditional and unconditional grants. Now we are talking about the whole budget so there is a percentage, which has been collected from local taxes. 

Whilst I agree that there has been a problem with graduated tax, and that it did bring in some small amount of money to some of these local governments and they paid certain bills, it is only fair that not only should the central government be given enough time to assess the amounts that are required to be remitted but also look at the administrative costs, which have not been quantified. 

At the same time, the minister has said that there is a certain amount of money, which has been put in place regardless of having received all these accountability, which is going to be disbursed as time goes by. I really think that we are splitting hairs here. The government has accepted that they will compensate the local government. The question then is: what is the method that we are going to use?  

The Local Government Association, of which I am an honourable member, wrote this letter. How can we take it at face value as if it is without the accounts on the table? Can we decide how much money we should remit? Which particular local government are they quoting, because there are several local governments? 

Kampala, for example, that graduated tax is one of the biggest components they used to get But a lot of our people suffered under it and, therefore, I would rather we sat down and found a scientific method to compensate these local governments, which I think we can do. I do not think that there is a problem. The Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Finance and the Local Government Association for that matter, should sit down and come up with some sort of modus operandi. Thank you very much.

MR BESISIRA: Madam Chairperson, when I read this letter, the beginning says that there was a study done by the Local Government Finance Commission and it is there. So, this Uganda Local Government Association is not depending on nothing; it has got a study, which has been submitted. It has been sent to us. It is there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Besisira, today is the 9th, I do not know when this letter was written and when it arrived here. By the way, I have not seen my copy. Have you had time to study that report?  Who has studied this report you are talking about? 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, as we speak, this sitting of Parliament is considering the Appropriation Bill. The Committee of Supply is appropriating money for the purpose of making this Bill into an Act. We are not budgeting here; the Budget Act manages the budgeting, in fact they manage the whole process. The substance of these figures was supposed to have been raised, debated and approved by the Budget Committee. A report was presented and then we moved. 

At this point, hon. Besisira may be saying that we cannot go into the details of how much exactly the Local Government used to collect and what was the cost of collection and what we should, therefore, appropriate as compensation. That is why I propose that you help us to stick to the regulation that relates to appropriation, and not the budgeting.

MR SABIITI: I want the minister to explain how, for example, NAADS is going to be managed. Because sub-counties have to co-finance the amount of money that comes from Agriculture, which is from the central government. Does that mean that if a given sub-county cannot raise that money, which was coming from graduated tax, it will not access funds for NAADS? These are the implications. We want to know from the Minister of Finance, when they were budgeting, did they put these things into consideration?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we are very certain that the local governments made budgets, which were budgeted from LC I up to the districts and were agreed upon them. Did the local government budgets show a deficit that the deficit was coming up as a result of graduated tax? No, because if it were, it would have been very clear in the policy statement.

Having said that, I am one of those people who know that graduated tax was really a very useless tax. People were being tied up at night while they were sleeping and at the end of it all, the people who tied them could collect about only ten thousand shillings. They would use a pick-up, army men, and my other things. At the end of it all the cost of collecting Shs 3,000 was about Shs 6,000. Now what is the profit? To me even this Shs 30 billion should not have been provided to local governments. Local governments are misusing a lot of -(Interruptions)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Chairperson, is hon. Nandala Mafabi in order to misguide this House when hon. Jack Sabiiti has asked a clear question regarding co-financing? He is the Chairman of the National Economy Committee and we have been passing loans that have that component of co-financing? The issue here over which clarification is being sought is how are the local governments going to manage these funds like, NAADS, et cetera, if they cannot raise money for co-funding? Is he in order to mislead this House by bringing in issues, which are irrelevant at this time?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, can the Minister of Finance answer those questions and we move on? Let him answer the question on NAADS and co-financing then we can move on.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, we can answer all those questions but the gist of the matter is that even the basis of this discussion, which is this letter, begs more questions. For example, it does not tell the Ministry of Finance the break down of the Shs 30 billion or whether what has been communicated or quoted here was the communication of Finance and details such as that. 

So I am assuring you that NAADS is a government programme. How can we take a government programme to a district if we have not found a mechanism of ensuring that it works? We are going to ensure that NAADS works wherever it is. If there is a requirement for counterpart funding, counterpart funding will be there. It will come from the Shs 30 billion. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, that is now a government assurance. I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 33,292,994,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 001, Ministry of Local Government, for financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 012 – Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, Recurrent Expenditure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 10,976,303,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 012, Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment for the financial year 2005/2006.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 012 – Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 143,561,063,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 012, Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment for the financial year 2005/2006.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 013 – Ministry of Education and Sports, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 57,310,145,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 013, Ministry of Education and Sports, for the financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 013 – Ministry of Education and Sports, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 59,729,275,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 013, Ministry of Education and Sports for the financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 014 – Ministry of Health, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 30,370,107,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 014, Ministry of Health, for the financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014 – Ministry of Health, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 231,302,232,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 014, Ministry of Health, for the financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 015 – Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 13,759,513,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 015, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, for the financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 015 – Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 18,998,230,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 015, Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry for the financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 016 – Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 30,376,296,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 016, Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications for the financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 016 – Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 347,895,412,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 016, Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, for the financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 017 – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 3,593,716,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 017, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for the financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 017 – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 175,288,123,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 017, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, for the financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 018 – Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 6,225,404,000 be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure under Vote 018, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, for financial year 2005/2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 018 – Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 12,215,088,000 be provided for as Development Expenditure under Vote 018, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, for the financial year 2005/2006.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 101 – Judiciary, Office of Judicature, Development Expenditure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of shillings 6,822,400,000 being Development Expenditure Vote 101 Judiciary Financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

Vote 102 - Electoral Commission Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of shillings 355,000,000 being Development Expenditure Vote 102 Electoral Commission Financial Year 2005/2006 provided.

(Question put and agreed to).

Vote 103 - Inspectorate of Government, Development Expenditure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I propose the question that the total sum of shillings 4,031,613,000 being Development Expenditure Vote 103 Inspectorate of Government Financial Year 2005/2006 be provided for.

Vote 104 – Parliamentary Commission, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now propose the question that the total sum of shillings 6,174,926,657 being Development Expenditure Vote 104 Parliamentary Commission financial Year 2005/2006.

MR AHABWE: I have a small comment, Madam Chairperson.  Madam Chairperson, in my presentation we proposed that the entire budget of the Parliamentary Commission be adopted without variation. The proposed figure, which Parliament submitted was 6,174,926,657 and in view of the fact that we have already adopted the report, I just want to make a comment that this figure does not rhyme with the figure you have read.  So, I do not know how we proceed on that one?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But honorable member, the figure, you have said is what I have read. I do not know whether – this was the question that this House provides for 6,174,926,657 Development Expenditure.

MR AHABWE: Sorry, Madam Chairperson, I think I was reading a different thing; I was looking at the Bill. So, I am sorry. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, honorable members do not look at that document there let us focus on what I am reading. So, I now put the question that the total sum of shilling 6,174,926,657 being Development Expenditure Vote 104 Parliamentary Commission for financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR RUKUTANA: I want to put it on record that according to the figure in the Appropriation Bill the figure should be 5,133,911,000 and that is the figure, which we agreed upon with the committee. 

MR NANDALA: Point of procedure.  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think we have already pronounced ourselves on the figures; where was the Minister?  If that is the case let him wait for the next budget then we can make the adjustment.  I thank you.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, what I am putting is to put it on record that for us the figure we negotiated and agreed upon was what I have stated. These other amendments were not within our reach, well we were here but we were told that we could make our submission at the time of Appropriation Act and I am putting it at record that the figure we appreciate, the figure we can afford is 5,133,911,000. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, in this committee we have to be guided.  It is true that the House has pronounced itself on the figure of 6 billion, but the actual figure is actually 5.1 billion.  So, we if recommit it now, what do we do so that we correct this figure, Madam Chairperson? It is not reducing what the Parliament is entitled to by even one shilling, the 5 billion is what was agreed on and it takes care of all that we have agreed to give to the Parliament, including the constituency fund and so on and so forth. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are talking about Development Expenditure –(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Yes, but even then Development Expenditure what we have here is 5 billion which Madam Chairperson we better appropriate as it is today and if there are any further discussion they will come in the course of time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The difficulty is that you are – for me I am reading what I have out of our deliberation and you; you are looking at the Appropriation Bill. We are not yet there.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson is it possible for us to continue with the figures that we have because that is the money that there is today. But without prejudice to the fact that we can come back by the way of supplementary and take care of any other supplementary issues that we require.  

Let me remind you, Madam Chairperson, that the funding by supplementary is a constitutional instrument that is available. To start amending these figures on the Floor now means, for example, that we must look for a billion somewhere within what is available to provide for this.  So, we need time in an orderly manner we pass the figures that we have; we have taken note of all these and we will come back with a supplementary budget after we have identified the appropriate funding. Otherwise, we run a risk of passing a figure for an amount that we do not have. Madam Chairperson, that is how you normally guide us.

MR RUKUTANA:  Madam Chairperson, a budget is a balance sheet. The expenditure side must balance with the revenue side. If we come up with a figure that is not indicated in our revenue, then our budget will not balance.  As my colleague said, while it may be a prerogative of this House to increase the budget by say, shs 1 billion, we must bear in mind that we have to balance, if we are to have a budget.  Otherwise, this august House should advise us on where to get these figures, from what we already have. I suggest that we pass the figures as they are and commit ourselves by way of supplementary provision. During the implementation of the budget, we shall avail the shortfall of over shs 1 billion, which we had not captured when we presented our projections. Otherwise, we without a balanced budget, we cannot proceed.

MR MAFABI:  Madam Chairperson, a budget is the expected income and the expected expenditure.  The Minister of Finance is saying it cannot balance, yet we have been hearing of deficit budgets. If this is what was agreed in the committee, let us agree on the budget. We shall negotiate on the actual expenditure. Otherwise, short of that, we are in a problem.

DR NKUUHE: Just one question and then the big man can come.  How did these figures, the discrepancy come about? I notice that the disagreement is over shs 1 billion. I could understand the issue of the shs 2 billion, but this other shs 1 billion seems to be – how did this come about?

MR MWESIGWA:  Well, Madam Chairperson, that is the question. How did this extra shs 1 billion come about?  We are taken by surprise for the figure we knew and agreed upon was this shs 5,133,911,000.  Well, we note that there were some concerns, which were raised here and as we are saying, since Parliament is bent on those concerns, the remedy is to pass the figure as it is. We shall provide the shortfall later. Otherwise, I do not know what kind of budget we are going to pass.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga):  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I remind our colleagues that everybody in this is legislating for our country. Whether you are on the frontbench or the backbench, we are all the same. In legislating, there are certain objectives we should endeavour to achieve. 

For the Chairperson of the Committee on Economy to say that budgets have deficits and therefore, we can pass unbalanced figures is to say the least, irresponsible.  One of the objectives of the Committee on National Economy is to keep stability and balanced figures. (Laughter) I had thought that the procedure would be to negotiate as hard as we can in the committees. We would finally get reconciled at the budget committee, where we would say, ”Subtract this from here.” Once we get there, then we can pass a balanced budget.  Therefore, I appeal to you to find a way of correcting this imbalance now.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What did you agree upon? What position did you take in the budget committee after all these negotiations on this matter?

THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso):  Madam Chairperson, this puts me in a situation that I cannot really explain. Committees convened at the budget committee level, where we proposed certain reallocations. I would like to be sincere to my colleagues; this reallocation, which raised the figure from shs 5,133,911 to shs 6 billion, is not one of them. The discussions we held were documented.  I was asking the chairperson of the committee privately here so that we look at the discrepancy and find an explanation for it.  Therefore, I cannot give information that I do not have.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Now, may I propose that we stand over this for now? You should consult and find out where the extra money came from? Therefore, we stand over the Parliamentary Commission Development Report. 

VOTE 105 – Uganda Law Reform Commission, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the total sum of shs 120,000,000 being Development Expenditure under Vote 105, Law Reform Commission for the financial year 2005/06 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 106 – Uganda Human Rights Commission, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the total sum of shs 7,329,250,000 being Development Expenditure under Vote 106 Uganda Human Rights Commission for the financial year 2005/06 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 107 – Uganda AIDS Commission, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the total sum of shs 11,920,145,000 being Development Expenditure under Vote 107 Uganda AIDS Commission for the financial year 2005/06 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 108 – National Planning Authority, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the total sum of shs 534,000,000 being Development Expenditure under Vote 108 National Planning Authority for the financial year 2005/06 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 109 - Law Development Centre, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 1,165,800,000 being Development Expenditure Law Development Centre.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 131 – Office of the Auditor General, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 6,031,869,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 131 Office of the Auditor General financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor General, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 2,366,395,000 being Development Expenditure for Office of the Auditor General be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 132 - Education Service Commission, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question shs 2,427,017,000 Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 132 Education Service Commission, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 132-Education Service Commission, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 50,000,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 132 Education Service Commission financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 133-Directorate of Public Prosecution, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 3,711,388,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 133 Directorate of Public Prosecutions financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 133 - Directorate of Public Prosecution, Development expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 330,000,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 133 Directorate of Public Prosecutions, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 134 Health Service Commission, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 1,648,366,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 134 Health Service Commission be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 134 - Health Service Commission, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 41,667,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 134 Health Service Commission be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 135 - Mass Mobilisation, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 5,362,359,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 135 Mass mobilisation be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 135 - Mass Mobilisation, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 221,258,000 being Development expenditure for Vote 135 Mass Mobilisation be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 136 - Makerere University, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 33,472,427,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 134 Makerere University be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 136 - Makerere University, Development expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 18,389,968,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 134 Makerere University be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 137 - Mbarara University, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 6,560,294,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 137 Mbarara University be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 137 - Mbarara University, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 656,000,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 137 Mbarara University be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 4,188,391,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 138 Makerere University Business School financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 139 - Kyambogo University, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 10,994,478,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 139 Kyambogo University, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to)

Vote 139 - Kyambogo University, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 280,000,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 139 Kyambogo University, for the financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 140 Uganda Management Institute- Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 397,252,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 140 Uganda Management Institute, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 141 Uganda Revenue Authority- Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 68,032,889,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 141 Uganda Revenue Authority, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 141, Uganda Revenue Authority- Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 7,689,820,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 141 Uganda Revenue Authority, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 142 - National Agricultural Research Organisation, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 2,802,410,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 142 National Agricultural Research Organisation, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.  

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 142 - National Agricultural Research Organisation, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 22,744,844,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 142 National Agricultural Research Organisation, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 143 - Uganda Bureau of Statistics, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 8,890,000,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 143 Uganda Bureau of Statistics, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 143 - Uganda Bureau of Statistics, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 4,981,500,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 143 Uganda Bureau of Statistics, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 72,915,647,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 144 Uganda Police Force, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 3,633,350,000, being Development Expenditure for Vote 144 Uganda Police Force, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 21,179,509,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 145 Uganda Prisons Service, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for – (Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: I beg your pardon, there is a mistake in that figure. The actual amount is 22,319,794,000 and not 21 and this is what we agreed on with the Ministries of Internal Affairs and that of Finance, together with the Budget Committee.  

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, that figure is strange to the Ministry of Finance, the figure you read is 21,179,509,000. I do not know where it comes from. [Hon. Kabareebe: ”Did you consult?”] Consult whom? I have the correct and authoritative figures. I do not need to consult anybody.

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Chairperson, it took us a long time to arrive at this figure. Otherwise, the figure I had was even much higher than that. I am telling him to consult and listen to what he is telling me. Yet, I got these figures from the Ministry of Finance.  He was not here yesterday.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: While he consults, let us stand over Uganda prisons service.  

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, it is apparent that what the hon. Kabareebe is reading is the total for both recurrent and Development Expenditure.  If you are talking of 22,319,794,000, then that is the total. You should know that it is split into recurrent and Development Expenditure. It is understandable at this time, I think diminishing returns of scale are coming in, this is the total.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, have you understood?

MR KABAREEBE: If both figures can add up to this, I have no problem. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you for being enthusiastic about the sector.(Laughter) I now put the question that shs 21,179,509,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 145 Uganda Prisons Service, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 1,140,285,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 145 Uganda Prisons Service, financial year 2005/2006, be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 146 - Public Service Commission, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 2,224,315,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 146 Public Service Commission financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 146 - Public Service Commission, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 277,500,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 146 Public Service Commission financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission, Recurrent Expenditure 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 1,242,480,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 147 Local Government Finance Commission financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 117,500,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 147 Local Government Finance Commission financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 148 - Judicial Service Commission, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 1,422,534,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 148 Judicial Service Commission financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 148 - Judicial Service Commission, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 30,000,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 148 Judicial Service Commission financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 149 - Gulu University, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 3,152,821,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 149 Gulu University financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 149  -Gulu University, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 1,400,000,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 149 Gulu University financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 150 - National Environment Management Authority, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 27,613,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 150 National Environment Management Authority financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 150 - National Environment Management Authority, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 7,168,988,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 150 National Environment Management Authority financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 1,830,000,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 151 Uganda Blood Transfusion Services financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 1,229,500,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 151 Uganda Blood Transfusion Services financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 152 - National Agriculture Advisory Services, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 2,515,955,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 152 National Agricultural Advisory Services, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 152 - National Agriculture Advisory Services, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 3,103,377,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 152 National Agricultural Advisory Services, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 153 - Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority, Recurrent Expenditure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that shs 1,000,000,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 153 Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 153 - Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that shs 698,063,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 153 Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 161 - Mulago Hospital, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the shs 24,687,066,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 161 Mulago Hospital, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

MR MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have a query we should address before we approve that figure. Mulago and Butabika hospitals have been given special treatment in as far as recurrent and Development Expenditure is concerned.  Other hospitals have no Development Expenditure, for example, Mbale where I come from, which is in a very bad condition.  If there is no development for Mbale hospital, Bagisu have reason to worry. Of all those hospitals, why is it only Mulago and Butabika, which have been given this money? Why have all the other referral hospitals been sidelined? I want to see the development budget for Mbale Hospital clearly spelt out here.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Chairperson, Mulago and Butabika hospitals are different from the other referral hospitals because they are national referral hospitals.  Hospitals from 163 to 173 including Arua, Fort Portal and Mbale are regional referral hospitals.  Their development is within the Ministry of Health.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Madam Chairperson, if hon. Mafabi wants to know about Mbale hospital’s fate, I should inform him that we have other sources of funds. These include the JICA project, which may get interested in Mbale hospital and most of the outstanding rehabilitations. I think a memorandum has already been signed.  I thank you.

MR MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is very unfortunate that Mbale hospital, which also has people taxpayers, is now at the mercy of donors.  If they are saying the money is in the budget of Ministry of Health, why is it not clear that these referral hospitals have their own specific monies? (Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  The minister said that the money for these regional referral hospitals is within the Ministry of Health Budget.  When you read the policy statement clearly, you will know how much Mbale received, what was budgeted for Bugiri, Busolwe and so on. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that shs 24,687,066,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 161 Mulago Hospital, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 161 - Mulago Hospital, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 1,496,000,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 161 Mulago Hospital, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 162 - Butabika Hospital, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 3,159,397,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 162 Butabika Hospital, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 162 - Butabika Hospital, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 50,350,058,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 162 Butabika Hospital, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, given that we are now in segments of hospitals, missions and whatever, I want to propose a procedural way forward so that we get totals.

Vote 163 – 173 - Referral Hospitals, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 24,287,184,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for votes 163 to 173 Referral Hospitals, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 201 – 229 - Missions Abroad, Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 24,041,830,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for votes 201 to 229 Missions Abroad, financial year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 201-229 - Missions Abroad, Development expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 710,000,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 201-229 – Missions Abroad for Financial Year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 501-764 – Districts and Municipal Councils, Recurrent expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 680,471,091,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 501-764 Districts and Municipal Councils, Financial Year 2005/2006 be provided for.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  We have been talking about expenses on districts.  Some of us were crying for districts to avoid being marginalised.  However, now even the Ministries of Finance and Local Government do not do the work of finding out how many people are in the district.  When you look at this distribution of the money in the districts, it is unbelievable. I think somebody sits down somewhere and does not care to find out about the population in different districts. 

I can give you examples; you have continued giving Mbarara, which is no longer a big district, too much money. Yet, a district like Isingiro has three constituencies with over 300 people. There are many others, of course.  Therefore, I request that the Ministry of Finance to go down to the population, in order to know how many people use the amenities we provide for. We cannot continue having figures like these.  The cry for districts will continue until we have equalised the services in the country.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Madam Chairperson, the allocation of funds to districts is guided by a very clear and elaborate formula contained both in the Constitution and the Local Governments Act.  The formula is there for everybody to see and if it was not because of time, I would go through the formula. Members know it.  Therefore, much as I respect my good friend, hon. Byanyima, I do not think his observations are justified at this stage.  Unless we revisit the formula, there is nothing we can do now. A formula is a formula, the most important thing is to make sure that we have complied with it, and we do comply with it.

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Chairperson, the budget for this year was announced and this Parliament officially announced that Kaliro was one of the new districts, which was formed.  Other districts have had their start-up funds and those districts have started. Kaliro has already put its executive in position.  To-date the Ministry of Finance is adamant to send money to start up this district. If I keep silent as we pass this budget, I wonder where I can appeal if I do not appeal to you, Madam Chairperson and the Minister of Finance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Go to the Ministry of Local Government.

MR WAMBUZI: It is here, Madam Chairperson, in this paper.  But on the ground something, which should have started months or weeks ago, is not being done. We are wondering why the minister is not acting according to the law, the declaration of this Parliament. He is disobeying the Parliament.  Therefore, if he has disobeyed, why is he now asking us to approve this money?

DR SURUMA: I would like to assure the honourable member that we will observe the law and act accordingly.  

MR MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I was about to advise the engineer that, that is an administrative issue. Vote 566, which is Bududa district - [Honourable members: “Which district is that?”] - there are documents here, this reads “Bududa district.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, that matter was corrected.

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much. I was getting worried.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that shs 680,471,091,000 being Recurrent Expenditure for Vote 501-764 – Districts and Municipal Councils for Financial Year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 501-764 – Districts and Municipal Councils, Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that shs 175,810,063,000 being Development Expenditure for Vote 501-764 – Districts and Municipal Councils for Financial Year 2005/2006 be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 104 – Parliamentary Commission

MS KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, the Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee has gone for something to eat. However, I consulted with the officials of the Parliamentary Commission and found that when you add shs 3,222,926,657 to shs 2,950,000,000, which is the constituency development fund, it totals to shs 6,174,926,657, which is what the Chairman had read.  

In the negotiations between the Ministry of Finance and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the ministry seemed counting on donor funding of about shs 1 billion, which we should not attribute to development fund. The donor money mostly comes for capacity building and we cannot really say we have donor money. Therefore, it should not be part of our development fund.  When you take off shs 2,950,000,000, which is being proposed in the Appropriations Bill, Parliament will remain with a development figure of about shs 1 billion. It is up to this House to decide, given the comment the minister gave concerning appropriating money, which is not available.

At the same time, the need for availing this money to Parliament should not be overlooked.  I want to propose –(Interjections)- maybe, I should not give my views because members do not want to listen to me. Madam Chairperson, I request the Ministry of Finance to realise that this money is not here for a show. This money is needed. From that kind of understanding, if they undertook to provide this money, we would approve it the way it is in the Appropriation Bill. However, there is consideration as the Budget is operationalised, in case moneys are available to give us a Supplementary Budget. 

The other extreme that I would be very hesitant even to talk about is for us to pass a figure knowing very well that we shall not have the money. This scenario has happened in the past, where the Parliamentary Commission has had disagreements with the Ministry of Finance. A figure was passed and money was not released.  

I would suggest that we do something, which is result oriented.  I also would like to report here that the Parliamentary Commission has invited the Ministry of Finance, on so many occasions, to discuss the budget of the Commission but the ministry has never found time to come. This is very unfortunate. 

THE STATE MINISTER OF FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Chairperson we try as much as possible to come whenever the Commission invites us here. It was only once when there was a problem with communication, but for all the many times we have been invited, we always come; I personally attend.  Therefore, it is not true to say that when you invite the Minister of Finance he does not come.  In fact, the last time we met, we were given time to go and consult. We would then be called upon, which has never been done to date. Are we supposed to invite ourselves?

MS KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, maybe it is that one time that the secretary to the Commission who is the Clerk to Parliament, is talking about. But honourable members, I should inform this House that the Development Vote for statutory bodies like Parliament, are not treated as a statutory budget. Such budgets should not be debated or changed. That is why our Recurrent Vote does not appear in this Appropriation Bill. Therefore, the decision is up to Parliament. It is good that the chairperson is here. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Godfrey Perez Ahabwe): Madam Chairperson, I am sorry I was away when you called me. I develop a bad stomach when I go without milk for a long time.  

The Chairperson of the Budget Committee proposed that we pass the figure that is indicated in the Bill and trust that the Ministry of Finance will eventually release more.  However, my view is that it is more prudent passing the figure as proposed by Parliament.  We are guaranteed that the commitment the ministry makes here will be fulfilled. 

I must say that the shs 5 billion may look like big money but it is from that that the shs 2.95 billion for constituency development fund is subtracted.  Therefore, actual Development Vote of Parliament is very little money, given the concerns that we have already submitted to this House. Surely, you should appreciate the dilemma of using just shs 1 billion just for Parliamentary development activities.  I think the Ministry of Finance should be realistic. Shs 1 billion is not such an overwhelming amount of money that should put us into this kind of  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I should just add that last year, the Parliamentary Commission operated without certain funds. We have reached a situation where we cannot forego some of the requirements that we have presented to you. They are inevitable, in view of the political programmes ahead of us. I would like you to understand that.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Chairperson, thank you very much.  As a principle, it would not be proper for Parliament to get in the habit of over budgeting, in the hope that money would be made available. If all the other branches of Government took after Parliament, we would have an over blown budget, that is not structural, realistic and credible.  It is better, as a principle, for us to budget for money we have rather than that we hope to get in future. This is not a correct approach to the budget.  

Secondly, we have understood that there are real problems of roofs leaking and dangers of lifts catching fire. We cannot take this lightly. We will bear this in mind for we have even given our commitment. At the earliest opportunity, as Minister of Finance, I will make appropriate adjustment.  As soon as I get the resources, I will make sure the situation is corrected.  Thank you.  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is a Government assurance. (Laughter)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to understand how the commission is handled. We all know that the Parliamentary building houses the President’s Office. I was amazed that the commission is budgeting for alternative places, instead of securing its own premises. Those who are occupying these premises should go and look for their home.  In the event that we do not enough money why should we continue to give up like this? I think Parliament is a third arm of Government and it should be respected.  

Last year, we talked about the passage, which the Speaker and all of us use. We asked for development money, which was never provided because we were told it was not available.  Madam Speaker, every time you are walking to this chamber, we have to borrow an umbrella to protect you from the rain.  Therefore, I think the executive should avail this money to the commission, in the spirit of good working relationship.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  How was that settled, hon. Musumba?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I thought the matter has been settled.  There was an undertaking by none other than the man who is in charge of the treasury, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  Therefore, spending more time on this matter will not add value since the undertaking has been made.  

Technically, to add shs 1 billion here means we will have to look at Butabika, Health or Tourism; we must find this money somewhere, but not now.  In fact, you had called upon Government and I thought you were going to put the question. Otherwise, there will be no end about people reminding us of how important Parliament is, as if we ourselves are not members of this House.  I thank you.

PROF EPHRAIM KAMUNTU:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  May I plead, for purposes of Parliamentary decorum, that when we are debating matters of the Parliamentary Commission, the Ministry of Finance should not take it that we are pushing. If we put things gently, it should be understood they should not take it that we are not serious. 

Secondly, Madam Chairperson, I sometimes get touched when you sit from 10.00 a.m to 5.00 p.m.  I suggest that we become more understanding, so that this matter is disposed of and we move forward.  Please put the question.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the chairperson of the committee had made a proposal for 6,174,926,657,000.  The Ministry of Finance is undertaking that we pass 5,133,911,000 and that he will provide the shortfall to fill up the figures. Therefore, this is now in the Hansard. I now put the question that the total sum of shs 5,133,911,000 being development expenditure for vote 104 Parliamentary Commission, for the financial year 2005/06 be provided for.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister of Finance, as you know, the recurrent expenditure of Parliament is not really subject to debate. Are you undertaking to give us whatever we have asked for?  [Minister: “Yes. Because –“] Honourable minister, please, go to the microphone and say it. You cannot speak from the chair. You have to go to the –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma):  Madam Chairperson, I have indicated that we have allocated the envelope as it stood. We hope that there might be some increased efficiency gains in revenue collection, which will make it possible for us to allocate the additional resources.  This is what we have undertaken and we will act faithfully, when additional resources become available. However, we cannot allocate what we do not have. That is the principle.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Minister of Finance, recurrent expenditure is already an entitlement, so we expect you to actually find the total sum.  Please, you must say on the microphone that you will find the money. Do not say it from there. (Laughter)

MR MUSUMBA:  Madam Chairperson, my name is Isaac Isanga Musumba, and I want to state on behalf of the ministry of Finance that we will look for the shs 1 billion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  No, we have finished with the development expenditure. I am talking about recurrent expenditure of the Parliamentary Commission now, which is not really subject to debate.  

MR MUSUMBA:  Madam Chairperson, recurrent expenditure is not a subject to debate. Therefore, I have nothing to say, because to say something is to invite debate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Should we take it that what we have proposed is what you will give us?

MS KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, recurrent expenditure is statutory and is not to be cut. It is not to be debated. It is simply to be approved. Recurrent expenditure is not a subject of debate and appropriation. It is not even in the Appropriation Bill, so it will go the way it is.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee has said the truth. To invite Ministry of Finance to make a comment on the recurrent expenditure of Parliament is contrary to the law. We should not invite debate on a matter that should not be debated. That is the meaning of a statutory expenditure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, could you read out that figure so that we settle it.

MR WAMBUZI: Madam chairperson, when the minister stood up, he spoke into the Hansard shs 100,000,000 before you told him to sit down. I think it must be clear exactly what we have agreed upon. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No.

MR AHABWE: Madam Chairperson and honourable members, when I was presenting this report yesterday evening, the following was one of recommendations: “In view of the observations and budget analysis of the Parliamentary Commission outlined, the committee recommends that Parliament passes the Parliamentary Commission Recurrent Budget as requested without variations.” This recurrent expenditure budget is Shs 49,084,148,748. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I just wanted that for the record. We are going to pass that figure for Parliamentary Commission recurrent budget. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Chairperson, I beg that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered votes 1-162, vote 163, Vote 173, vote 201, Vote 229, votes 501-764 and passed them without amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I put the question that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2005

4.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, THE BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Madam Speaker, the Supplementary Appropriations Bill, 2005 was presented in this House on 7 September 2005.  We have scrutinised it together with the technical staff and members of the Budget Committee. The Bill seeks approval of Parliament of the proposed supplementary expenditures as per section 16 (1) of Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003. The figure is shs 163,836,427,000. 

It should be noted that there is an error of shs 2,869,000 and the correct figure shs 163,833,603,000.  In other words, when we tried to add up what was in the Appropriations Bill, we found out that there had been this computing error.  We have noted that the Supplementary Appropriations Bill, 2005 before this House contains an extra expenditure, which Parliament did not approve, amounting to shs 32,200,980,000. 

We approved some supplementary figures in March. The impact of the financing requirements of the extra amount of expenditure has not been demonstrated to Parliament as is required by Section 16(2) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.  The impact of the financing requirement of shs 131.813 billion was explained as being 37.96 per cent being a resource supplementary and 62.04 per cent being technical supplementary; the figures are there for you to see.

The impact of the budget reallocation:

Section 16(2) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act requires the Government to indicate the effects of the supplementary expenditure changes on the original financing requirements at the time of appropriation and any expected changes to the original statement of outputs and outcomes.

The supplementary expenditures particularly those requiring reallocations are a major source of distortion and make sector budget management and implementation difficult. It will also be recalled that in the previous years, several ministries and departments have attributed their poor performance to the budget alterations midway the financial year. Budget cuts tend to introduce inefficiencies, corruption tendencies and lack of confidence in the budget process particularly formulation and implementation.  

During the budget discussions, it was believed that the Government had carefully identified, scrutinized and prioritized its plans, programmes and activities for funding and presented them to Parliament for appropriation. However, a submission of the supplementary expenditure request requiring substantial amounts of resources clearly indicates that the Government’s priorities have drastically changed.   

While the law justifies the need for supplementary expenditure, Parliament needs to critically weigh the request in light of the originally budgeted priority. Reallocations are particularly very distortionary because in many cases, there is no consultation and harmonization with the ministries and departments from which reallocations are made, contrary to Section 73 of the Budget Act, 2003.   The outputs and outcomes intended in the budget are often not realized and the entire budget process is undermined.  

Parliament should have a full picture of the costs and benefits of the proposed supplementary expenditures and the report on the performance of the budget for the first eight months. Efforts should be made to minimize the supplementary expenditures in future by ensuring that ministries and agencies vigorously prioritize their programmes and activities during the budget process.

Because of non-compliance with Section 16(2), it was not possible to establish the proportion of the resource requirements for the additional expenditure for compliance with the limit of 3 per cent of Section 12(1) of the Budget Act.

We recommend that passing of this Bill is contingent upon the minister demonstrating the impact of the financing requirements of that extra shs 32 billion, the details of which are attached on this report that I am reading.

The deviation: 

The deviation is attached with Annex 1 and Annex 2, short of that justification; I would move to amend the Appropriation Bill to remove the shs 32,200,980,000. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we were represented in that Budget Committee by our chairperson, so, let us just have two contributions.  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Honourable members, I think in the interest of time, we should approve the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, less the figure that is strange to this House, so that the minister can table it separately for discussion and a report be made to this House for debate.  

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I want to draw the attention of the House to the recommendation of the Chairperson, Budget Committee, on the third page where she recommended that the passing of this Bill is contingent upon the Minister of Finance and Economic Development demonstrating the impact of the financing requirements of the extra shs 32 billion.  

As a Parliament passing an Appropriation Bill, we simply – because everything is contingent on raising the revenue, everything is contingent on the weather being conducive. But if we put it as a recommendation to pass a bill contingent to this, we will not have been professionally correct. 

I think what we could do is just to make the amendment as proposed in the next – it says, “Short of which Parliament is advised to pass only the figures”. We should pass only the figures for which a budget is done and agreed upon in the budget process but we cannot pass something contingent on something, which is not known. 

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, what the professor has said is exactly what I wanted to bring out. But I recall in some supplementary budget last year in the Committee of Finance, there was an illegal account, which was being operated by the Ministry of Finance in Bank of Uganda where by an audit was supposed to have been produced to this House. To date that audit has never been produced. If you say we leave this as it is, we are giving the Ministry of Finance authority to go and commit more illegal transactions and pass time but not report to us. So, let us at this time either remove this or even force them to bring the other audit. Maybe that is where the money is from and we proceed.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the minister.  

5.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, it is true that a supplementary worth shs 32,020,980,000 was incurred by the Government through the Minister of Finance. It is also true that under the laws that we operate and the procedure, we should have come to the Budget Committee and discussed this supplementary.

Madam Speaker, we were unable because of the peculiar circumstances that this Parliament has been operating under in the recent past. (Interruption) If only I would be allowed to finish, really. At a time when we could have come to the Budget Committee and discussed this matter, we were most immersed as a Parliament in a Constitution making process. The bigger problem is that under the Constitution, once money is expended, we must get appropriation and have it approved by Parliament within a period of four months from the day of expenditure.

Now that period of 4 months -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I was hesitant to intervene but procedurally for the House to pass a figure of shs 32 billion without details – and you remember when we passed the supplementary budget expenditure here, there were some urgent requirements, especially arrears to pensioners and Arrow Group but the money was not available. So, for the minister really to bring shs 32 billion without even bringing it to the attention of the committees, which are concerned and coming in the House to ambush us to pass shs 32 billion, I think is not a simple matter.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, if hon. Rwamirama had given me an opportunity to present my case, then he would say what he has to say after he has heard what I have to say. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister explain.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you. I am saying that we had a peculiar circumstance of spending so much time in the Constitution making process, which all of us know hindered or constrained us in the manner in which we do this.

Secondly, we have a constitutional timeframe in which we -(Interruption) 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, a law is a law and all these unforeseen things - laws are made knowing only too well that there are things unforeseen. If the law says, “You cannot spend without prior approval of a budget”, regardless of whether and it becomes so urgent, you do not spend, you just hold on. But you cannot spend and use the constitutional review as an excuse for spending the money without prior approval of Parliament. It cannot happen.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I do not think – honourable members, he did not say that the money was spent on the constitutional review. He is saying that they went off schedule because they were engaged in that process and they did not come in time to the committee.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, this was not an illegal expenditure, it was - (Hon. Members Interjected) - I am not yielding on the Floor, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let him finish his submission.

MR MUSUMBA: This was not an illegal expenditure. It was expenditure of a supplementary authorized by the Constitution in keeping with the provisions of the same Constitution. I am prepared, Madam Speaker, to explain to this House where and on what items this money was expended. I would have no objection for this matter to stay longer, but that means that we would be acting contrary to the Constitution, which says this amount of money must be approved within four months of expenditure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable minister, the chairperson said the passing of this Bill should be contingent upon an explanation. Proceed to explain.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have with me a summary of supplementary funds recurrent 2004/2005, and in this one, we did run a supplementary expenditure for the following offices 

We did supplement funds for Mbarara University -(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I was at pains when we were discussing the additional funding for the Commission. The ministers were very clear they did not want to have a budget, which does not balance and I give them credit because they were trying their best.

Madam Speaker, the law of the country demands that they should not exceed a certain percentage. Now, the money authorized according to the chairperson, is clearly stated in this report. The additional funding if we were to debate it in full should have gone first to the Finance Committee, then the minister and the chairperson come and explain. But now bringing these figures here unprepared and unresearched causes a problem.

Procedurally, Madam Speaker, I would request that this shs 32 billion first be studied by the committee and we pass the other one. There is no problem. Then we shall come here and do the job as required by Parliament, because really it is going to cause a lot of suspicion. Some of us have more information and may have to start again throwing words here and there. It is not good for Parliament and for the Government. Therefore, I request that first, the committee goes and studies this shs 32 billion and then come back and report to Parliament.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Under our normal procedure, this should have featured under supplementary schedule No. 2. But now it is put in 1, which was passed by this House and I find it a bit difficult.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what do you propose?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I still stand by my earlier proposal that we pass the Supplementary Appropriation Bill less this fallen figure, so that it can be studied by the committee and a report be made to this House for approval.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have any objection? I think that is a reasonable proposal, Minister of Finance.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, it also depends upon the legislative programme of this House because as I said, we have a time constraint, which again was not entirely our fault. However, I just want to bring to the attention of this House that this supplementary was largely to cover shortfalls in salaries. It was for Makerere University, Mulago Hospital, Prisons and Finance. I have the figures here and they add to shs 32 billion. 

It is not like there is something that is not above table.  The problem is, we have a timeframe. We leave it in your hands, Madam Speaker, although depending on the legislative programme of this House, we have a constitutional limitation in the amount of time we take before we have this supplementary passed.  

I wanted, in keeping with the recommendation of the lady chair of the Committee to read and commit to the Hansard these amounts upon which we expended and an evaluation can be made later.  But at least, the law would have been passed within the time frame that the Constitution authorizes us.  Madam Speaker, the figures will actually add up to the shs. 33b/= we are talking about.

DR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, in light of your ruling and advice to the Minister that what is important is for him to go back to the Committee so that this amount can be clarified, now the Minister wants to argue his way out that he will not have the time. I would like to request you to assure him that as soon as he completes his commitments with the Committee, you will slot in time for the Members of Parliament to discuss this matter and we finish.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I can say on the time frame, honorable Members, I did indicate that today we shall go on recess, and we intend to resume on Monday the 19th. We start again with the other part of the budget, namely, the Finance Bill, Income Tax Bill, VAT Bill.  So we can actually consider this matter on the same day.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, we are prepared to take your wise guidance and concede, but should any item be found to be outside the period stipulated by the law when we resume, then we should not be blamed because by your own guidance, you have acquiesced in not complying with the provisions of the Constitution.

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honorable Colleague.  Madam Speaker, may I put a request to you that your previous advice be turned into a ruling so that we can proceed?

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I thought the Minister was making a reasonable proposition.  I am not asking honorable Aggrey Awori because I would know what he would answer, therefore, there would be no need to ask him.  Madam Speaker, the proposition that in order to avoid the risk of being caught by the law, -(Interjection)- okay, that is a reasonable question.  

In order to avoid the risk of being caught by the law, the Minister was proposing he uses this occasion to read out the figures so that Parliament receives them.  Then we can discuss all these in accordance with what honorable Rwamirama is suggesting, what honorable Sabiiti is suggesting at the time when we come.  But having overcome that impediment which can be serious, which will not be overcome - and I do not see any contradiction or any problem with it - I propose that we adopt that position; he reads these things, but then we commit the discussion of the matter and therefore the decision of this House to a later time.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honorable Member, the reading is not where the problem; the question is, do we consider the whole or we consider minus the 32.  That is really the question.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I find it very strange, because Parliament has not seen the bill and failed to perform.  They spent money long ago and they did not bring it to the attention of the House so that we consider it.  So the delay actually is not the fault of Parliament, it is the fault of the Executive.  What would have happened is that they should have presented Supplementary Schedule No.2 of shs.32b/= etcetera. But now they have brought a foreign expenditure into what this House pronounced itself in March, 2005.  

Madam Speaker, I was the Chairman at the time and we considered the Supplementary Schedule No.1 and passed all of it; and if I can remember, it took about three days - we were done.  So let them bring the Supplementary Schedule No.2 and we examine it and make a report to the House so that you can take a decision from an informed position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from Budget Committee Chairperson.

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, as a way forward, the honorable Minister of Finance has presented to this House this expenditure.  So the idea of being time barred does not arise.  The idea of when we present our report or when we approve should not arise.  Because the time frame given in the Constitution is for the Executive to bring for approval the expenditure which has been done within four months of spending.  If by the 7th of September when this expenditure came to us you were within the four months, even if we release our report on the 19th or 29th or in December, that one should not be affected by the time.  

So I think we should not confuse the two things, Madam Speaker.  As far as we are concerned, the request has now come to Parliament, it came on the 7th.  If you were within the four months, honorable Minister, you will still have been within the four months next month or the month after.  So we should not bog down this House by reading through something which we are not going to look at and approve.  The two proposals are still on the Floor.  The other one is for him to explain, which Members said procedurally they cannot accept because they need time to scrutinize this expenditure.

The other one, I had proposed that I will move an amendment to the Appropriations Bill, to remove the shs. 32b/= and we approve the money which we have calculated here.  In other words, the Appropriations Bill will have been amended now to read a different figure, while we wait for the committee to look at these figures, interact with the Minister and come up with the report.  For me I think this is a better way forward.

Honorable Members, the issue raised by honorable Mafabi of that account, I remember very well that the Committee of Finance gave one month to Government to look into that account and come with an explanation on that account. I think they called it illegal or secret (so many names) that account which was being operated in the Bank of Uganda and which was used to use money from the Consolidated Fund over a long period of time without coming to Parliament for appropriation as long as 12 or 17 years. I thought that is something that the Ministry of Finance would like to comment about.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I entirely agree with the wisdom of the Chairperson of the Budget Committee. This Bill has two parts: there is the part of supplementary schedule 1, which was approved; there is the part of Supplementary Schedule 2, which was yet to be approved by this august House. I concede that we sever and consider Supplementary Schedule 1 today. 

As for Supplementary Schedule 2, we take it that it was presented in accordance with the provisions of the law to this House on the day the Bill was presented. Let it be remitted to the committee for it to scrutinize and report to the House, in which case, as the chairperson has said, we shall not be time bad since our expenditure was within time.  

The other point regards the deferred account.  Honourable members, I remember on the Floor of this august House some time back, after this august House had advised that the account be closed, I presented evidence that we had closed the deferred account. It was closed immediately this august House recommended that we close it and it is no longer operational.

DR CHEBROT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  First of all, I am happy that the Minister of Finance has eventually conceded because during his earlier submission, I was under the understanding that he had not conceded. But then when they had to put on a rider on the issue of time, which has now been answered by the Chairperson of the Budget Committee – my understanding as of now is that, Mr Minister, you have conceded to this issue. Therefore, I do not see the need for us to continue debating this matter. Let us continue as we had agreed. Thank you very much.  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has raised the issue of the illegal account. It is true, when the committee presented their report here, it did say the minister had written an apology letter for having operated this account for the last 12 years. But the Plenary that day went ahead and said this account must be audited and the report was presented to this House. It is the report, which has not been presented here; it is not enough that the minister told the House that it closed this account. 

What we want is –(Interruption.) Hon. Rukutana, if only you could listen. I was saying it is true the minister that day did tell the House that he had written an apology letter to the Committee of Finance and he had closed the account. But the committee went ahead to say we want an audit and a report presented to this House. So, the report of the audit of that account, which was operated for 12 years, is what Parliament is asking from your ministry.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, this is expenditure, which had taken place for over 15 years. The audit exercise is going on and once we complete it, a report will be tabled before this august House.

MR OKUPA: But you had given an undertaking of one month, it is now over five months.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members and the Minister of Finance specifically, perhaps since you have agreed that you are going to sever this Bill, why don’t we recommit it and then you submit those two bills? I do not know how you are going to get the shs 32 billion from the totality of this one. You have brought them in time so you have complied. Now, it is our work that is left. You complied and you have brought it before the 7th Parliament. That will really simplify our work.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I had thought that we could use the report of the Chairperson of the Budget Committee to sever and know which items fell within Supplementary Schedule 1 so that we can deal with those and conclude because for those, this august House approved. It is only those items amounting to shs 32 billion, which have been complained about that should be recommitted. In any event, since this august House approved that supplementary schedule, what we are doing now is just a formality because we have already approved.  

I would beg that with the guidance of the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, we approve the figures that had been earlier approved by this august House, but we recommit only those that had not yet been approved by the august House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, can you move the figures? Is that acceptable?

MS KIRASO: Yes it is, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the figure of shs 163,833,603,000 being the total amount of the money in the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2005, be altered to read as shs 131,812,623,000. The reason I am moving to alter it is to enable Parliament remove from this total figure an amount of shs 32,020,980,000 being the amount of money that should appear under Schedule 2 as per items or details attached on your reports. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, you see, there is a bit of difficulty when we go to the Committee of the Whole House. How are we going to get the shs 32 billion because we have got to go item by item? 

MS KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, I did not envisage that we are going to go item by item on this Appropriation Bill for one reason that the figures and items that we are going to approve under Schedule 1 were already pronounced by this House when the Finance Committee made its report. 

The report is there; I did not know we were going to go through the ritual of going through item by item.  However, I thought this one was going to be made easier because the items, which are covered by shs 32 billion, which I have talked about, are herewith attached.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, the precedent of this House is to appropriate supplementary expenditure because we have already expressed ourselves on the figures. We do not go item by item; we just appropriate the total as long as we are sure that the amount had been approved by the august House. 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, the figure we passed in Supplementary Schedule 1 of 2005 is what the Chairperson of the Budget Committee has read. The details of that expenditure are available in our Hansard and the reports are available. So, I pray that we approve it in block and then we can take on Supplementary Schedule 2 as details attached to the report the Chairperson of the Committee is reading so that it makes our work easy and we save time.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Chairperson, I remember hon. Musumba was reading items like Mbarara University, Kyambogo University, so, if we could use those items, because they are the ones that amount to the shs 32 billion, it would be easier for us to disaggregate them from this block figure. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are still carrying out consultations. Let us stand over this matter and go to the Appropriation Bill itself.  

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2005

5.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Appropriation Bill, 2005 be read the second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It has been seconded.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, the Bill is intended to provide budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Fiscal Year 2005/2006 and the particulars are contained in the Bill. I beg to move that it be passed.

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to support the minister because I think we have basically gone through most of this work together as Parliament. But allow me to take this opportunity to thank fellow Members of Parliament, especially members and chairpersons of sessional committees. Because of the time constraint that we had, a lot of work has been put into this exercise and I am happy that we have reached this far. 

I would also like to commend the Government, Madam Chairperson, for keeping within the time frame as prescribed in the Budget Act. I would also like in a special way to further thank government, specially the Minister of Finance, hon. Suruma, who took it upon himself to scrutinize the report, which we made to His Excellency the President and make responses, which I circulated to all chairpersons. 

He made responses on policy issues, which we had raised, he made responses on recommendations, which this Parliament had made, he actually went further to say where government could implement and where they could not, giving reasons why they could not. I would like to thank him because I think that kind of mutual respect will go along way in improving this participatory budget making process. 

In the past, Madam Speaker, we have been complaining that our recommendations are not looked at by the Executive. They are just ignored and nobody gives any explanation. But one improvement I would like to say we have made in this budget for this financial year honourable members is to put a section where each sectoral committee talks about the recommendations we made and what the response was from government. I think that is an improvement. 

Madam Speaker, I do not want to repeat the issues that were raised during this budget debate, but maybe government should again look at some recommendations we made, which they said are not feasible, like releasing government vehicles and other assets.  

Madam speaker, I had put here a few things, which I will not go into. Another innovation we have brought in this process is that after every quarter when the financial year begins, sessional committees shall look into the performance of their sectors and come up with a brief report on how the budget is being executed. 

That will give us a chance to hold government more accountable, it will give us a chance to monitor how funds are being utilized, it will give us a chance to look at the programmes and activities that government has committed to do and see if they are on course. So, maybe, when that time reaches, we will re-address some of these issues that I had picked during the debate. 

Madam speaker, I will stop there and support the motion that the Appropriations Bill be passed this afternoon. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is very clear –(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Speaker, much as the Minister of Finance is doing very well and becoming very accurate, I want to request him that at least when we are going to discuss such serious matters concerning money, there should be at least, if he is not here himself, one serious junior minister around so that he can take into account what we are discussing. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the motion by the minister. It has been strongly supported by the Chairperson of the Budget Committee without objections. And now, I put the question that the Appropriation Bill, 2005 be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2005

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 3

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question agreed to.)

Clause 4

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question agreed to.)

The Schedule on Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Schedule on Recurrent Expenditure do stand part of the Bill. 

 (Question agreed to.)

The Schedule on Development Expenditure
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Schedule on Development Expenditure do stand part of the Bill. 

 (Question agreed to.)

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill. 

 (Question agreed to.)
 
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled “The Appropriation Bill, 2005” and passed it without amendment. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT

5.58.
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2005

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Appropriation Bill, 2005 be read the third time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the Appropriation Bill, 2005 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE APPROPRIATION ACT, 2005

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Supplementary Appropriation Bill, Minister of Finance.  

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2005” be read the second time – third time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are moving the House to give it a second reading.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2005

MR MUSUMBA: That the Bill entitled "The Supplementary Appropriation Bill 2005" be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, is it seconded? (Laughter) Can you now speak to your motion for the second reading?
 
MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, this Bill seeks authority of Parliament to pass a Supplementary Appropriation Bill for shs 163,836,472. This was money spent variously within the year under the authority of the Constitution to be able to supply additional money whenever there was a shortfall by way of supplementary. And under the constitutional provision and the laws that fall there under, we have to present this Bill to the House for appropriation.

Madam Speaker, I have since the discussions that took place in this house, had consultations with honourable chairpersons of the committees and explained to them two things.

1.	That technically, it would not be possible to split this Bill now because the various amounts that occurred at various times have all been aggregated in the same bill.

2.	That today marks technically a day when we conclude all the financial affairs of the last financial year and begin a new financial arrangement because we have just passed the Appropriation Act. They have, however, agreed if for the shs 31,983,571 billion, I do present to this House on Hansard the expenditures upon which this money was done and the House considers them.

Madam Speaker, for Makerere University, we gave shs 4 billion for salaries for lecturers. For Mulago Hospital, we gave shs 1.5 billion for drugs, for Prisons, we gave shs 1,308,000,000 for food for prisoners and for Finance, we spent on the membership of IGAD and COMESA shs 4,400,000,000. On Ministry of Justice, we spent shs 4,523,156,000 for defence of the case against us in DRC-Congo. And we did expend shs 16,268,514,000 for salary shortfalls for teachers, civil servants, and medical workers in both the local and central governments.

The total of these amounts is shs 31,983,571,000 which amount we seek together with the other amount to make a total of shs 163,836,472,000 for appropriation by way of supplementary. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson Budget Committee, what is the minister doing there?

6.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Madam Speaker, the minister was lobbying that we accept the explanation given by his colleague by looking at the items the way they were read. The figures add up because we had gone through them, there is nothing extremely suspicious from the figures. 

However, Madam Speaker, I would like to request the minister, even after we have passed these figures that he appears before the committee, we go through the details of this, and if there is any matter that we think should be reported to the House, we will bring it to the House for debate. This is the money, which has been spent, unless my colleague has got a contrary view.

6.04
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister showed me the handwritten figures on a piece of paper and I asked him to get me the actual figure. But the list he has given me does not add up to that amount and I would like to suggest that we adjourn for five minutes, because I do not want to find myself in an awkward position because somebody has failed to do his job. 

Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to put the expenditure in print and give copies to members so that when they appear to the committee with contrary information, then we know that actually there was a problem. I also agree with my colleague that the expenditure I have seen does not look suspicious but the members need to get a list of these items, add them up so that we pronounce ourselves on something we know.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, since you are still consulting, we can proceed to other business so that after you finish that business, you come back.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, first of all, the figures that I have talked about are in the Hansard. If the fear of the chairperson is that we come with a different figure, we will come with the copy of the Hansard, which has the figures as I have read them and we will stand by them at that time. To tell lies in Hansard is an offence. I thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, you notice that the figure, which you were asking, that is very strange is shs 32,020,980,000. In other words, if we pass the figures the way he wants, the schedule is not balancing. Honestly, if you are doing arithmetic and not mathematics, it is not balancing and I am requesting for five minutes that he sits down and brings something that is balancing and we pass it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have got other business, let the ministers and the chairpersons go and balance. You can go out and do the balancing while we take on the next item. So, we defer this matter for a few more minutes.

MOTION FOR PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORIZE GOVERNMENT TO 
GUARANTEE BORROWING FROM JAPAN BANK FOR INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION TO UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR FINANCING A PROJECT UNDER PHENIX LOGISTICS (UGANDA) LTD.

6.08
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (Dr Ezra Suruma): Madam Speaker, we have laid before this House a request for a loan guarantee for Phenix Logistics (Uganda) Ltd for $5.5 million. The purpose of this guarantee is to enable this company, which is engaged in spinning of our cotton, to introduce more modern machinery so that it can make yarn and be able to export this yarn to Europe and other countries and also to be able to increase its capacity to make this yarn. The first phase of this loan of $2.1 million will enable the company to procure the machine for the manufacture of yarn from our cotton. 

The second phase of this loan would enable the company to make fabric from this yarn again to be able to export fine fabric to Europe and other countries. In the third phase of the loan, the company would be able to manufacture garments again for exports to other countries. 

Madam Speaker, the company will be able to acquire new technology and to introduce this technology to Uganda in textile industry and put us in a forefront of textile manufacturing. We believe it will be a window for Japanese technology to come to Uganda. 

The Japanese Bank for International Cooperation is the second largest development bank in the world and we are lucky that it is willing to come to Uganda although in the past, Japan has been rather reluctant to come to Uganda. We feel that this opportunity may open a window for Japanese Industry and Japanese investors to come to our country. This Japanese bank has made a feasibility study of this project and found that this project is viable.  

Uganda Development Bank has made a further study and also agrees that this project is viable. So, the request is that the Government through UDB guarantees this loan so that this project can go ahead. We believe that it is in the best interest of Uganda instead of exporting raw cotton as we are doing. 

Luckily, our cotton production is increasing now in the range of 230,000-250,000 berries per annum and we expect this increase will continue. We believe it is in the best interest of Uganda that we use this cotton for manufacturing and we are able to export value added products. I request the House to approve this guarantee and look at it as a strategic opportunity. 

There is a tendency to think that because this company has had some problems in the past, therefore, it is not worthwhile to lend the money to it. But we have had extensive discussion with the Japanese, especially the Japanese Bank for International Cooperation and they believe that strategically this would place Uganda in a position to become a player in textile industry in the world.

I believe that our support for this as a strategic project, as a strategic industry is in order in the best interest of our country. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

6.14
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee of National Economy on the request by the Government to guarantee a loan from the Japanese Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) to Uganda Development Bank (UDB) for financing a project under Phenix Logistics (Uganda) Ltd (PLUL).

The request for the Government to guarantee a loan from the Japanese Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) equivalent to $5.5 million for a project under M/S Phenix Logistics (Uganda) Ltd. was laid on the Table on 3 August 2005. The committee considered the request and now wishes to report its findings and recommendations to the House. 

The method of the work is on page 1. I hope everybody has a copy.  

The committee noted that the guarantee is in accordance with the provisions of Article 159(2) of the Constitution. It was also noted that JBIC is a development bank, which does not lend to private sectors. It lends to the Government only and for PLUL to access this loan, the Government of Uganda has to be the guarantor to keep in line with the bank’s practice.  

The loan is equivalent to $5.5 million and will be disbursed in three phases. Phase one is equivalent to $2.1 million, phase two is $1.3 and phase three is $2.1 million.

As shown above, the three phases will cover the following activities:

In phase one; the major target is to improve on the quality and export of organic yarn to the regional and international markets. The company PLUL is already in the export of these items to Tanzania, Mauritius, South Africa and others. The main action of this phase is to install the Auto Zone machines to make three kilograms of yarn on cone, which is the standard requirement for the European Union customers as opposed to the current two kilograms of yarn on each cone. 

The improvement of spinning capacity will also raise the production from the 24 metric tons per month to the 54 metric tons per month.  

The committee shares the same sentiments, which are in line with government’s strategy to add value to the export and support export-led growth. 

Other activities in this same phase will include installing a new steaming pipe, new tabular knitting machine to produce knitted fabrics of suitable width to lessen the fabric wastage. They will also install a new dyeing equipment to dye 250 kilograms per batch of fabrics. There will also be a new standby generator for power stability and a new transformer. That is phase one, which will cost $2.1 million.

Phase two is targeting exporting of organic fabrics. This will include the following: establishment of an affluent treatment plant to meet the ECOCERT standards. The Eco-Certificate is mandatory so, it will be obtained in this second phase if you are to access the European Union market. There will also be a compactor to decrease shrinkage of knitted fabrics. They are going also to import knitting machines and a new dyeing machine for knitted fabrics with both 250 kilograms and 500 kilograms dyeing batch to cope with the increased demand by the buyers.

Phase three is the last component of the project. It is aimed at raising production of woven shirts and knitted ready-made garments for export. These include T-shirts and Polo shirts plus others.  They will increase the production of T-shirts to 4,000 dozens per month and the production of Polo shirts to 10,000 dozens per month. This will also include purchasing new sewing machines and modernized cutting machines.

A brief analysis of the evaluation report by UDB and a feasibility study by Truspire:

PLUL is a registered company in Uganda and is incorporated with four shareholders. Madam Speaker, the details of this are in the brief report, which was laid before this House and I believe all the members got copies. 

The company has a loan from Uganda Development Bank totaling to shs 4,895,639,566 including accumulated interest of shs 646,174,307. 

The company has not been able to pay off its loans due to making losses; the losses were due to the initial high costs including the following: the high costs of capital, the high costs of replacing absolute machinery, high inventories in raw materials, the high cost of sales and high costs of administration.

According to the feasibility study for PLUL by Truspire Company Limited, PLUL requested for government intervention, which included the following: One was exempting the company from VAT on all the fuel. They also requested for transport subsidies, zero rating of imported inputs, ban on secondhand clothes, export incentives on yarn, fabrics and garments made from Uganda cotton, reimbursement of all taxes on imports of inputs, and low bank rates of 6 per cent for capital investment and 12 per cent for working capital.

The study also recommended business restructuring of PLUL and the following needed to be done: They should fully utilize the spinning capacity, produce high quality organic cotton yarn for export, cut down production costs of knitted products and improve the quality of knitted fabrics.

The terms and conditions of the credit:

The total amount requested for is $5.5 million and the borrower is Uganda Development Bank. The loan has a maturity period of 10 years including a grace period of three years. The interest rate is to be paid as LIBOR, which was mentioned at about 6 per cent. This is the average but it keeps on fluctuating, +0.4375 per cent per annum, plus 5 per cent per annum for MIGA guarantee fees.

The security is by the Government of Uganda to cover all payments to JBIC. This loan request is concessional and is within the borrowing cap for this Financial Year 2005/2006. 

The other conditions include concluding of subsidiary agreements between Uganda Development Bank and M/S Phenix Logistics (U) Ltd.

The committee observed the following:

• That PLUL has both forward and backward linkages in that the firm buys raw cotton and passes through all the stages to finished products.

• Cotton growing is one of the strategic interventions areas for the transformation of the economy. 

• PLUL is the only company with Japanese as key stakeholders that is currently manufacturing in Uganda. This would be an entry for other Japanese firms and individuals to come and invest in the country. It will also attract new technology in the textile sector.
 
• Value addition to the locally produced material has great positive multiplier effect on the economy, hence one of the engines of transformation.

• The committee also noted that for the local industries to be able to compete regionally and internationally, there is need for government intervention. The Private Sector is still weak, and needs support. There is a new approach, the public private sector partnership, which is being practiced even in some countries like China. This means that private sector alone cannot transform the economy. This calls for the involvement of government in making strategic interventions.

• The Government as a way of supporting the sector would convert parts of the loans portfolio of PLUL, which stands at about shs 4.9 billion into equity. The committee was informed that this was agreeable to PLUL that shs 2.1 billion will be transformed into 40 per cent of government shares. The remaining shs 2.8 billion will remain as a long-term concessional loan to PLUL as recommended by the UDB appraisal report.

• The company has been under capitalized and it is envisaged that the proposed loan would turn around the factory.

• Much as the guarantee is for $5.5 million, this will be disbursed in three phases. A feasibility study will be carried out at the end of each phase before disbursement of the next batch.

• The loan facility will trigger cotton production by providing market for the cotton. In this line, it will boost the household incomes of the rural majority in the cotton growing areas.

• Between 230 and 250 bales of cotton are produced annually but due to the collapse of the cotton prices on the world market, government introduced a subsidy of shs 50 per kilogram to keep the farmers afloat. This project would address this problem by processing the raw cotton.

• Members noted with concern, the request by PLUL including tax exemptions for some inputs, subsidies etcetera. The committee was, however, assured that only the incentives that are in line with the laws of Uganda and the East African Customs Union would be allowed.

• The committee noted that management and ownership of PLUL were fused. However, the committee was informed that after the injection of the new funds, PLUL will be restructured and new management will be put in place.  

• The MIGA guarantee of 5 per cent is not necessary according to the committee, as government will guarantee the loan. The committee was assured that government would continue to negotiate with JBIC for the removal of this fee. The committee agrees this fee is normally required, especially for private borrowers to guarantee their funds against, especially, political instabilities. Since it is government itself, which is going to guarantee, we believe it is not necessary to add an extra cost on this loan.

• The committee agrees with UDB report that PLUL secures a loan with its property at its current location in Industrial Area.

• Both the feasibility study of PLUL carried out by Truspire Co. Ltd, and appraisal report by the UDB recommended that this project as viable.  

• It was reported that as a policy, the Japanese government does not lend money to HPIC countries like Uganda. This was, therefore, considered a rare opportunity for Uganda to access development funds for this sector.

• The committee was informed that the funding will be channeled and monitored by UDB to ensure that it achieves the intentions.

• The funds will be accessed by procuring the machinery through Letters of Credit.

Madam Speaker, the committee came up with the following recommendations:

• That the new approach of Public/Private Sector Partnership should be promoted in all strategic sectors of the economy since the private sector alone can hardly transform the economy at the desired pace.

• That the acquisition of the 40 per cent shareholding in lieu of the shs 2.1 billion loan in PLUL should be done before the release of funds from JBIC.

• That the incentives requested by PLUL should be considered within the law and the East African Customs Union Charter. The committee further emphasizes that the process of giving incentives to investors should be clearly spelt out and be known to all.

• PLUL property located at its factory premises should be secured for the guarantee.

• The supply of machinery should be carried out after a competitive bidding process from the potential suppliers.

• Government should report to this House on the progress after every phase of the project before disbursing money for subsequent phase.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee appreciates the efforts by government to promote industrialization and value addition to locally produced raw materials.

We also note that the cotton sub sector needs urgent attention because of its positive multiplier effect in the economy.

Madam Speaker, the committee urges the House to adopt this report and approve the request by government to guarantee this loan. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson and the Members of the Committee on National Economy. I have looked at the report; it is signed by seven out of the 15 members, so, it qualifies for debate. (Hon Members rose_) Honourable members, do we really need so many contributions? Okay, one minute hon. Kigyagi.

6.30
MR ARIMPA JOHN KIGYAGI (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to support what has been presented and comment on the decision taken by the committee that they noted that for local industries to be able to compete regionally and internationally, there is need for government intervention. 

Madam Speaker, I want to say that while this is true and while I support this resolution, I would like to point out that preferential treatment is given to industries based around Kampala while those up-country do not get this treatment. I would like to put it on record that many upcountry industries who by the way have made a very big impact on this economy are not considered in many ways which maybe because they do not interact with people in Kampala Club and all these other high profile areas.  

I will give an example of GBK milk industry in Mbarara, which industry has always supported the milk industry in the West. One time when industries like Rha Milk, Ever Fresh, Country Taste and Dairy Corporation had closed, GBK continued to supply all the milk in the country. Despite all this, they have been in a financial crisis and need Shs 2.5 billion. 

The President gave them a letter, which they took to the Minister of Finance but up to now they have been tossed here and there. The people in the ministry were so arrogant that they could not even reply the President’s letter that asked these people to be helped. As I speak, if they do not get this money, supply of milk in the West will be in a crisis. I do not know what criterion is used but I believe we should also support these upcountry industries. The example I have given is of an industry that is supporting the local economy at the grassroots. Shouldn’t they really be helped? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.32
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and I want to thank the committee for this report. I want to remind this House that sometime last year we urged Government to support the private sector, particularly in strategic areas like agriculture and specifically cotton. The problem with this sector is that we have failed to get machines that make fabrics. We have the best cotton but we have been exporting raw materials simply because we did not have the machinery to turn our cotton into shirts.  

Madam Speaker, the logic behind intervening in the private sector is that you can only enjoy the fruit if you water the tree. The investment potential in some of these areas is enormous but if Government does not come out with a deliberate effort we shall not take off.

I would like to add to the recommendations of the committee, recommendation no.7 on page 8 that Government should source for cheap money to be availed for investment in strategic sectors so that the private sector can also get involved and access this money for investment. May I add that it is not only the cotton sector that is involved?  We are lucky that we have a Japanese who is investing in this sector and the Japan Government is also extending this facility to its nationals. 

But what about Ugandans like hon. Kigyagi was saying? Government must come out with a deliberate effort and not just dish out money for free. Instead it should avail cheap capital for investment so that we can turn our economy around and industrialize especially in the agro-processing industry. Otherwise Madam Speaker, I support the report and I beg to move.

6.35
MR FRED RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have only one point to emphasize, which point has been highlighted by hon. Kigyagi and hon. Rwamirama. I raised this same issue when we were passing the loan guarantee for the Islamic University in Mbale. Then I requested the minister and the committee to come out with clear guidelines and criteria on how guarantees of this nature should be passed by this House.  

Accordingly Madam Speaker, I want to move that this House not approve the succeeding loan guarantee unless we have clear criteria of how these guarantees will be passed by this House. Thank you.

6.37
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (Bukanga County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Personally I am beginning to see some light at the end of the tunnel. This is because you may recall that we had a quarrel in the 6th Parliament to this effect but up to now this Government is still footing Mehtha and Madhivani’s bills. In fact I recall one time when the minister came here and said there had been a guarantee when this was not the case. We however kept picking up the bills because IFC was involved. Now since this company has its own property as the committee has put it, let this property be the main security or if not Government should at least get these titles.  

Otherwise things may turn out for the worse since we have seen this company and it is not performing very well. If anything it still has outstanding debts with UDB which we are only adding to. While this Government has a lot of good will for investors we are very unfortunate because we do not get genuine investors coming here. For example when you look at the history of this company, it is not Japanese and the so-called owner only has 20 percent of the total shares. Other shareholders are Ugandans and from Singapore.  

Therefore I think that before we approve this, Ministry of Finance should go back and research on the profile of this particular company. We have never made a deal of this nature with investors and I think we should be careful especially since we might be dealing with people who have come to Uganda to get free money. We should also consider the fact that this loan will be paid using taxpayers’ money.  

I must also add my voice to that of many others that it is high time that fellow Ugandans were also assisted instead of only looking at Europeans who do not bring any value but only come with their briefcases to pack up whatever they earn to take back home. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.40
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am happy that we have come round to appreciating the fact that the private sector does not have all the solutions to our problems and that some intervention is necessary. I also want to appreciate the format used by this committee and especially the way they followed up this matter. I wish we could use the same format when dishing out money to people like Basajjabalaba.  

Parliament must know where this Shs 20 billion is going to come from, what it is going to do and how it will be paid back. Otherwise this will become a back door affair and will not help the progress of this country.

Cotton is becoming a very vital sector but I am still unhappy with our organisation of the cotton sector and especially the rights and privileges that are being given to the Cotton Development Authority. 

We must revisit this area if ventures of this nature are to take off. I trust that Phenix will do a good job but we should not forget the big plants that process and weave yarn like Nytil and Pamba. Maybe we should interest investors in revisiting our textile industry. Thank you.

6.42
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. I think this is a good loan that will encourage the Private Sector to grow, as this has been one of our major strategies for the development of Uganda. I believe that this loan is an incentive geared at appreciating the goodwill of investors. This is because many investors have come here with goodwill but due to high costs of investment, they have become frustrated. 

If we continue to identify serious investors like Phenix and support them in this way, this will also help us to develop. This is a very important sector because many of our people grow cotton and there will be a multiplier effect because cotton growers will be encouraged to grow more cotton as they will be assured that there is a factory in Uganda that will be process their cotton.

However Madam Speaker, I wish to reiterate recommendation number six of the committee that Government should report their progress to the House regularly or after every phase. This will help us in appraising the progress of Phenix as well as encourage other investors to come up. This is because if Government supports serious investors, others will also come up and do serious jobs. I thank you and I support the committee.

6.44
MR WILSON MURULI MUKASA (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the request because it is a very good one and it is quite welcome. I know it will do good our economy a lot of good.  

However Madam Speaker, I feel that the repayment period is a bit too short. Secondly, I hope that Phenix will pay particular attention to the market, especially the one abroad that seems to be inelastic. This is because currently Europe and America are putting a serious ban on for instance, Chinese textile products. The other day we heard on the news that 75 million textile pieces from China were stranded particularly in Europe and America. 

I think particular attention should be paid to the market and its sustainability and on how Phenix can effectively and sustainably compete with long established producers, particularly from the Eastern world. Otherwise this is a very good loan and we should go ahead and approve it.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, do you have any comments to wind this up?

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank honourable members for the support they have given this report and I welcome the additional recommendations. If you will allow Madam Speaker, I ask that they be part of the report. One of the recommendations was for Government to look around for sources of cheap money for the Private Sector. 

The second one, which is in line with our recommendation number three is that the criteria for accessing this money or guarantee should be clearly stated by Government. Short of that, there should no approval for guaranteeing such monies. The other contributions were really comments and questions for the ministers. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.46
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the members for their comments and their support. I agree entirely that we should support our own investors fully and not give preferential treatment to investors from abroad. 

I would like to assure hon. Kigyagi that I have spoken with the owner of GBK Industry with the view of assisting him but I am afraid that he said he did not want money with interest attached. Therefore I found it impossible to be helpful to him since he was not interested in paying interest. However I told him to think about it and that when he has a change of mind, he should come back and see me.

As regards the idea of getting cheap money for our investors from the Private Sector, I want to assure honourable members that we are working day and night and this is one of the main reasons why we have reopened Uganda Development Bank.

MR DOMBO: I want to thank you, honourable minister for giving way. I want to seek clarification in reference to the cost of money that GBK Dairy Products raised. It is true that worldwide money is got at a cost. However there have been investors in Uganda like Mr Basajjabalaba and Mr Kananathan who have been accessing some money. I wonder about the rate of interest that people like Basajjabalaba were getting this money. That may be the reason why other people also think they should access that type of money. Could the minister clarify?

DR NKUUHE: Honourable minister, I wanted to know the owner of this company because when I went out, I checked on the internet and found out that the actual owner is a company from Singapore called Crocodile, which company was founded by a Dr Tan Pian Sin. He owns about 20 percent of this company and he is the majority shareholder. So in actual fact he is the actual owner of Phenix Logistics and not Mr Kashuwada who is only a minority shareholder.  

You need to be aware, Mr Minister that in actual fact this company is owned by somebody from Singapore. Crocodile is a credible brand name but nevertheless I think this information is important in knowing whom we are dealing with.

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI:  Madam Speaker, I would like the minister or the chairperson of the committee to tell us whether there is an intention to rule out small scale industries and emphasize on particularly those that produce cotton. I remember the time we quarreled here just to have the price of a kilo of cotton increased by Shs 50. The impact of that Shs 50 turned out to be Shs 2.2 billion. 

Why should the minister borrow for a company, Ugandan or foreign $5 million when Ugandans are producing cotton worth $22 million? Some statistics say that we exported cotton worth $34 million. Should we assume that the extra $12 million was donated to foreign traders? Honourable minister, do you know that it is possible for these industries that you have started financing in Kampala to change and start manufacturing other things?  I would like to be clarified on whether this is the plan. 

Furthermore Madam Speaker, when you produce cotton as a finished good you get $10 dollars per kilo for it yet you can imagine that our peasants are giving away cotton for much less than a dollar. The minister must clarify this issue of cotton at this juncture. He must to convince us that we are going forward in the production of cotton, that we are all going to be on board and that the $5 million he is going to borrow will be shared by every peasant. We must be able to see a ray of hope that somehow poverty is going to be conquered especially at grass root level. I seek this clarification, Madam Speaker.

6.52
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Madam Speaker, the information I want to give hon. Nkuuhe is that he did not have to run to the Internet to get all that information. The Minister of Finance already gave it to this House and it is contained in the document that was laid on the Table. Further more, being out of the country does not exonerate him from –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He was not even here when you were reading the report.   

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, it is true that Crocodile International currently own 45 percent shares while Mr Kashwada owns 20 percent, Gordon Wavamunno owns another 20 percent and Dr Tun owns 15 percent. As we reported, the shares in this company are going to be reorganized such that the Government of Uganda gets 40 percent. 

What should be clear to this House in response to hon. Gagawala’s question is that this loan was sourced, by and large by Mr Kashwada from Japan. He went there as a Japanese but also as an investor from Uganda. As we told you the Government of Japan does not lend to the private sector. That is why the Government of Uganda is coming in to guarantee this loan. 

It is also for this reason that we recommended that there be a clear policy from Government stating qualifications for guarantees and loans and clearly stating the terms In the event that there is, say an investor in Kaliro and this policy is already in place, I believe Government will be in position to guarantee that person so long as the terms are agreeable. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.55
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to assure honourable members that Government will do everything possible to give every possible encouragement and support to the private sector. There should be no doubt that the proactive stand by Government is to make sure that private investors, both domestic and foreign find materials, financial assistance and any other type of encouragement so that they are able to succeed. 

As we visit other countries, we are seeing more and more that Governments are going out of their way to make their businesses succeed. We must do the same if we are going to be able to compete in the world. Therefore, I want to assure honourable members that they need not fear. We will put in place fair and transparent policies that will encourage all would-be investors without discrimination. 

We are working very hard to make sure that Uganda Development Bank has a growing volume of reasonably low cost loans for medium to long-term periods and we believe that this is the fairest way to make finances available. When you go to the bank, your project will be appraised. If it is found to be marketable, it will be financed at a competitive cost in Ugandan terms. 

This is because competitive interests as far as world terms are concerned vary. In the past there was a tendency for loans to be given at the so-called market rates within Uganda. However we are not competing only within Uganda. Therefore if interest rates are three or four percent in other parts of the world, if our business people are to compete within the same market they need equally low interest rates. We have to struggle to attain interest rates that are competitive not just domestically but also internationally. 

I would like to thank honourable members and to assure them that we believe this will be a good example for us to follow for the industry. We have already taken steps in this Budget that we have just approved. As you know we have put in more than Shs 10 billion for the cotton industry to make sure that all arrears are cleared and to ensure that there is potential assistance in case prices continue to be low. This will help farmers maintain reasonable prices. So Madam Speaker, I believe we are doing everything possible to assist the cotton industry.  I hope that –(Interruption)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No honourable members, please we must finish.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for a member to insist and overlook the ruling of the Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been here long enough. Let us finish this item, finish the Budget and handle the next item. You can seek clarification later from him.

DR SURUMA: Madam Speaker, I thank honourable members for their support and I look forward to successfully finished logistics as a result of this support. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve Government guarantee borrowing from Japan Bank for International Corporation to the Uganda Development Bank for financing the project under Phenix Logistics Uganda Limited.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go back to the Supplementary Appropriation Bill.

7.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) Mr Isaac Musumba: Madam Speaker, I am happy to report that we have since harmonized our position with the Chairman of the Committee on Finance and Economic Planning and the Chairperson of the Budget Committee as you directed and we are ready to proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the outcome of your deliberations?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, the figure that was in question was Shs 31,983,571,000 and this figure is the one that we had expended without going to the committee for their authorization. 

This arose from the following: 
(i)	Major expenditure has been incurred for Makerere University with lecturers’ salaries amounting to Shs 4 billion.
(ii)	Shs 1.5 billion was spent on Mulago Hospital for the purchase of drugs.
(iii)	In the Prisons department we spent Shs 1,308,000,000 for food 
(iv)	Shs 4,400,000,000 was spent in paying membership fees for IGAD and COMESA 
(v)	To Ministry of Justice we expended Shs 4,523,156,000 that was used in the court case that DRC lodged against the Government of Uganda in Deheng. 
(vi)	Salary shortfalls for teachers, civil servants and medical workers in both Local and Central Governments amounted to Shs 16,268,504,000. 

Madam Speaker, this adds up to Shs 31,983,571,000. As earlier presented, this figure has been fully reconciled. Therefore I beg that the Supplementary Appropriations Bill, 2005 be read the second time so that these figures can be considered. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the Supplementary Appropriation bill, 2005 be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2005

7.04
Clause 1

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) Mr Isaac Musumba: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of supply do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) Mr Isaac Musumba: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2005 and passed it without amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) Mr Isaac Musumba: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered The Supplementary Appropriations Bill, 2005 and I beg to move that the Bill be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2005

7.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) Mr Isaac Musumba: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled The Supplementary Appropriations Bill, 2005 be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2005 be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: 
THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION ACT, 2005

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

7.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is a ministerial statement –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, in all fairness this House has been sitting here since 10.00 O’clock and hon. Buturo has not been in the House. He has been constantly moving in and out. We cannot afford to wait for somebody and this matter can be put on hold. It is proper and fitting that this House adjourns so that we go home and have supper.

MR KIGYAGI: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to say that the Minister of Information has not been in this House, when in actual fact he has before he was given an opportunity to go and prepare this document for presentation today?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am usually able to see who is in and who is not. I want to confirm that the Minister of Information has been here since a quarter to midday and he sought my permission to arrive at that time.  Moreover you demanded for this statement very urgently and since we are going on recess, you must be able to tell your people whether they are going to pay tax or not. Honourable minister please make the statement.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Thank you Madam Speaker. Honourable members, this is a ministerial statement in connection with the collection of TV viewers’ license fees. Earlier this year, this August House passed the Bill entitled the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Bill, 2005. Thereafter, this Bill was sent to His Excellency the President for assent and on 2nd May 2005, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda signified his assent to the Bill. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, there is now in place the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Act, 2005. Members of the Board have started executing the work in readiness to modernize as well as expand Uganda’s broadcast network.  Earlier this week, His Excellency the President invited me to State House to discuss the funding of the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC). This invitation arose from my earlier request to meet His Excellency the President over the subject of funding for the UBC.  

It is true that the Act establishing the UBC and in particular sections 14 and 15 authorise the UBC to raise its revenue through various ways such as borrowing, television viewing license fees and advertisement. In exercise of their right to borrow money, the management of UBC approached some local banks with a view for the latter to lend UBC money. While the banks were willing to do so having found UBC worth investing in, they put certain demands that the UBC management could not meet without the –(Interruption) (Dr Ezra Suruma rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please do not abandon us. We have supported you through the Budget, please go and sit down. (Laughter & Applause)

DR NSABA BUTURO: Could not meet without the express support of Government. The banks were demanding a Guarantee by Government for the funds they were considering giving to UBC. When I put this matter to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it was found to be impossible for Government to give that Guarantee. 

It was at that point that I requested for a meeting with His Excellency the President. The meeting duly took place and was attended by, among others the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister in charge of the Presidency. It was agreed that the Government’s debt strategy would not permit it to give this Guarantee that the banks required before they could consider extending a loan to UBC. This explanation was given by the minister and appreciated by all of us at the meeting.

It was in the course of discussing possible sources of funds for UBC that the issue of TV viewing licence fees came up. I wish to make it clear that media reports that claimed that His Excellency the President had stopped the TV tax were a gross misrepresentation of what the press release from State House had said. This is why any suggestions that the President of the Republic of Uganda was undermining the law would be inconceivable and grossly inaccurate.  

His Excellency the President is not opposed to the TV viewing licence fee in principal. His main concern was about those Ugandans who are low-income earners or who own second TV sets and who may find it hard to pay the fee. In the press release the President directed that this category of people be exempted from payment of the television fee. 

There is a slight omission that I wish to bring to the attention of honourable members and it is that it has been recommended that we amend the law to exclude this category of people. Since we have not had the opportunity to know which of the TV set owners are low income earners, the President has recommended that for now we start the collection in places like hotels and health clubs.  

In future however when we are able to get accurate data on the financial status of domestic TV owners, we may consider widening the bracket of those eligible to pay the TV viewing license fee. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, a South African Company called TRACES (SA) in South Africa won the tender to provide TV viewers’ licence fees collection services. The contract with the Government of Uganda was signed on 6th June 2005. Since the President’s directive was issued, I have met the management of TRACES TV (Uganda) Ltd who represent TRACES (SA) to discuss the best way that this directive can be implemented without causing injury to their commercial interests. I am happy to report to you that the company fully appreciates His Excellency the President’s concern and will give appropriate attention to them.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, any suggestions that the Government does not respect contracts that it enters into with private companies couldn’t be further from the truth. The NRM Government in general and His Excellency the President in particular has been at the forefront of efforts to attract private investment into the country.  Our record is unsurpassed and everything possible will continue to be done to ensure that private investment in Uganda flourishes.

Finally, the TV viewer’s license fee is not new to Uganda.  It was introduced in Uganda in 1960’s and up until 1998 it was still being collected and Ugandans were faithfully paying the fee. If our country is to have a public service broadcaster (i.e. UBC) that is the envy of the world, the public must be prepared to pay something to maintain it. However Government has the onerous duty to first revamp the ailing country’s broadcast network. 

Until yesterday, Ugandans had been thronging pay centres to pay the viewers’ license fee. I believe that when this matter is finally resolved Ugandans will rush to post offices and Standard Chartered Bank branches to pay the fee. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, will you be coming back to amend the law you made?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, it is our intention to come before this August House and do just that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And pending that?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Until that is done Madam Speaker, the public will be excluded from payment of this fee except for those categories of institutions I have just mentioned.

7.13
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you Madam Speaker. Last time we raised a question as to why the contract with TRACE Company was signed before the law was enacted. If the minister had not done this, this issue of Government having to negotiate with the company on interests or penalties would not have risen. What provoked you to do this?

7.14
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the minister whether they have considered the prepayment system so that in future if they expand this license to include every one, People would have to first pay before being able to access anything on TV.

Secondly, the minister is saying that in future they will be able to collect this tax from wealthy people and exempt the low-income earners. How will they do this? For example members of Parliament may be wealthy this year but after elections they may become very low-income earners. How will they differentiate between those who have been members of Parliament and wealthy and then the next time they are walking on the streets?

7.15
MS GRACE TUBWITA (Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I wanted clarification from the minister. He is saying that they are going to tax hotels and clubs but some hotels are bigger than others. How they will identify hotels that has more TVs than others? What procedure are they going to follow while licensing these TV’s? 

Are they going to have a specific figure and say that certain categories of hotels will pay this much while small clubs will pay this much? This is because some hotels are really big and have a TV in every room. I would like to know the procedure they are going to follow.

7.17
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you Madam speaker. I just wanted to know why this tender was given to a South African company when we have our own local companies that could have collected this fee. I want to give an example of parking in Kampala. At first a Korean company took it but a local company now manages it. Why don’t we also give this tender to a local company?

Secondly, the minister is talking of private investment. What has this company invested in Uganda?

Lastly, I want to thank His Excellency the President for having stopped the payment of this fee especially for the poor people. This is because we had already started receiving complaints from our villages. In fact somebody called Masasi from my village who has a TV that uses a battery had actually given up and was ready to surrender the TV to whoever came to collect the Shs 20,000.

7.19
MR DANIEL KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. My contribution is very small. I want to thank Ugandans for their enthusiasm because the minister said Ugandans have been so enthusiastic and have been thronging these paying stations to pay this tax. This of course contradicts my honourable colleague who has said that he has been receiving many complaints about the tax. 

What prompted this statement is that the minister wanted to prove to this Parliament and the entire country that the President did not actually stop the payment. However when you read this report and analyse it, the President actually stopped payment of the fees and ahead to propose that we even amend the law to exempt most of our people. This is because most people are poor and who are among the poor owns a hotel?  

The President should be thanked in spite of the fact that our people were so enthusiastic. In fact I think that even the timing of this tax was not good. Therefore I would like to thank the President for having come out and put a stop to this tax to enable us go through the transition smoothly. I thank you.

7.21
MR WILSON MUKASA MURULI (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I am still not convinced about the necessity of this tax or viewers license fee. Government just recently abolished graduated tax and proposed property tax. The other day traders were on hon. Migereko’s neck complaining about taxation. When you look at the performance of UTV and the quality of programmes that have been offered all along, a lot of sensitisation is required to convince many of us to pay this fee willing. 

I agree with the President and believe that he has the pulse of the country at heart. This tax should be stayed until there is proper sensitisation and in the meantime other means should be looked into to revamp UTV services without making people pay this tax.

I ask the honourable minister to undertake a serious sensitisation campaign in case everything else fails. Otherwise the timing is utterly wrong and we may pay dearly as a Government for going along with this kind of thing.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MWONDHA: I just want to help the minister because this matter of TV license has been very dodgy. His statement is dated 8th August 2005 and I hope he does not use that date to deny this statement at a later stage.  

7.24
MR AMON-REEVES KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a big concern in connection with the Ministry of Information under President’s Office and State House. Coordination has become so irregular to the extent that Ugandans are left in suspense. For example the Minister of Information at one time told us that the President could not attend Garang’s burial in Juba because he was devastated –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, our discussions are not general. We are talking specifically about TV licenses.

MR KABAREEBE: I have left that. Concerning this tax, it is mentioned in the report that press reporters reported wrongly. However according to the information we read, the President was reported as saying that this tax should only be levied on those who are operating commercially. Automatically this meant that individuals were not going to pay and that is what was reported.

Therefore before we begin quarrelling with the newsmen and the press houses, let us first synchronize our own ideas here. Thank you very much.

7.25
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am happy that the minister is going to come up with amendments to this law. However I would like to propose that he first does a thorough study of TV licensing. This is because currently in essence he wants to remove second-hand TV sets. I want tell you that some second-hand TVs have higher quality output than the new TVs and some are even more expensive.  

My concern however is this TV viewing license. In my constituency, UTV and WBS are hardly received and others like Multichoice do not exist. Why then should I pay the TV viewing license? Maybe the law that is coming will be able to spell out all this although my view is that if we get a good law and policy, even low income earners will be willing to pay.  

I will equate this to vehicle licenses. Even the very poor sometimes save and manage to buy vehicles. Now once you buy a vehicle you have to buy a road license whether the vehicle is new or old. If we could follow that approach, it may solve several problems as far as TV viewing license is concerned. Thank you very much.

7.28
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to first say that actually this tax was not part of the Finance Bill so the money was not going to the Consolidated Fund. This was an arrangement of the ministry without involving the Ministry of Finance.  We found this out when we summoned the minister to tell us where they were going to get money for the deficit that was created after they stopped collection of Graduated tax. He assured us that this TV tax was not included in the Finance Bill. 

Secondly, I want to warn my colleague hon. Nsaba Buturo that speed kills. The Bill was assented to on 2nd May 2005 and because of their readiness and enthusiasm to work very fast, by 6th June 2005 they had advertised and got a company from South Africa and awarded it the contract. It is beats my understanding that we can even hire a South African Company to come and knock on the doors of Ugandans in Kololo, Ankole, Bugyengye to pay the tax.  

I also want to warn Government basing on precedence. If you say that you are removing a certain tax because of the poor people who are watching TV, tomorrow expect demonstrators here comprising of poor people who own cars and want to pay less tax.  

Madam Speaker, there is something that the minister has not communicated. We have a scenario where we signed a contract with a South African company. We based the terms on the population of viewers in Uganda, which could amount to about four million TVs. Soon after an announcement was made to the effect that the contract holders were to collect money from only the people who were using TVs for commercial purposes. We would like to know who is going to bear the cost for the breach of contract. We have previously passed some reports here and warned Government on uncoordinated movements.

Finally Madam Speaker, it is very important that we harmonize positions. Somebody asked me recently, “What is the problem with your Movement Government?” He continued to say, “I heard Tamale Mirundi actually flooring the minister saying he did not know what he was talking about. The minister is not informed. He does not know that yesterday the President abolished this tax”. Honourable minister you may come here and use your good English but at the end of the day, Tamale Mirundi is the star in public.

Madam Speaker, this is very important. You saw how lack of coordination almost brought us problems when we were debating the Appropriation Bill. It is common knowledge that we have cooperated with Government concerning supplementaries on all Bills but when you ambush people here yet you are not coordinated, this becomes a problem. Those of us who subscribe to the present Government get disappointed when there is lack of harmony especially regarding views.

Finally, I want to recommend that they stay the fees completely and find a way of sorting out the problems with this South African company. This is because subsequently we are going to pay heavily by going back to the drawing board to come out with something acceptable. After all even if people pay this tax there is nothing to see. 

When I want to watch Multichoice I go and pay for the services before hand. I advise that you also use current technology so that we can pay for what we can control.  You do not need to come to my home and deny me my viewing rights. Instead tax these people of Multichoice since they control virtually the whole country. Start on something that you can sustain. I thank you very much.

7.40
DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (Sheema County North, Bushenyi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also have some comments for the minister and I thank him for his statement. I am particularly concerned about the argument that the Government is concerned about low-income earners and those who own second hand TV sets. (Interjections) Yes, but there is no way you can differentiate between first hand and second hand TVs especially after they have been used for some time. After all even rich people buy second hand TVs because of the belief that a second TV from Japan is more durable than a new one from China or Malaysia. That therefore cannot be used in determining who pays.

My second issue is that of the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. I presume that this corporation mainly controls Uganda Television and Radio Uganda. However you will find that in many parts of the country, people who own TVs do not watch UTV or even WBS. Instead they use their TVs for their VCRs to be able to watch videos and their wedding tapes. Why should they be compelled to pay for owning a TV set in their homes?

My third point is just to echo what hon. Rwamirama said. There are many people in Uganda who are complaining about so called investors who come here to do petty jobs or businesses that could easily be done by local Ugandans.  When you hire a South African company to come and start collecting taxes on TVs in the villages, heavy transactional costs are incurred. 

You will find an expatriate being paid a large salary and this burden is borne by the taxpayers. In fact when you are awarding these contracts, I do not think there is need for international bidding, unless of course you are getting the money from the World Bank. But this was our money. We could have used local companies and created jobs for our people.

I believe it is the duty of Government to give information since information dissemination is a very important duty of Government. We should even be grateful that we have people watching UTV. I believe that by levying this tax you will reduce on the number of people watching their ministers and President give out very vital information including health related information. Therefore rather than taxing peasants and even the rich, I would rather that an increase in tax on TV sets be levied as they are being imported and have money from budget support to support TV stations.

My final point Madam Speaker is that the Government is now suggesting that they tax hotels. However in the few hotels that I have visited, you may find that you cannot even watch UTV. They are mainly tuned to CNN, BBC and other stations. Why then should these hotels pay when they never watch UTV?  I thank you.

7.38
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE(Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I thank you and I congratulate you on your stamina. I have a few questions for the honourable minister. First of all, you are saying you are going to bring an amendment. What does the law say and why do we need to amend it? Does the law state that people must pay viewers license fees and therefore for some to be exempted there has to be an amendment?  In other words are you saying that the President has overlooked the law? If the answer is no, then why bother with these amendments?

Secondly, you said that Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) staff wanted a loan and they were refused. How much did they want for which a guarantee was required? This is because we have just approved $ 5 million for a company that belongs to an 80-year-old man of Chinese origin, Malaysian citizenship and a permanent resident in Singapore. This man was born in 1925. Now here we are refusing to approve an amount of money that I believe does not exceed $ 5 million dollars for our own people who are struggling to make this company work. That in my view is double standards.

The other question I have honourable minister, is on the broadcasting policy document. There you talk of public broadcasting, commercial broadcasting that is pay per view and community broadcasting. Of course they have specific definitions. Why then are you mixing public broadcasting with commercial broadcasting? What you are doing essentially is creating a public company, subsidizing it and then engaging in commercial activity. In our attempt to subsidise are we not undermining other commercial companies that are in the business of broadcasting?

Finally, can’t you think of alternative ways of raising this money? I fear for you because this tax is very difficult to collect. It is going to make everybody angry and your boss will be very unhappy with you. Can’t you really think of alternative ways of raising this money so that you can spare poor miserable Ugandans who can hardly afford a meal yet now they have to pay for these South African guys to come here, drive their pajero’s and torture them with a tax? I thank you.

7.40
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will be very brief. First of all, I want to agree with my brother hon. Kiwalabye that I do not see the purpose of this report because the minister has come here to tell us that the President was misquoted. This is despite the fact that the statement he has brought is in agreement with what the press told us that had happened at State House. Therefore I do not see the purpose of this report.

Secondly on the issue of graduated tax, when the President reduced the graduated tax to a minimum of Shs 3000, everybody claimed to be poor and tried to pay only Shs 3000. You know how that ended. History repeats itself but man has continuously failed to learn from history. Mr minister, please learn from history.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, could you also let us know for how long the economy of South Africa is going to be supported in its growth at our expense?  

7.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, permit me to thank you for giving me the opportunity to say something about this very important subject that has plagued the minds of Ugandans. Hopefully we shall conclude this subject today.  

Can I inform hon. Okupa and honourable members that His Excellency the President did assent to the UBC Bill on 2nd May 2005 and the contract with the South African Firm called TRACES was signed on 6th June 2005. That was the sequence of the assent and signing of the contract.

About hon. Eriyo’s query, what I can say is that the modalities for collection and identifying who qualifies will be worked out with the company and with this August House as well. I foresee a situation where I will come back to this House to report on our findings and I am sure that honourable members will want to contribute.

Hon. Tubwita has raised the same issue about how we actually work out who qualifies, who pays and the whole exercise of collection. Can I say that one of the challenges we have faced since we sought to introduce this fee is the question of awareness? We needed to have brought the whole country along with us but time has been too short. That may explain some of the difficulties we are witnessing today. 

I think it is true that even honourable members of this August House need to be convinced about the merits of this fee. However may I remind them Madam Speaker that they are the ones who suggested that the principle source of funds for UBC be our license fee, please refer to sections 14 and 15. I do hope you remember that.

Hon. Mutuluuza was asking why we gave the contract to a Southern African Company. All I can say is that the tendering process was duly respected and that this company came out on top. I should also add that this exercise involves a lot of technology. It is not simply a matter of moving from house to house with your receipt book. Rather it involves a lot of technology and that is why I suppose this South African Company won the tender at the expense of a few indigenous ones that did not qualify.

I quite agree with hon. Kiwalabye that the case for raising awareness is compelling indeed. One reason that we have had for the intense interest in this whole exercise is that people were not aware. I want to inform you honourable members that when a country decides to have a public service broadcaster, the public has to pay. I want to remind you also that UBC is 100 percent State owned and as a result it does not operate like WBS or LTV. It is the State that must pay.  

I realize however that the concept is not yet a familiar one and that it will take us time to explain it to our people. We must remember though that every country worth its name, and every country that is jealous of its integrity, its identity and its sovereignty must have a public broadcaster and this is exactly what we are trying to do.

Hon. Muruli Mukasa said he is not convinced about this fee.  Well, he is the one who initiated it so I am not sure what he means exactly.  

Hon. Mwondha, I apologize that your statement reads 8th August but mine reads 8th September. That is an anomaly that I apologise for.

As regards the issue of coordination, I admit that we could have done better and indeed we intend to do better. As a matter of fact Government is coming out with a grand idea and we may have the opportunity next time to report on how we have effectively coordinated and disseminated information in an attempt to solve some of the situations we have just reported about. These things happen and no one is perfect. From time to time we all get it wrong and I am sure you understand this. But of course we do not want this to happen all the time.

Hon. Kabakumba has advised that we undertake a thorough study. We intend to do this as we discuss and debate on the modalities of funding this very public asset. I want to say Madam Speaker, that UBC is a public asset. The people of Uganda own it and they are the ones who should fund this public broadcaster.

We have consciously moved away from having Government broadcasters and situations where UBC concentrates most of its time on government programmes at the expense of other programmes such as those of the opposition. Therefore we have consciously put in place a public broadcaster that will be addressing and attending to the interests of every section of Uganda.

Our challenge is to modernise the current network. It is a big challenge and the approach will be in two phases. We want to first modernise the equipment that we have and the second phase will involve expanding to the West where we do not presently have a broadcast network.

One of the reasons why we were looking to the public to give us money is precisely so that we can improve the quality of service that UTV and Radio Uganda provide.

Hon. Rwamirama was inferring that the minister has been moving too fast and that that may explain why there is this discordant response to a situation that has perturbed a good section of our people. I am not sure that is the case. I do know that in a way we are in a hurry because the country does not have a public broadcaster to be proud of and like I said no country can survive without a public broadcaster. Our intention therefore is to have a broadcaster that is second to none and that will only be possible if our people cooperate with us. In a way we are in a hurry and I think one should commend us for being in such a hurry. However we will make sure that we do not make further mistakes.

To address hon. Tumwesigye’s concern, I want to assure you that this South African Company was engaged purely on merit. There was a tendering process and three firms, two Ugandan and this South African one bided. TRACES of South Africa won the tender because it had superior technology and experience in South Africa. It is actually the company that collects this fee in South Africa so they won the tender through a proper and fair competitive system.

Hon. Nkuuhe raised the issue of guarantee. The Minister of Finance is not here but one of the reasons Government was not able to guarantee the loan we asked for was because the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) was attempting to raise these funds from Private Sector yet according to the debt strategy of Government, it is not possible for loans that are secured through private means to be guaranteed.  That is the technical explanation I am able to share with you.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank honourable members once again for the support they have given us. I am counting on them because we will be coming back with further proposals on how best the country can fund its public service broadcaster. I thank you very much for this time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. At least the country can now go to sleep without worrying about what will happen to their televisions the following morning. We await your Bill for the amendment.  

Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work you have done. We have been here quite long. I want to thank you because today especially we had a long session on the Budget but we have been able to accomplish everything. I thank you all for your cooperation. The Prime Minister wants to say something.

7.52
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, I wanted to pay tribute to you. (Applause) You have shepherded us extremely well and you are tenacious. May I also thank honourable members of Parliament, the Front Benchers and especially the Ministers of Finance. I want finally to thank the Almighty, the creator who has given us life.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister for your kind words. Honourable members, let me also thank our Clerks-At-Table, Sergeant-At-Arms and his team and all our support staff who have worked on the reports, attended to our committees and given us all the support for the work we do here. I adjourn this House to the 19th September 2005 at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 7.57 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 September 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)
  

