Tuesday, 9 September 2014

Parliament met at 10.12 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, every year on the 8th October we host the National Prayer Breakfast. This is to inform you that the 16th National Prayer Breakfast will take place on 8 October 2014. The theme will be, “Faithful stewardship in governance”.

The chief guest will be His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda. The host is the Rt Hon. Rebecca A. Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament. The keynote speaker will be Barr Emeka Nwankpa, Chairman of the Africa House of Prayer. Sister Rosemary Nyirumbe will be a special guest. She is the winner of the 2007 CNN Hero and director of St Monica’s Tailoring Centre in Gulu, Uganda. 

The venue will be Hotel Africana, Nile Hall. It starts from 7.00a.m to 10.00a.m. Please confirm your attendance by filling a confirmation form and place it in the National Prayer Breakfast box on the table next to the pigeonholes. Come, all of you. Thank you.

10.13
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to question why the Leader of Government Business and his deputy are not here. However, I also want to raise an issue of public concern. Parliament has been on recess for some time – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Parliament has not been on recess; we only adjourned plenary.

MR MAWANDA: Okay. The media was awash with the Katosi scum during that time and the people I represent expected Government to come up with a statement to tell us what is happening. We have waited for this statement in vain. My people have now asked me to raise this issue and ask Government to come up with a statement to tell us what the scum is about and what Government is doing about it. 

Secondly, you may realise that Government is always informed about accounting officers to whom we appropriate funds. One of the accounting officers was interdicted by the board of UNRA. We want Government to tell us what is happening concerning that scum. 

10.14
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank my colleague who has raised this issue. Government will make a statement to Parliament and the country after we have dealt with the budget. 

However, I want to inform the country that this issue was raised by the Secretary to the Treasury, who is also the appointing authority of that accounting officer. So, administrative matters are being handled by the administrators. However, we shall make a statement to inform the country what happened and how work will progress on that road.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

    I. THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2013/2014
    II. THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND THE BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report was presented to the House and the question was dully proposed for your debate. I re-state the motion: that the report of the sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2014/2015 be adopted. That was the motion for your debate. Debate starts now and the time we agreed will be three minutes for each contribution. I will start with the member for Kalungu West. 

10.15
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that this iPad is not opening, but let me go on; at least I read the report. 

These are my issues I would like to raise. One, I would like to ask the Ministry of Defence: you raised the UPDF budget from Shs 800 billion to Shs 1 trillion and yet there is no consideration for soldiers at all; what is the soldiers’ increment in this amount? What are you doing for the soldiers? Actually, these are your escorts. We need to know what you are doing for them - even the police and prisons. We are tired of complaining all the time about these people. 

Secondly, I want the Ministry of Defence to tell us openly why they are not allowing retirement according to age. Dr Kiyonga is aware of what is happening in Tanzania. When a soldier reaches 60 years old – actually, even those who fought in the war in Tanzania – they are given a very good farewell. They construct for them very good houses and give them some money to help them earn a living. But here in Uganda, we are seeing soldiers deserting, and you will not stop them from disserting the army unless you allow them to retire at their will. 

I want to state here that one time I will give details. I taught in the army for ten years and I know them very well. People want to retire but they are being blocked from retirement. Only God knows what they fear. 

Mr Speaker, there is the issue of NAADS. I want to state categorically that I went to Coffee Development Authority and found out that in one year, they spent only Shs 4 billion to provide coffee seedlings to the whole of Uganda. When the President was giving his State of the Nation Address, he said that where he used the army in the Rwenzori region only – Luwero - he spent Shs 8 billion. There is nowhere in Luwero where you can find seedlings worth Shs 8 billion. That is the proof that even if you bring in UPDF, corruption will remain. 

Let us therefore address the real issues facing NAADS before we bring in the army. Let us look at the substance and find out what is failing NAADS, other than thinking that everything will be done by the army. Did you investigate the helicopters’ crash? Where is the report? We are told that there was connivance that led to the crash of these choppers. We want to know what happened. 

I want to conclude by asking about the issue of buckets in prisons; it is escalating. You cannot detain people in places where there are no toilets. One time in my constituency, they arrested people for not constructing toilets but where they were taking them, they were going to use buckets. So I asked them, “Why don’t you forgive these people and let them use the money for the fine to construct their own toilets because where you are taking them, there are no toilets?” At the Public Accounts Committee, we are always assured that internal affairs –(Member timed out_)

10.18
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was here when the report was presented. I thank you for this opportunity. 

I am interested in vote 145, the Uganda Prisons Services. In the introductory remarks, we were informed that Shs 182 million was returned to the Treasury by the end of June. As someone who knows what is happening in the prisons, it does not sound smart to me that money is returning to the centre yet the services are not adequate. I want to know if the money was received by the prisons services very late and therefore had to be returned. 

I remember when we were considering the public service ministry report, we had a recommendation that this money stays in the budget where it was designed to be used in the preceding year. So, it does not augur well when it is recommended that money has to be returned yet you know that services are not adequate.

Secondly, there was an issue about women and children in the cells. I was not happy that there was no money pegged to this service. There was also an issue about the diet for mothers and babies and one cow per prison, which to me is not adequate. Why don’t we think about other dietary provisions like the provision of soya beans, which is one of the best dietary provisions for pregnant mothers and babies? If the cow is not adequate, we can look at other budgetary provisions because it is not the fault of the baby that the mother gets to be in the prison. We need to be serious about these budgets.

Thirdly, let me say something about trafficking of people. I have not seen a budget for this item. Yes, it was mentioned in the recommendations and there was talk of improving policies and putting policies in place, but there is no specific budget meant for saving people who are being trafficked and repatriating and saving those who have been trafficked. This is a serious issue and we know it, especially for the girls and women who are trafficked into places like Malaysia, India etcetera under the guise of employment. That is why we need to have a budget to ensure these policies are in place and we get mechanisms to avert this practice. (Member timed out_)

10.21
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank the committee for the work they have done. 

I would like to make some remarks but before I do that, allow me to thank the UPDF for the work they are doing in regard to our international diplomacy. I am saying this because where the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has failed, the UPDF has always come in to provide services. When you travel outside the country, people do not actually talk about Uganda’s foreign policy but about the role of Uganda in the regional stability. That is why I want to thank the army for what they have done.

Further, I want to thank the police at least for the calm they have brought to this country. That is why there is a lot of confidence in the minds of the tourists who come here. They know that Uganda is an island of peace but this is because of the police and the army. 

I want to call upon the Minister of Internal Affairs to think about the issue of Criminal Intelligence Investigations Department (CIID) of the Uganda Police Force. That department is not performing the way it is supposed to because there is lack of capacity. Look at the crime trend, specialisation and expertise, the volume of work in both intelligence and investigation and you think you will perform! I would like to make my humble request to the minister, who is also an expert on security matters, to consider dividing that department into one for pre-crime and another for post-crime situations. This will help us to trace the crime trend.

About retirement against desertion, it seems the army generals do not want to go and so they have clogged the top. When the top is clogged and the youth develop a mind that there is no space for them to take over, they will definitely desert. So, it is better to allow people retire if they want because you cannot have forced labour. We need to use people who want to work and allow those who do not want to work to go home. Otherwise, we are going to cause a problem of having numbers and yet the soldiers are actually not there.

Let me now comment on the issue of UPDF being involved in NAADS. This issue concerns unemployment. My people and other Ugandans are employed in NAADS and the people in the UPDF are already employed. So, that displacement factor that is injuring the status of employment for other people is actually uncalled for. Minister of Defence, you already have people who are employed and specialised in their own way; let us not have those who are already employed lose their jobs because you want to have double employment for others. I request that we do not argue about it because the law does not also provide for double employment in Uganda.
About the choppers – (Member timed out_)

10.22
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done. 

I would like to complement my colleagues in thanking our forces, the army and the police, for a good job done. On stabilisation of this region, I would like to say they have put Uganda on the forefront. It is a big credit for us. I believe when we continue in that direction by supporting them, we shall surely stabilise not only the region but also our country. I am saying this because if your courtyard is bushy, the next thing is that you will find the bush in your house.

Mr Speaker, we have a problem with criminal intelligence in the police. Many cases that are taken to court are not successful. Many suspects come out scot-free because of inadequate investigations.

The other issue is about the absence of magistrates in some districts. You will find a place like Bukwo sharing a magistrate with another district. There is a backlog of cases just because of lack of manpower. This has resulted in delays in deciding cases, and yet you know that it is commonly said that justice delayed is justice denied. We are now getting a lot of problems because we do not have enough magistrates to expeditiously handle these cases. I want to request that something is done about this issue so that we can ably exercise the rule of law in this country. Thank you very much.

10.24
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for doing a fairly good job. 

I have issues in two areas. One of them is in respect to the AMISOM operations and the UPDF missions abroad. I would like to associate myself with colleagues who have thanked the UPDF for doing a good job. However, the committee report on this mission leaves a lot to be desired. Although the committee mentions the missions and operations as having been marred by corruption and mismanagement, the information we have, which we intend to verify and maybe bring a formal motion in the future, is that corruption is not limited to our officers only. 

The information we have, and I believe the minister will shade light on it, is that the United Nations, through the African Union, pays this country what they call equipment rent. We have never received any information from Government as to whether this is true or not and how it is applied.

Further to that, we occasionally meet former serving officers in the mission who complain about not only deductions but also some complain about no pay at all. Last week, I was confronted by somebody from Mbarara who said he has a list of over 40 former veterans who served in the UN mission in Somalia but never received their payments. I am yet to get documentary evidence from him so that I can table a formal petition about that issue in the future. However, since the minister is here, he can clarify whether indeed we are being paid rent for the equipment that we have deployed in Somalia since the mission started. If so, who takes that money? Where does it go and what does it do?

In respect of the budget for access to justice for our prisoners, last week as I was travelling to the constituency I came across a box body truck carrying prisoners. What a pathetic picture it portrayed! People were being carried in a body box body vehicle with no ventilation and largely because our prison department does not have adequate funds to transport our people! (Member timed out_)

10.26
MS GERTRUDE NAKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee and I want to present my observations on two issues.

One, the committee made good comments and recommendations on the recruitment of the UPDF but they left this hanging. They proposed the formation of a subcommittee but we do not know at what level. During the recruitment exercise that has just been carried out, the criteria of the district quota was just put there for formality. Maybe I will get clarification on this. When these people go to recruit, they already have names. The public is made aware that there is recruitment but when the public turns up for interviews, the officers start asking for particular people. This means that the district quota is just for formality. I would therefore suggest that the subcommittee be composed.

Another issue is about ammunition, which is on page 13.We are experiencing many murder cases and this is caused by the weak laws on arms possession. Two months ago, I experienced a problem where a chairperson of LCIII in my district called the council and threatened the councillors with a pistol. When he was taken to the authorities, the chairman said that the pistol belonged to his friend. The friend possessed that pistol illegally. (Member was timed out_)

10.33
DR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues, I must thank the committee for the good report they have given to us. 

I would like to comment on the AMISOM mission in Somalia. I would like to applaud the good work being done by our soldiers there. (Applause) We must thank the Government for that effort. However, there are two concerns which I would like to raise before the minister and our commanders there. The first is about the training and selection of our personnel who go there. 

I have received reliable information that a number of officers are selected for training but a number of them are not deployed; there is some segregation that goes on in the deployment. They call the officers over and over again for the training but they are never deployed. When I tried to probe why, they said maybe it is because of the financial benefit which they get. Honourable minister, you have to address this issue.

The other issue is on what appeared in the media yesterday. The discipline of our soldiers has been good but there was a disturbing report accusing all the armies of member states that are participating in AMISOM of exploitation of women and girls in exchange for goodies. Minister of Defence, please take it up with our commanders and tell them that we do not want to soil our image abroad.

I would like to comment on the prison services. We have prisoners who have served their jail terms and they have completed them and when they are released, they come to us, MPs, for transport. We are all aware that when these people have served their jail terms, they should be given transport back home. What is happening with the money which they are supposed to be given?

When the UPC was in government, every prisoner used to earn some kind of allowance everyday as they worked. We do not know whether this kind of allowance still exists or not. At the end of their jail term, somebody should have accumulated some kind of money which he or she can use to buy some clothes or travel home without bothering any relative who is residing in Kampala. (Member timed out)

10.36
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative Amudat): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their work. 

On the disarmament operations in Karamoja, it is true that Karamoja is largely peaceful right now and I would like to thank the UPDF for that. Before the disarmament exercise, there was a lot of insecurity and people would not move freely. Women going to health facilities needed to be escorted by men, but today women can walk alone without any escorts.

However, like the committee noted, there are still few isolated incidences of theft and there is need to increase the number of ASTU forces. They are doing a good job alongside the UPDF but the problem is that they are few in number. In a kraal, there can be 10 of them and yet when there are those isolated incidences of cattle theft it becomes difficult for them and they are overwhelmed. By the time UPDF reinforces them, they find that the cows have already gone and the UPDF is put to task to recover the animals. So, there is need to increase the number of the ASTU people.

On compensations for the helicopters, it seems that Government is looking at the AU to compensate them for the helicopters. We are aware that Ugandans perished in those helicopter crashes; what is Government saying about this? Don’t you think there is also need to compensate the families of those people because they died on duty? (Member timed out)

10.48
MS FLORENCE IBI (FDC, Woman Representative Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I thank members of the committee for the report. 

My first concern is on the issue of appointments and promotion, especially in regard to the women. I was wondering when we shall have a female IGP, or even an Assistant IGP or a General. Why are all the Generals that we have in this country men? What is wrong with the women that we have in the service that cannot warrant their appointment to these ranks? What is special? Is it because of the 1986 history? What is so historical about a Government that has been in power for 30 years and still cannot have equality - that is if you have equality and a heart for the women?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, in last year’s budget we passed money for the sanitary needs for the female inmates. I am very much interested in getting an update. When the committee visited the prisons, what did they find? I kindly request that feedback and an update are given on how this facility is being used and whether the money was put to proper use, because it was a serious initiative here. 

The other issue is about the dismissal of the female police officers who were here in Parliament as our staff. These women were removed from working in Parliament as staff in the security department in the name of either being breastfeeding or pregnant women. 

Mr Speaker, as women leaders in this country, we feel so offended that an institution like the police, and especially the officers attached to Parliament, can be this backward and have such a mind-set. How on earth do you remove a serving officer working in a place like Parliament where we have female MPs, staff and a female Speaker above all? You come and say that these women cannot continue working because they are either breastfeeding or they are carrying pregnancies for this country! I think this is deplorable and we demand a serious explanation from the higher authorities and offices and we want them reinstated. We are waiting to see Peace and group. There are four women officers who were removed from Parliament. We want a serious explanation and these people should be reinstated.

Related to this, there is the issue of female staff and Members of Parliament being subjected to machine checking. In fact, they are forced to go through the machine when they are pregnant. This is very unacceptable. (Member timed out_)

10.42
MR SAMSON LOKERIS (NRM, Dodoth County East, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the recommendations that they have come up with. 

I have three things to comment on. One is on the disarmament in Karamoja. I come from Kaabong District and we still believe that the UPDF must remain and do the disarmament in Karamoja. In the last two months, we have lost 41 people who were killed innocently by the Turkana. You talk about police presence but the police are only available at the counter; they cannot go out to do recovery of guns and so forth. So, I believe that we still need UPDF. If you went to South Sudan, people are using AK-47s to look after cows and when you go to Kenya it is the same. So, we still believe that until Sudan and Kenya disarm, we still need the UPDF in Karamoja.

Two, on the payment of veterans, I do not know the criteria they use to pay them. They start from West Nile, maybe because of the West Nile Bank Front, and go to other areas, but our veterans in Karamoja have waited and opened accounts with Post Bank but they have never got any payments. So we want to know from the ministry what criteria they are using; is it people who were once liberators or – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, and I wish to thank my colleague for giving way. The information that I want to give you, my brother, is that the veterans in West Nile are as helpless as the veterans in Karamoja sub-region.

MR SAMSON LOKERIS: Mr Speaker, I think that is the situation and we need the Minister for Defence to give us an explanation.

Lastly, on recruitment in the Police Force, we had slots that were given to our region. In Kaabong District, we were given four slots for cadets and we attended the recruitment exercise in Moroto but it was disappointing. One of our boys who had graduated and had a scar on his leg from when he was still young was told that he was unfit. It is not until the boy appealed that he was taken. I think that there is a problem because these people come with their lists that have the names of their own sons and relatives to be recruited. Even in the regular Police Force, we had slots but we only got about 16 and others were from other parts of Uganda, and yet today we are trying to fight unemployment.

I would advise that when the responsible officers go for recruitment, they should try to get the right people from that quota and they should not go away until they fail to get people to fill that quota. I think this is quite feasible. The Karamoja today is not the Karamoja of some time back, when we used to say that we shall not wait for Karamoja to develop. We have many graduates – (Member timed out_)

10.44
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee. The report highlighted a number of issues which I want to emphasise. 

One, we want to know about the innocent babies who are kept with their mothers in prison. When I was arrested and taken to Luzira, I found many of them there. For heaven’s sake, these children are innocent but the situation they are in is terrible! They are underfed and traumatised and they are innocent, serving for the guilt of their mothers. My call is that there should be an alternative punishment for mothers so that the innocent children are not bundled in prisons in this country.

I also want to say that on the issue of agricultural production, prisons are well placed to be one of the food baskets of this country; so they should be facilitated to do so rather than meandering around on food security.

Three, I would want Government to define, very clearly, the roles of the police and the army without making them conflict. At times the police’s work has been merged into the work of the army and you cannot tell the boundaries. At times when the police are supposed to do their work, the army comes in and takes over in an unceremonious way, rendering this institution of the police not viable. We want it to be defined and we want them to respect each other.  

I also want to make a further appeal; since we have 10 army representatives in this House to look out for the welfare and interests of the army, I want to see the prisons and police also being represented in this Parliament. We have 10 UPDF representatives. It is constitutional but very unfair to see that the other security agencies of Government are not represented.

Lastly, I would like to comment on the very pertinent issue of our UPDF in South Sudan. This issue has become murky and I thank the committee for recommending their withdrawal. What is happening in South Sudan, Mr Speaker and colleagues, is something that maybe most of us do not know about. My cousin was abducted on 2 June 2014 and taken while she was boarding a taxi from the supermarket where she works and she was kept in captivity for 46 days. Just imagine –(Member timed out_)

10.48
MS ANN MARIA NAKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to comment on utility bills, which has been brought out on page 27 of the report. For many years now, this Parliament appropriates money for utilities, especially electricity, and this is where my concern is. 

When the Committee on Natural Resources was scrutinizing the concession between the Government of Uganda and the distributor, who is Umeme, we discovered a clause on an escrow account. Where a Government department delays to meet its obligations of paying electricity bills for 60 days, the company goes to the escrow account at City Bank and withdraws the money. This goes for the UPDF, the Police and UBC. The escrow account gets depleted every other day because the company recovers its money from the escrow account.

Mr Speaker, I again see arrears here for the Police and the UPDF. My question is: where does the money that we approved go, and yet for these sectors –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, my sister. I had an opportunity to chair the Public Accounts Committee for two years and seven months. The findings on the ground are that accounting officers actually take advantage of the escrow account. They divert the money for utilities so that at the end of the day, they are able to make use of that money for other things and then the service provider goes and gets money from the escrow account. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MS ANNE NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The other issue I would like to comment on is recruitment. It has been to the disappointment of Parliament for almost two consecutive years when reports go to the press saying the Government has not paid the police personnel, but this is not the case. It has been found out that this is due to the recruitment and the change in salary scale for many of the officers whose salary scales changed within a financial year. However, what they do, especially the police is only reduce the available amount which Parliament has budgeted for the officers –(Member timed out_)

10.52
MS ROSE MUTONYI MASABA: (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa) Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

I am glad that Ministry of Internal Affairs has planned to decongest their headquarters. Drawing their attention, on top of the congestion there does not seem to be networking in all the offices and that is how forms get lost and passports get lost. I had a nasty experience, and this has happened maybe not once, maybe not twice; my sister’s forms got lost and when you go to one office they tell you go to the other office, from that office they tell you maybe it is the other one which is in charge and they even tell you go to the strong room. You find all the offices full and there is some kind of disorganisation. 

Can I request that the Minister of Internal Affairs, apart from decongesting the headquarters, - and maybe this could be repeated in the regional offices - let them acquire computers and do the right networking on those computers. We shall then not have the embarrassment of people running around and taking a full month to acquire a passport. That is all I wanted to say. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Obongi, you are the shadow minister; I will give you time when we are closing. You submitted your statements to the committee and they have reported on both. So, there will be time for you to respond to this side and that side, and then we close.

10.54
MR JACOB OBOTH: (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to join other members in appreciating the committee and the role of both the UPDF and the police. (Applause) if we can rise in unison to appreciate a national force doing a great job out of Uganda, I think Uganda is moving forward towards the right direction in appreciating or acknowledging a fact.

The former CDF of UPDF is now the Minister of Internal Affairs. I have heard of some report here that you want to change the name from Uganda Police Force to Uganda National Police. What is the beauty in the change of name? If you are Gen. Aronda, even if tomorrow you change to be Gen. Oboth, - (Laughter) - you will still be the same Aronda. Are you disturbed by the form or the content? It makes me a little uncomfortable to hear that we are changing names. You might change a few things in the police force, but let us not be like we are failing to manage the police force. The police force is doing a great job. As the former CDF, we are proud that you are there; you will do even a better job, as you did in UPDF. But must we really change the name? The reasons why people change names, – I tried to google – is because they are bored, they do not like the current name – (Interjection) - You will give information later.

I am happy with the committee report and their recommendations but for the change of name. Those who came to Uganda ten years ago and will come back ten years later will find the Uganda National Police and they will wonder. You even change the name without amending the Constitution; how would you do that? You even create a website – I think that was criminal. How do you even create a website, misleading foreign countries that there is Uganda National Police in Uganda? This is a coup to constitutional order in Uganda. (Member timed out_)

10.56
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the elaborate report and I want to also to thank the ministry under which this report we are discussing falls. 

Indeed, there are a lot of things that the ministry is doing which are notable, especially concerning the police. Now the country is peaceful, unlike in 2011, 2012, where things were almost chaotic in Kampala. I want to thank the police for their great work. (Applause) 

I also thank the police for what they are doing especially in Agago where land wrangles are very severe and are a major source of conflict. The police are doing some good work there; they are not only trying to apprehend the culprits but they also go to the extent of educating the masses so that they contain the situation.

Mr Speaker, one other issue I want to raise, and maybe ask the Ministry of Justice especially, is that the president told us that 19.5 per cent is the poverty line- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want to ask the Minister for Justice?

MR AMOS OKOT: I want to raise issues that concern them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But we are not debating that now; it will come later. This is internal affairs, not justice.

MR AMOS OKOT: Maybe I will have to bring out the point that I wanted to raise, Mr Speaker. The point is that during the war, the people of Northern Uganda lost their property including animals and there was an agreement that was reached that compensation would be done. However, until today, people who lost their animals are still scrambling for their compensation, especially the old people. In the report, under justice, nothing has been clearly indicated about compensation of that kind.

It is of interest –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Agago, that will be properly housed in the debate on the ministerial statement of the Ministry of Justice.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you so much. I will save it for that particular time. However, I want to raise one other issue about the prisons. Mr Speaker –(Member timed out_)

10.59
MR MARTIN MUGABI (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good work and I want to thank the two ministries.

My concern is on the UPDF participation in the NAADS programme. We have heard the President on several occasions saying that he is closing NAADS and here the committee is coming out clearly to say that we do not have policy guidelines in regard to participation of the UPDF in the NAADS programme. As a leader, I ask: do we still have NAADS officials? Are we now going to look for these products or the programmes that are going to be run in my district? Whom will I ask what is going to be given out in my district or in my constituency? If we still have the NAADS officials, who is going to report to whom? I propose that the Ministry of Agriculture comes out clearly and informs us on whom we should go to when we are looking for some of these goods. 

In addition, if UPDF is going to participate, are they going to receive two salaries, one from UPDF and one from Ministry of Agriculture for participating in the NAADS programme? Are they going to earn just allowances or are we now regarding them as pioneers in running this programme? I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

11.01
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity and I want to thank the committee for doing a good job. 

I am of the opinion that as much as the report is good, we should not approve the budget of Ministry of Defence. We have been sending money to Somalia - some time back we sent Shs 263 billion - and that was under our mandate of keeping peace there. When you read the UN charter or if you read about peacekeeping missions under the UN, what happens is that every contingent country will meet the costs of their personnel and of machines but there will always be reimbursement by the UN. Now, we want to find out from this committee, from when we deployed in Somalia up to today, how much money that was budgeted for and sent to Somalia has been reimbursed and where is that money?

Secondly, we are in command in Somalia because we have the biggest number of soldiers there. This makes us in charge of command, in charge of procurement, in charge of almost everything. When a country sends a force, that country must benefit. The benefit is that once you are in command of any contingent peacekeeping force outside the country in a foreign land, you do the business of supplying fuel and so forth but the benefit must come directly to the national budget. However, we now have private firms that have taken advantage of the fact that Uganda has the biggest number of soldiers there and we are in charge of command and everything and they are doing business in the name of our country’s deployment. How do we benefit from such businesses?

Finally, how do we pass the budget of defence when actually our soldiers there are being paid peanuts - US$ 700 – and yet according to the standard, our soldiers on peacekeeping missions are supposed to be paid US$ 1280 per month per soldier? (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give you is that my former driver joined the forces and indeed what they were promised to be paid before he left is not what he is getting. I can therefore confirm that actually, they are not getting what they were promised. Thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: So Mr Speaker and the House, as I conclude, there is no- (Member timed out_)

11.05
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I thank you and I wish to thank the committee. 

I want to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs who crime preventers are and what their role is. I went to Kabale recently and found thousands of young people being trained at a police training facility as crime preventers. Who are they? How are they paid? Under what arrangement are they recruited? Is this a vote of no confidence in the police force that is supposed to prevent crime? Why do we need crime preventers yet we have all sorts of arrangements like PISOs, even in our villages, who are maintaining peace?

Secondly, I am concerned about the welfare of the police; I want to specifically talk about accommodation of the police force. We have been around the country and have found families sharing rooms – uniports - separated by a curtain. What does this say about what happens to these families in the absence of the head of the family? We have seen cases of policemen turning against their colleagues over their spouses. I would like the minister to tell us what arrangements they have in place to improve on the welfare of the police.

Thirdly, and this goes to the Minister of Defence, as far as I know, the war in South Sudan is not our war but what I observe is that we are funding this war. Why are we funding this war in South Sudan? What benefits does Uganda partake of the war in Sudan? I know my friend, hon. Crispus Kiyonga, will say we are trying to serve our interests as the war could spill over to Uganda; but bring the boys closer to the border! What are you doing in Juba? What are you doing far north of South Sudan? The cost of the war is impacting negatively on the economy of this country.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the Ministry of Internal Affairs as to when we will have a truly professional head of the police. We have seen army generals heading the police. First, it was Gen. Katumba Wamala and now it is Gen. Kale Kayihura. I have never seen the reverse happening where a policeman heads the UPDF; never! I have yet to see this happening. What are you telling the public about the officers who have grown through the ranks of the police and - (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now go to the shadow ministers of internal affairs and defence. They will each take four minutes. I will then have the Leader of the Opposition and I will come this side. You have four minutes.

11.08
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND SECURITY (Mr Hassan Fungaroo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not know if the four minutes will be enough but I will touch on issues, which may rekindle debate. 

One issue is on the understanding of defence and security. For us in the Opposition, we look at security as human security. What seems to be the case with the sitting Government and my colleagues is that they take security as regime security, and they say Uganda is safe.

It is true the state is not under any threat but the people of Uganda are losing lives and property daily. Recently, buses were robbed on the road from Arua to Kampala during two successive weeks. Iron bar hit men are killing people here. The people of Uganda are dying in various ways - through school fires, market fires. These are matters affecting the security of Ugandans, but my colleagues here say Uganda is safe. It is because they are concerned about the survival of their government.

Two, we presented our alternative statement and you can access it on your iPads. I want to draw your attention to a table under administration and management of the sector programmes - how the budget of the previous year changed in the current year. We have questions in the following codes and budget lines:  One, on classified expenditure. This came in form of first a request, and then a supplementary. Out of a total of Shs 170 billion, about Shs 45 billion is supplementary. 

We have questions on the governance and audit of the classified expenditure. Honourable members, let me draw your attention to other areas of classified expenditure which are not talked about here. That General of the Ministry of Internal Affairs has classified expenditure under his budget. Under President’s office, the Office of the President has classified expenditure; State House has classified expenditure; ESO has classified expenditure – Huge amounts of money that are not brought under the purview of Parliament! We do not know how much it is.

There is another area to which I want to draw your attention; we are supposed to appropriate money here and then spend it later. However, in defence, huge sums of money come in from off-budget financing but you do not see it. What we budget for here is also financed by other people - the friends of Uganda - either in kind or in cash, but the value is not declared to us. 

I will give an example. The US is giving Uganda support towards the mission in Central African Republic in pursuit of Kony, and we also get support for our missions in DRC and South Sudan for intelligence, transport from here to there, etc. This is a huge amount of money and yet they still ask for huge amounts of money. They say, “Give us money for fuelling planes to transport people”; which planes are you fuelling when you were given planes to transport people?

South Sudan is funding our operations there with huge sums of money, which are not declared to us. When we pestered them at the committee, they yielded by saying, “We signed an addendum to the – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. But honourable member, classified expenditure is audited. Once it is audited, the reports come to Parliament, except that the procedure is different - they appoint a committee of Parliament to go through this classified expenditure. Right now, it is being headed by the chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee, if my recollection is correct. 

11.13
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS AND HUMAN RIGHTS (Mr Muhammad Muwanga Kivumbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our duty and generational obligation is to transform institutions of security from regime patrol to democratic regimes and institutions for the sole purpose of ensuring that there is peace and stability. 

I have only four issues to raise. One is on crime preventers. Honourable members, I have a picture here of Gen. Kale Kayihura, Inspector General of Police, launching an organisation called Crime Preventers Coalition Uganda and it has an executive director. We are asking, under which legal framework is this? We must take care to ensure that no single officer, whether in security or in government, can raise a militia in this country. Countries have paid a high price for that. 

The second issue I want to raise, which was touched on in the report, is the issue of regional balance. I have a structure here which we all know about and we have talked about it. This is on defence, but I will go further and say that if you go down to various ministries and check for regional balance, you will see this repeated. In Cabinet, accounting officers are 22 and those from the west are eight, those from central are six, from the east five and from the north three. 

Under missions abroad there are 33 accounting officers, but 24 of them are from western Uganda, five from central, three from the east and the north has one. Government agencies have 53 and 22 of them are from western Uganda, 12 from the central region, 12 from the east and seven from the north 7. 

Let us build Uganda; let us transform national institutions to mirror the image of this country. (Applause) We are in a new age; long time ago, we accepted the explanation we were offered, that these were historical factors. But what historical factors are there after 30 years in power? 

Another issue I want to talk about, which is also so critical, is the issue of public order management. Mr Speaker, in this budget, we are going to pass Shs 46 billion for the police to manage 20 envisaged riots at a cost of Shs 2.5 billion per riot. We are asking a big question for Gen. Aronda to explain: are you going to teargas people with whisky or perfume? The police budget is about Shs 400 billion. In 2018, it is going to skyrocket to Shs 800 billion and a big chunk of it will go to public order management. Why don’t we dialogue as the political heads and address the pushers and causes of public riots. Let there be free and fair elections, stop corruption, solve unemployment; these are some of the issues that lead to riots. 

Mr Speaker, I want to raise the key issue of charges for public events. The police in Uganda are paid to keep law and order but when Uganda Cranes is playing football in Namboole, the Uganda Police has been charging FUFA up to Shs 50 million per game. In Namugongo, they charge up to Shs 30 million or Shs 40 million per day. We are asking, under which legal framework do they do this? It is not even receipted anywhere – (Member timed out_)

11.18
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We would like to thank the committee for the report. 

We would also like to appreciate the good work our soldiers are doing in Somalia and South Sudan. However, once again, we want to ask the Minister of Defence: when are we withdrawing our soldiers from Somalia and South Sudan? We need a timetable for that. We have been in Somalia for seven years; we do not want the same thing to happen in South Sudan. It is very costly to this country. 

The issue of classified expenditure is a big one. Mr Speaker, I read recently that now there is a committee to audit it, and I think there is a member of the Opposition on it. However, we need to concern ourselves with classified expenditure because it would appear like government uses classified expenditure for doing political work.

On the issue of the imbalance in the UPDF, I would like to ask Government to take this seriously. They have continued to breach the Constitution. They make some Ugandans feel like they do not belong to Uganda and they see this country as belonging to just one region.

Mr Speaker, I would like to mention that the police have had a progressive increase of its budget from Shs 40 billion about nine years ago to now over Shs 200 billion. We would like to see this translated into a quality police force, including good welfare for them. This is important because we seem to increase this budget for the police to get money for politics, torturing, teargas but not for things like building houses for police officers or paying the police officers properly. The increase in the budget should be reflected in the personnel in the police. That is very important. 

On the issue of crime preventers, two weeks ago, I had the occasion to address some of them after I had been invited. They were many, and I would like to know from the minister how many he is planning to recruit and under what law he does this. How are you going to deploy them? When and how will you pay them? I am asking all these questions because from what I heard from them during that interaction, they seem to be a political group that is going to cause trouble if you do not address this in good time. We want to know, has this House pronounced itself on that question of crime preventers?

In regard to Uganda Prisons Services, I would like to say that our prisons upcountry are falling. Here, we are privileged because we have not had the misfortune of being kept in those prisons, otherwise we would have known that they are not for human beings. This means Government is incapable of running these prisons and providing decent accommodation for our prisoners.

I would like to propose to Government to consider privatising these prisons, though I would want it done in a gradual manner. If we look at the money we spend, if the prisons were hired out to private people, we would have better accommodation for prisoners.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of NEC, the committee recommended that we should give it Shs 10 billion per year for three years. I would like to say that we need to have a report about this entity. We know that NEC has been around for a while but we all know that NEC has been wasting resources. So, I do not agree with that recommendation of the committee, unless NEC has given us a strategic plan and shown what they intend to do with that money. We cannot just approve that Shs 10 billion be given to NEC every year for the next three years without any proper plan from NEC. Thank you very much.

11.23
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crsipus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank colleagues for the very important comments they have made in regard to the defence sector. In order to keep within the time you have allotted to me, my response will be under four headings.

Point one is to thank colleagues for the commendations they have given in respect to the good work that the national army is doing. Indeed, the national army has stabilized the country in addition to assisting to stabilise other African states. I also agree with colleagues that from thereon, our joint concern is to sustain this good performance. 

Therefore, when colleagues express concerns about discipline of the army, this is in the right place. I want to assure colleagues that discipline in the army is cardinal point one in terms of the code of conduct for the soldiers and the laws that govern the army. You are aware that the army court martial sits regularly. Many soldiers have been sentenced, some to death or otherwise, depending on the ferocity of a particular case. 

What we have heard recently in the press regarding issues of sexual offences in Somalia is something we have taken very seriously. Let me report, colleagues, that right now there is an officer in the court martial having been charged with sexual offences committed in Somalia. Any other case that comes up will also be taken very seriously. The allegations that have been made in the report of the Human Rights Watch, unfortunately, are generalities but we are going to follow these through. If we find any culprit, they will be accordingly handled.

The second point regards recruitment, training, promotions and retirement. A point has been made about gender balance in the army. Yes, I agree with the honourable member who raised this point that indeed our female colleagues form a small proportion of the UPDF. This is mainly because of lack of interest from our female relatives in terms of turning up for recruitment into the army. However, I would like to inform the House that right from the days of the struggle that brought the NRM to power women have been very strong participants. We all recall people like Mrs Gertrude Njuba and others who participated in that struggle.

In the current formation, we now have a special directorate to ensure we uplift the visibility of the female soldiers in the UPDF. Indeed, I am glad to announce and remind colleagues that at last we have a female brigadier general in the army, Brig. Gen. Proscovia Nalweyiso. She has risen to that rank due to her performance and good track record.

On recruitment, you are aware that we always announce to the public whenever we are going to do recruitment and we always indicate the quotas per district. It is true that even within the committee, the accusation came in that in some cases people think that those being recruited are just ferried from some other areas. We had a case in Kaboong; an honourable member raised this issue and we were called back to the committee. Fortunately, we came back with evidence on how many had been recruited from Kaboong and we tabled the recommendations from the LCI chairpersons.  

This is not to say that all is perfect. What I would like to ask honourable Members of Parliament to do is to keep together whenever recruitment is going on. If there is an incident that you detect as having not been fair or not in line with the policy, let us know about it and I can assure you that we will not take a minute in correcting that.

On AMISOM, I would like to make the following points: First of all, an honourable member asked what monies flow into the country arising out of the work of our soldiers in Somalia. I want to say these are mainly in four categories. First, there is what is known as troop allowances. Two, there is depreciation; the vehicles that we use there are assessed by the UN every year for depreciation, a calculation is made using a set formula and this money is paid to the country. There is also compensation for our brothers and sisters who die at the battlefront out there. That money is also paid to the country. Those who get injured are also compensated and money is sent to the country. So, the honourable member who asked about money in lieu of using vehicles is in the right place. We do receive that money. 

The second issue is that this Parliament is funding the mission in Somalia - my brother from Padyere raised this issue – and should we continue to appropriate money before getting to know whether we will get refunded. It is true that budget after budget, since the year 2007, this Parliament appropriates money to sustain our soldiers in Somalia. 

Let me remind you that actually, the money you appropriate is an estimate of what we think our soldiers will need and for the maintenance of the vehicles. We only spend when you have appropriated, when money flows in. It is not like we get money directly from our Consolidated Fund to pay out Shs 450 billion and wait for compensation. It is the other way round; the money comes first and then we pay it out. In this particular budget, for example, there is Shs 250 billion to sustain our troops in Somalia. You are going to appropriate this and we shall spend it as and when it comes in.

There has been a question about some alleged discrimination when people are being recruited for missions abroad. If there has been a mission that has been handled very well and equitably, I think it is the mission to Somalia. Every village in Uganda has somebody who has gone and participated in that mission. If there are any cases of bribery or people being unfair, if we get to know about this we will definitely deal with it.

On South Sudan, we all know why we went there. As I have said many times on this Floor, as soon as our brothers in IGAD deploy in South Sudan, then our national army will come back home. It is a bit disappointing that the rate at which deployment is taking place by Kenya, Rwanda and Ethiopia is rather slow. However, deployment is on and I can assure you that as these people come in place, the national army will return here.

On off-budget expenditure, the committee was not consistent. They said that we told them that we do report, and indeed we do report to the committee. If you look at our reports to the committee, even the one for this year, we gave figures; we even gave figures of how much assistance we got from the USA last year in the Central African Republic. Yes, there are some minimal off-budget grants that we get - some of them are in kind in form of vehicles - and we report this to the committee. I think we will make this more visible in our policy statements in future.

The issue of NAADS was discussed very well under the report on agriculture. Let me just restate some issues. One, the UPDF officers being deployed to participate in the implementation of NAADS programmes are not replacing anybody. The officials under the NAADS programme continue to do their work.

Two, the government has taken a decision to reform NAADS not because UPDF has come. Government has taken a decision to reform NAADS so that less money should go to personnel payments and more money should go to inputs, which is what our people that vote for us actually need.

The UPDF is going to serve two limited roles: One, the UPDF will ensure that our brothers and sisters, the veterans who over the years have been retiring, do also benefit from the NAADS programmes out there. Two, they will do some auditing role to checkout and ensure that the inputs, the payments that are being made out there in the population in regard to NAADS are actually taking place. Otherwise, the rest of the work will be done by the regular officers under the Ministry of Agriculture and the NAADS secretariat.

On classified expenditure, I think the point has been made. My brother, hon. Kassiano Wadri, is the chairman of the Public Accounts Committee emeritus; he knows very well that the money under classified expenditure is clearly being accounted for using regular procedures of the Government. The Public Accounts Committee has a subcommittee to handle this issue. The Auditor-General himself has a special arrangement to ensure that these monies are accounted for and audited using our laws. 

I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I also thank you, colleagues, for the positive comments that you have made about the budget.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, you realise that when a number of ministers come to committees, they actually answer questions of policy nature selectively. Even when they come to Parliament, they actually answer at will; they answer what they want and dodge other policy issues. Would you guide that these ministers, even when they have not responded to those policy issues, put them in writing and send them to the committee and to Parliament. In the committees, they also dodge some issues and yet some of the issues are serious in as far as government policies are concerned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is a good proposal but usually, what used to happen is that the committee would generate a list of areas they are concerned about, submit them in advance to the ministries and when they appear they come with those issues in writing. That is what used to happen. If it is not happening, please let it start happening.

11.37
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also add my voice to that of my colleague in thanking the committee for their report, which will go a long way to consolidate our national security. I also thank you, honourable members, for your advice, concerns and additional points.

I will right away go to areas under internal affairs. There was a question about welfare of the prisoners and those who look after the prisoners. There were a broad range of issues and I promise that we will not dodge any question; a time will come when details will be given. 

Prisoners’ welfare is top priority in the prisons service. We have ensured that they all have uniforms. We have also gone a long way to ensure that they have medicare. We used to have a challenge with health matters but now we have a hospital in Luzira and working with Ministry of Health, we have enough drugs. We also have regional health centres III where the prisoners are taken care of. 

There was a question about the allowances. When they go outside, they do some work and their names are entered into a book in the prisons. At the time they are released, that allowance is given to them.

On the question of a cow, I agree that a cow is not enough; we are going to do more to ensure that we have milk. Prisons have enough land on which they can raise more cows and ensure that there is enough milk for children whenever they are in such places. We agreed that milk from one cow is not likely to be enough.

Mr Speaker and members, we will eliminate the bucket system in this country. We have now done almost 40 prisons and we are left with 48 to eliminate this infamous bucket. We will deal with this bucket system in the next financial year.

On the question of transport and distances, under the JLOS arrangement we are coming up with one-stop centres where we have a court, judicial officers, the police and prisons all working together. This has reduced distances. About the box body car, I do not know whether my friend did look well because we look after them when they are being transported.  

On the potential for agriculture, we agree with this and we have been discussing with the Ministry of Agriculture especially about planting and harvesting. They have big farms and sometimes it has taken them over a month or two harvesting, and they lose some of their crops because they lack good technology to help them harvest. So, we are in touch with the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Finance to acquire combine harvesters to improve the cultivation and harvesting. 

Another issue is on the welfare of the prisons staff. I thank the committee for being spot-on; they have one pair of uniform and it is quite difficult to manage with one pair of uniform throughout the year. This has been due to budgetary constraints and they do understand; they are very professional and patriotic. However, we are working with the committee and the Ministry of Finance to ensure that in the next financial year, they get an additional pair of uniform to make them two.

On immigration, the question of delays and congestion at Jinja Road is very uncomfortable. It is not a modern way of delivering a service to the people of Uganda and those that live here. An automated system has been put in place and we have contracted a company from one of the countries, working with Ministry of Finance and other ministries, to connect the Directorate of Immigration. This will ensure that our borders are safe and even when people come in, they can be ably tracked. 

Automation is being done under the local network at the headquarters and later on, the headquarters will be connected with the regions to ensure that the service delivery by this department is quite modernised and professional. They have a challenge. 

We are discussing with the committees on finance and public service to allow a reallocation of the wage expenditure in order to allow us train more young people without paying them a salary and we pay them a salary upon completion, when they become immigration officers. We are working with the ministries of public service and finance and I hope that they allow this reallocation. It will enable us train more immigration officers so that we can expand the workforce and then our country will be better served by a number of immigration officers.

Mr Speaker, on the police, my colleague has responded to the first point. The national character of the Uganda Police Force, like the UPDF, is always tested at the point of recruitment. That recruitment is transparent and participatory and we challenge anyone who found UPF or UPDF recruiting in the darkness to come up. The recruitment is announced in the newspapers and people turn up. It is not true and I want to challenge whoever said that when a group turned up at a recruitment point, they came with a lorry full of people already recruited. 

Even during post recruitment, we are comfortable with vetting. The Leader of the Opposition visited Kabalye training grounds. Anybody can go there and check and you will find that the country is well represented; the national character is maintained in recruitment. Throughout the promotion, the procedure is also professional and modern to ensure that everyone is given a chance to move up according to merit.

I now come to the deployment of ladies. We are very sensitive – the professionalization, the political education and the leadership is sensitive to the national gender policies that are in place and there is no one who can make a mistake. In an attempt to reorganise and strengthen the security of Parliament, ladies were removed. We have been discussing this issue. If they were pushed out of the police, that would be unacceptable and action would be taken. However, they were taken to other departments and we will be discussing that when they get strength after delivery, they will be reconsidered for redeployment to this House to continue their work. Otherwise, we are very sensitive and professionally, there cannot be discriminatory policies to make the police look like it is dominated by one gender – [Hon Member: “and one tribe.”] - No, that is beyond us. Sectarianism is condemned by the Constitution and no one can do that. 

On crime preventers, this is a group that is volunteering with the police and we are happy that some Members went there and talked to them. No one is forced to join the group as it is a volunteer group that is prepared in all the efforts – I have heard Members talk about murders, fires and all that - in order to reduce crime irreversibly. We are taking all measures to ensure that we achieve this, so that Ugandans and their property are secure and the stability of the country is maintained. 

We, however, intend to put in place a regulatory mechanism to tackle the various issues: Where can they come in? How long would they serve? Are they going to be armed? Are they going to be uniformed? I agree, and we are going to put in place a regulatory framework and policy to ensure that these volunteers who come on their own are looked after so that they do not turn into what a colleague called a political force. They cannot and they will not. They will remain reinforcing police measures like community policing in order to irreversibly reduce crime.

On the budget, I want to say that the budget is not worrying because it is in the following areas: the package they have talked about is about equipment, training, consumables, allowances, salaries; it is a package about capacity building. Where there is an indication of “classified”, like under defence and intelligence this classified expenditure under the laws and policies we have is auditable, has been audited and will always be audited according to the law. The Auditor-General is there to account and no one can have some monies hidden in any place that cannot be accounted for.

Militarisation of the police: When we do everything to ensure the stability of the country and ensure sustained development, I think all measures will be taken to strengthen the capacity of the police for law enforcement. If training has resulted into effective policing, surely, it is not militarisation. 

After all, there are some universalities; when it comes to training in counter terrorism, for example, there are no counter terrorism measures that are exclusive to the United States, Britain or whatever country. They are all uniform. Therefore, if you found someone training in counter terrorism measures, just know that is what it is going to cost us to ensure that Uganda is not threatened by some threats, local, regional or global. Look at what is happening in the Middle East where some terrorist organisations like ISIS are organising themselves and they could harm us. 

We will ensure that the police are better prepared and trained and respectful of the rule of law. We will ensure that they have the culture of legality, the rule of law and that they live harmoniously with the population in Uganda so that that this strategic alliance is maintained and Uganda remains safe, secure, stable and developing. 

On some matters like the fires, which a colleague was talking about, whenever these occur we take action. We investigate, people are taken to court, we learn lessons and then we begin putting in place pre-emptive measures to ensure that some of these dangers or risks are significantly minimised so that they do not reoccur. 

On the welfare of the police, I thank colleagues for getting concerned. We will work together - Government and this Parliament – so that the welfare of the police is improved especially in three areas. The first area is accommodation, the individual accommodation. We already have some measures in place. Some construction work has already begun at Kabalye Training School to improve on training facilities and then individual accommodation is also being undertaken.

The other area is salaries. We have put in place measures to remove all the ghosts and ensure that no salary gets lost or even delayed, or is deducted in any circumstances.

On uniforms, we have started a factory, so we will be reducing on the delays of acquisition of uniforms. The factory will be producing uniforms. We also intend to see if we can partner with Uganda Prisons Service to ensure that they can be supported in acquisition of uniforms so that they do not have just this one. With this, they can have an improvement. 

We have an engineering unit in the police force to undertake local construction but they still lack equipment. The workforce is also not yet enough but since we are about to pass out some about 3,000 from Kabalye, some of them will be recruited into this unit to strengthen the capacity of police in doing its own construction. If needed, this unit could support any other efforts, for example in times of disaster. Recently, we had floods in Kasese and some time back we had mudslides in the Elgon area; the police engineering unit could be there to help in such situations.

Mr Speaker, the other point is on the policies in place. As I said, from the recruitment we have guidelines - there is a recruitment policy in place - all the way until exit.

On retirement, we do not have a policy that when you want to retire you cannot. However, the policy says that the leadership of the police force reserves the right to consider that or not. Otherwise, the policy is there for entry and for exit for those who apply. As chairman of the police authority, together with members of the police authority we have considered cases of retirement and we have let them go and they have gone.

What is in a name? Certainly, we have removed that one, hon. Oboth. I think once people are talking about transformational strategies, you can say, “I intend”; for example, I have mentioned that we intend to acquire combine harvesters, but we may struggle and we do not get them. Someone can ask, when was the prisons structured to have the capacity to use a combine harvester? If it comes or it does not come, we continue with other efforts. So, the police were talking about possible transformation measures and they mentioned a name, but we have told them to withdraw it now, Mr Speaker. (Interruption)

MR ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The name of the police is a constitutional matter and the honourable minister is admitting that indeed there was an attempt to change the name unconstitutionally. Isn’t it procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for the honourable minister, who was attempting to commit treason, to apologise for the attempt to change the constitutional provision on the name of the police?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Treason is a known offence under the Penal Code, the definitions are known and the ingredients of that offence are known; I do not think they stretch to include changing of names. (Laughter)

GEN. ARONDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I said there was a meeting and a discussion took place but our force is the Uganda Police Force. You can go back to the website; we have withdrawn the other one. We did not intend to do that.

Mr Speaker, as I said, we will ensure that Uganda Police Force maintains national character in terms of recruitment, training, deployment and in the profession so that law enforcement is strengthened and our country remains stable, peaceful and developing. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, shadow minister, Leader of  the Opposition, Madam Chair and the committee and Members for this very intense debate we have had for this sector.

I now put the question that the report of the sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2014/2015 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chair.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, I would advise that you do not take the example of the chair of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. That was not a good precedent - presenting for two hours. (Laughter) So, please, use the time properly so that we can conclude this - it is a very big sector - so that we can move with this quickly. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTRAY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. In line with your guidance, I will introduce the report, go through the executive summary and thereafter proceed to the observations and recommendations.

Before I make my presentation, I would like to lay on the Table the minutes and the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2014/2015. Mr Speaker, the minutes are of the meetings that took place between us and the ministries and departments under our docket.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you also laying a copy of the report?

MR TASHOBYA: Yes, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes and the full copy of the report.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

Introduction

In accordance with Articles 90 and 155 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for 11 votes under its mandate and hereby presents its report.

The committee considered the policy statements of the following institutions and ministries:
    a) Vote 007: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
    b) Vote 102: Electoral Commission
    c) Vote 105: Uganda Law Reform Commission
    d) Vote 148: Judicial Service Commission
    e) Vote 109: Law Development Centre
    f) Vote 106: Uganda Human Rights Commission
    g) Vote 101: the Judiciary
    h) Vote 133: Directorate of Public Prosecutions
    i) Vote 104: Parliamentary Commission
    j) Vote 103: Inspectorate of Government 
    k) Vote 119: Uganda Registration Services Bureau.

Mr Speaker, in considering the ministerial statements, the committee held meetings with these institutions and also held a harmonisation meeting with the Prime Minister leading the institutions that are mentioned here above.

Mr Speaker, we reviewed and analysed the following documents: 
    a) the policy statements for 2014/2015;
    b) the alternative policy statements for 2014/2015; 
    c) the Budget Speech, 2014/2015; 
    d) previous reports of the committee on the budget framework paper and ministerial policy statements; and 
    e) the responses to issues raised by the committee from different ministries, agencies and departments.

Mr Speaker, permit me to go through the executive summary before I go to the observations and recommendations made by the committee.

VOTE 007: MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs received Shs 15.14 billion in the financial year-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is 58 not 15. Did you say 15 or 58?

MR TASHOBYA: It is Shs 58.14 billion in the financial year 2013/2014, of which Shs 23.61 billion was for development; Shs 30.37 billion was for non-wage expenditure; and Shs 4.15 billion was for the wage component. This budget performed at 99.09 per cent.

The committee observed that the issues of the JLOS house, compensation and court awards, arrears and operationalization of the Centre for Arbitration and Dispute Resolution (CADER) remain unfunded. The committee recommends that funding be availed to enable the ministry stop renting and to effectively carry out its mandate.

VOTE 102: THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION 

The Electoral Commission received Shs 51.475 billion in the financial year 2913/2014 of which Shs 0.114 billion was for development, Shs 33.063 billion was for non-wage expenditure, Shs 8.298 billion was for the wage component and Shs 7 billion was for taxes. This budget performed at 100 per cent.

The Electoral Commission recorded achievements including demarcating polling stations countrywide, conducting regional workshops on demarcation and reorganisation and carrying out continuous development of the strategic plan and the roadmap for 2015/2016 general elections.

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the current wage structure of the Electoral Commission was last set in 1999. The development budget ceiling remains very low and the elections of local councils remain pending even after Parliament’s recommendations.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommended that emoluments be reviewed, the development budget be reviewed and funds be availed for elections for lower administrative units.

VOTE 105: UGANDA LAW REFORM COMMISSION

The Uganda Law Reform Commission received Shs 7.061 billion in financial year 2013/2014 of which Shs 0.02 billion was for development, Shs 4.4 billion was for non-wage expenditure and Shs 2.4 billion was for the wage component. This budget performed at 97.5 per cent.

The Uganda Law Reform Commission recorded achievements by finalising the revision of the principal laws of Uganda; developing issues papers for consultations on reform of the electoral laws, Birth and Deaths Registration Act, the Prisons Act, and the Moneylenders Act; and finalising research for reform and drafting of several Bills.

The committee observed that the commission needs support to print the seventh edition of the principal laws of Uganda. It is also anticipated that by investing Shs 3 billion in this project, Shs 5 billion can be generated in non-tax revenue. The committee recommends that the commission be supported.

VOTE 148: JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION

The Judicial Service Commission received Shs 2.251 billion in the financial year 2013/2014 of which Shs 0.28 billion was for development; Shs 1.443 billion was for non-wage expenditure; and Shs 0.78 billion was for the wage component. This budget performed at 88.4 per cent.

The commission recorded achievements in running job adverts, conducting ten recruitment sessions, recruiting 49 judicial officers, holding ten interview sessions and running one supplement in the media, among others.

The committee observed that the commission, which is established by the Constitution, works on an ad hoc basis with only the chairperson working on full time basis. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that the status of the commission as the body superintending over the third arm of Government be reviewed through a constitutional amendment and the commission be made permanent with full time commissioners. In the meantime, Government should consider taking on part-time commissioners so that they can handle the business of the Judicial Service Commission.

VOTE 109: LAW DEVELOPMENT CENTRE

The Law Development Centre received Shs 9.398 billion in the financial year 2013/2014 of which Shs 0.873 billion was for development, Shs 3.024 billion was to cater for wages and Shs 4 billion was appropriation in aid. This budget performed at 89.285 per cent.

The Law Development Centre reported achievements in terms of better performance in the bar course, a number of short courses were conducted, increased participation in community service initiatives and establishing linkages between LDC and the University of Northumbria in the United Kingdom.

The committee observed that the Centre requires Shs 790 million to enable it to compensate squatters and reclaim its land, and another Shs 900 million for a perimeter wall to secure its land. The committee therefore recommends that these funds be availed to support these activities.

VOTE 106: UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION

Mr Speaker, the Uganda Human Rights Commission received Shs 9.7 billion in the financial year 2013/2014 of which Shs 0.143 billion was for development, Shs 5.96 billion was for non-wage expenditure and Shs 3.59 billion was for the wage component. This budget performed at 100 per cent.

The commission reported achievements such as compiling and launching a special report on oil and human rights, launching and disseminating the Uganda Human Rights Commission client charter, and producing and disseminating the 16th annual report including a Braille version as well as a popular version, among others.

The committee observed that in some cases handled by the commission, complainants have reported loss of their livelihoods because they have been maimed or disabled through the human rights violations they have suffered. The commission requires Shs 3 billion to compensate these victims. The committee recommends that these funds be availed. 

VOTE 101: THE JUDICIARY

The Judiciary received Shs 85.324 billion in financial year 2031/14 of which Shs 9.619 billion was for development, Shs 49.768 billion was for non-wage expenditure, Shs 1.424 billion was for taxes and Shs 24.513 billion was for the wage component. This budget performed at 97.9 percent. 

The Judiciary recorded achievements such as disposal of 10 criminal appeals, 12 criminal applications, 8 civil applications and 29 civil applications in the Supreme Court; 21 Constitutional Court case applications and 8 Constitutional Court petition cases; 158 civil appeals; 303 civil applications; 128 criminal appeals; 193 criminal applications; 64 constitutional case applications and another 43 constitutional petitions in the Court of Appeal, among others. 

Mr Speaker, the committee noted that there was need to procure and install court recording equipment in 39 chief magistrates’ courts at a cost of Shs 80 million per court. This would come to a total of Shs 3.12 billion per annum. The committee recommends that this sum, Shs 3.12 billion, be availed to enable these courts to acquire recording equipment. 

VOTE 133: DIRECTORATE OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

The Directorate of Public Prosecutions received Shs 17.221 billion in the financial year 2013/2014 of which Shs 1.976 billion was for development, Shs 9.96 billion was for non-wage expenditure, Shs 0.30 billion was for taxes and Shs 4.984 billion was for the wage component. This budget performed at 97.2 percent. 

The committee was informed that the Directorate of Public Prosecutions had improved service delivery standards. Out of 68,921 cases registered, 28,978 case files were sanctioned in an average of two days. This was in line with the objective of enhancing JLOS services. 

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the lawyers in the Directorate of Public Prosecutions were the lowest remunerated in the sector. The committee recommends that as the process of constituting the long awaited salary review commission gets underway, the salaries of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions be reviewed. This is in order to address the exodus of staff from the directorate to more lucrative government departments and the private sector. Further, we recommend that the shortfall of Shs 1 billion for preparing witnesses be availed. 

VOTE 104: PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSION

Mr Speaker, the Parliamentary Commission received Shs 237.58 billion in financial year 2013/2014 of which Shs 8.966 billion was for development, Shs 28.94 billion was for non-wage expenditure and Shs 19.67 billion was for the wage component. This budget performed at Shs 99.6 per cent. 

The Parliamentary Commission informed the committee that it had recorded achievements in legislation, committee operations (sectoral and standing) and services. Most especially, the commission passed 19 Bills in financial year 2013/2014. 

The committee observed the urgent need for the commission to stop paying high rent fees for Bauman House. The commission requires an additional Shs 3.65 billion to complete the construction of an additional floor on the east, north and west wings, paying outstanding certificates on the underground car park and renovation of Development House. The committee recommends that Shs 3.6 billion be availed for that purpose. 

VOTE 103: INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT

The Inspectorate of Government received Shs 35.64 billion in financial year 2013/2014. Of this, Shs 15.18 billon was for the wage component, Shs 15.448 billion was for non-wage, Shs 5.012 billion was for development and Shs 2.66 billion was the donor component. This budget performed at Shs 100 per cent. 

The inspectorate investigated and completed 2,272 complaints on alleged corruption and ombudsman complaints; prosecuted and concluded 26 corruption cases; received declarations from 1,049 leaders; and facilitated activities of 23 integrity ambassadors clubs in universities and other tertiary institutions among other achievements. 

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the operational funds of the Inspectorate of Government have a shortfall of Shs 2.127 billion for inland travel to conduct investigations. The committee recommends that these funds be provided. 

VOTE 119: UGANDA REGISTRATION SERVICES BUREAU

Uganda Registration Services Bureau received Shs 9.215 billion in financial year 2013/2014. Of this, Shs 5.97 billion was for the wage component, Shs 2.74 billion was for non-wage and Shs 0.5 billion was appropriation in aid. This budget performed at 100 per cent. 

The bureau reported achievements such as improved turnaround time for issuance of birth certificates from the date of application in three days, and registered 17,424 companies and a number of business names and legal documents. 

Mr Speaker, permit me to go to page 2 for the crosscutting issues. The committee in its meetings recognised that there are some issues that cut across the sector and need urgent action from government. Short of this, it will lead to the continued poor performance from sector institutions. This section of the report highlights those issues and makes recommendations on them. 

Office Accommodation/Rent and JLOS House

The committee noted that some progress has been recorded on this project, that is, approved architectural designs have been done and with different developers expressing interest under the Build Operate Transfer (BOT) model. The committee further noted that the procurement process would be concluded by December 2014 and construction would commence in the first quarter of 2015, with the project expected to be completed in two years. 

The committee recommends that the timelines indicated by Government be adhered to as this project is anticipated to resolve the accommodation issues that exist in the sector. 

Harmonisation of Salaries and Emoluments

The institutions in the justice, law and order sector such as the Inspectorate of Government, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau and the Law Reform Commission have received salary enhancements while others such as the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, the Electoral Commission and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs are still operating on old salary structures.

This disparity in salaries has resulted in a number of problems such as a high level of staff turnover, low motivation levels, corruption in the Judiciary and poor performance of staff.

The committee reiterates its recommendation made in its report on the ministerial policy statement for 2013/2014, that the establishment of a salary review commission be expedited. It is further recommends that in the medium term, institutions such as the Electoral Commission and the DPP, which are in dire need of salary enhancement to enable them pay a living wage to their staff, be given urgent consideration.

I now would like to request members to turn to page 11 where we have the recommendations on the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

Compensation and Court Awards

The committee noted that this is one of the biggest challenges facing the ministry. The estimated figure for the court awards was reduced by Shs 87 billion paid out in the last financial year by the Ministry of Finance following a receipt of Mandamus orders issued by courts against Government for some of the claimants.

The committee further noted that while the outstanding amount in compensations and court awards is estimated at Shs 84 billion, only Shs 4.3 billion has been allocated to settlement of these in the financial year 2014/2015. At this rate, with no further court awards, it would take Government about 20 years to clear these awards. Some of these awards attract interest of up to 30 per cent per annum. It should be noted that Government made an undertaking to prioritise the settlement of court awards in the financial year 2015/2016. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs liaises with the Ministry of Finance to establish a payment schedule for this outstanding obligation. 

The committee recommends that the two ministries should work out a three-year payment plan starting this financial year and submit it to the committee within one month.

The committee further reiterates its recommendation that the court awards and compensation originating from ministries should be recovered from the budgets of the respective ministries. This decentralisation of payments is in view of the fact that Government sometimes loses cases due to negligence of officials in some ministries and departments.

Operationalization of the Centre for Arbitration and Dispute Resolution (CADER)

Mr Speaker, CADER, was created under section 58 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act to steer and guide the growth of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms so as to decongest the courts. However, CADER remains non-operational in spite of the committee’s previous recommendation that funds be allocated to operationalize it. This state of affairs has contributed to case backlog and continues to affect investment.

The committee notes that the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill 2007 provides for direct financial support from the Treasury to CADER. The Ministry of Finance informed the committee that it would consider funding for CADER as and when it receives a submission from the Ministry of Public Service.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service submits strafing requirements and funding needed for CADER to the Ministry of Finance within the next three months.

Legal Training in Uganda and the Role of the Law Council

The committee noted that the Uganda Law Council has been inspecting universities that offer law courses. The Uganda Law Council however lamented that it does not have the mandate to stop the teaching of law in universities that do not meet the criteria and standard required for the teaching of this course.

The committee recommends that the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 be amended to empower the Uganda Law Council to stop the teaching of law by universities that do not meet the required standard and to take action where such universities do not heed to the directives of the council.

Mr Speaker, I suppose that members must have perused through this report. So, I will now move to page 14 to read out the committee recommendation that the budget for Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be passed as follows: 
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 18,222, 836,000. 
    b) Development budget - Shs 24,426,585,000.

Mr Speaker, we go to page 18 and those are the observations and recommendations in respect of the Electoral Commission. I will proceed, because I suppose that members have read, to read the committee recommendations on the budget as follows:

The committee recommends that the budget for the Electoral Commission – vote 102 - for the financial year 2014/2015 be passed as follows:
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 150,467,009,000. 
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 113,676,000. 
This comes to a total of Shs 150, 580,685,000.

On page 25, we have observations and recommendations on the Uganda Law Reform Commission. The committee recommends that the budget of vote 105, the Uganda Law Reform Commission, be passed as follows: 
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 7,360,515,000. 
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 254,966,000. 
This comes to a total of Shs 7,615,481,000.

We proceed to page 31 where we have observations and recommendations on the Law Development Centre. I will proceed to read the recommendation on the budget. The committee recommends that the budget for vote 109, Law Development Centre, be passed as follows: 
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 4,924,000,000. 
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 873,304,000. 
This comes to a total of Shs 5,397,304,000.

Mr Speaker, I proceed to page 37. These are the committee recommendations and observations on Uganda Human Rights Commission. I am sure members have had time to read them. I proceed to read the recommendation of the committee that the budget for vote 106, the Uganda Human Rights Commission, for the financial year 2014/2015 be passed as follows: 
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 9,557,791,000. 
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 142,617,000. 
This comes to a total of Shs 9,700,408,000.

I will proceed to page 42, which has the recommendations on the Judiciary. The committee recommends that the budget for vote 101, the Judiciary, for the financial year 2014/2015 be passed as follows: 
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 77,548,419,000. 
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 9,138,823,000. 
This comes to a total of Shs 86,687,242,000. 

I will now go to page 48 which has the committee’s observations and recommendations on the Directorate for Public Prosecutions. Permit me also to read the recommendation of the committee. The committee recommends that the budget for vote 133, the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, for the financial year 2014/2015 be passed as follows: 
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 16,863,846,000. 
    b) Development expenditure - Shs 6,286,751,000. 
This comes to a total of Shs 23,150,597,000. 

Page 52 has the committee recommendations on the Parliamentary Commission. I will now read the recommendation of the committee. The committee recommends that the budget for vote 104, the Parliamentary Commission, for the financial year 2014/2015 be passed as follows: 
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 292,713,305,000. 
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 39,207,547,000. 

That takes me to page 58 which has the observations and recommendations in respect of the Inspectorate of Government. The committee recommends that the budget for vote 103, the Inspectorate of Government, for the financial year 2014/2015 be passed as follows: 
    a) Recurrent expenditure - Shs 33,211,320,000. 
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 5,511,568,000. 
This comes to a total of Shs 38,722,888,000.

I now go to page 63, which has the observations and recommendations in respect of the Judicial Service Commission. The committee recommends that the budget for vote 148, the Judicial Service Commission, for financial year 2014/2015 be passed as follows: 
    a) Recurrent expenditure – Shs 2,946,646,000. 
    b) Development expenditure – Shs 286,416,000. 
This comes to a total of Shs 3,233,062,000.

That brings me to the last vote on page 75, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. The committee recommends that the budget for vote 119, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, for the financial year 2014/2015 be passed as follows: Recurrent expenditure - Shs 9,295,034,000. There is no development budget, so the total is still the same, Shs 9,295,034,000.  

I beg to move and thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable members, for giving me this opportunity to present for my sector. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chair and members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for this very elaborate report capturing all these votes. 

I now propose the question for your debate, honourable members. The motion is that the report of the sectoral Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2014/15 be adopted. That is the motion and that is the question I propose for your debate, which begins now. The time allocated is three minutes each. If there is no debate, we can proceed to – (Laughter) - I will start with the member for Entebbe.

12.39
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. 

I have three issues to raise; one is about the Law Development Centre. The committee has reported that the Law Development Centre registered achievements in performance. However, we note the poor performance of the students in the training centre. There is a tremendous increase in students failing. 

The committee has also suggested the amendment of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act to deal with universities that do not qualify to teach law. However, when you look at the performance of the students at the Law Development Centre, it is not only students from other universities that fail at that centre but also from Makerere University and other universities that long qualified to teach that course. So we need to look at the cause. Probably, there is limited space. Is there room in the budget to provide for funds for the expansion of facilities, so that the students can perform better?

The other issue that I would like to raise is in regard to human rights. Human rights commission performed at 100 per cent in the previous financial year, but in our electoral session during the general elections, we noted low voter education. Now countrywide, we do not see and appreciate the role of the human rights commission in educating the voters. When you look at the response of voters in suggesting a candidate of their choice, there is an increasing number of wasted votes.

Finally, the Judicial Service Commission performed at over 89 per cent but up to now, we do not have a substantive Chief Justice and yet the budget is there. So, what is the problem? We want to approve the budget of the sector with the respective office bearers in their offices. There are general problems in the Judicial Service probably because of lack of a substantive Chief Justice. I want to thank you.

12.43
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work that they have done so well. I have only two comments to make. 

My first comment is about the Uganda Human Rights Commission. They need the money but down at the grassroots, they are not felt. I do not know how far they go. I do not know whether they reach the districts or if they have some representation at the sub-counties. This is because people are ignorant and do not know where to take their complaints. 

Some time back, FIDA had a lot of steam but I do not know where the steam went. Many women who were molested by their husbands would run to FIDA but these days, there is lukewarm reception. It is not active as it used to be. I do not know whether the budget is constrained or something has happened. 

In the 1990’s, FIDA was very active and the women who they sensitised in those days have now grown. We now have a new generation of young women who are also being harassed by their husbands. Those days they were very happy. Recently, there was a man who chopped off his wife’s hand and the relatives were wondering where to go. Can there be more publicity? Can they create more awareness at the grassroots?

My second comment is about the junction down here to our offices. Our lives are in danger because of traffic. The traffic is very heavy and when you come from Parliament when you are tired, sometimes you just stand there and look a fool. Can something be done? I do not know whether there is a plan, as part of the renovations being carried out at the UDC building, to put a flyover or bridge so that when Members of Parliament cross from this side, they can do so without the interference of the traffic; otherwise, our lives are in danger. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

12.45
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will begin with the Electoral Commission. In its 2013/2014 budget, the Electoral Commission had an activity within which voter education and reorganisation was supposed to have been done. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, if you were sensitive, you would have noticed that the Electoral Commission went and parcelled out some of the polling stations and put them in different parishes all together. They did this without consultations or informing the local leaders. They just sat at the headquarters and pushed some villages to places where it was very inconveniencing. 

I implore the Electoral Commission that when it is going to do some of these activities, there should be adequate consultation. They should liaise with the local leaders so that this is done in good faith and the voters are able to know where they fall.

I also feel that it is the mandate of the Electoral Commission to carry out civic education. Honestly, without any institution in this country volunteering to tell the voters what is expected of especially a Member of Parliament, as I speak the role of a Member of Parliament can only be done by a supernatural being. It is not tenable and just not sustainable. 

Where the Government has failed to provide the social services, the Member of Parliament is the only solution to this; you are supposed to be mobile money –(Interjections)– an ATM, 24 hours standing and not sitting. You work on the roads, bridges and they will continue because there is need. You look at this with sympathy and you are compelled to come in where you can. So, where is the Electoral Commission in this? After putting the offices in place, what role does it play beyond this?

Secondly, I will not shy away from the budget of Parliament. In 2009 when we joined the Parliamentary Commission, the fuel of Members of Parliament was standing at Shs 1,400. We managed to push this to Shs 2,400 per litre but now fuel is Shs 3,000 and above – almost Shs 3,700 - but it has still remained at Shs 2,400. This is not something anyone can shy away from. We go to the same petrol stations and this is what is standing in the whole country. So, I implore the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to work on this.

Mr Speaker, the other thing is the question of the parking lot. Since this construction took place, we are stranded and do not know what to do with the parking lot. Can we be updated on how far you have gone? –(Member timed out_)

12.49
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. I want to add to what has been said about the office of the DPP. The committee rightly observed that these people are underpaid and no wonder many of them are moving out for greener pastures maybe in other government ministries, departments and agencies including KCC.

Mr Speaker, whenever the report of the IGG comes out, it always highlights corruption in the office of the DPP and in the Judiciary. I want to say that this is correct because these people are underpaid and no wonder they have to be involved in corruption as the committee observed.

Mr Speaker, I also want to observe the issue of long distances covered by prisoners especially in districts of Kaabong and the islands, take for example Bukhooli, Buvuma and Kalangala to access justice. I would pray that in future under the JLOS sector, I think it is always prudent that wherever they construct an office of the DPP, there is a prison and a police post such that the prisoners are saved from covering long distances as we are all aware that justice delayed is justice denied.

I want to concur with my colleague from Kaberamaido on the issue of voter education and civic education. The committee rightly observed that the Law Reform Commission should be given money to translate even the Constitution into local languages. This would help us to clearly outline the roles of a Member of Parliament and also save us from these huddles the member is actually in.

Finally, the committee is silent when it comes to the Parliamentary Commission. They were very frank and in some places they are clearly saying, such and such amount should be availed to the Judicial Service Commission, to the Law Reform Commission, to the Electoral Commission, but fall short of recommending any figures when it comes to the Parliamentary Commission. What is rightly ours should be ours. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.52
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start with the Law Reform Commission. We hardly have a year, according to the national Electoral Commission, for us to go to the electioneering seasons but I am perturbed and surprised by the level at which we have begun addressing issues to do with constitutional amendments. Just some few minutes ago, members alluded to the issue of amending or changing the name of the Uganda Police Force to the Uganda National Police. This is a mandate – these are proposals supposed to be coming from the minister – (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Motion

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Motion?

1.54
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this chance to move a motion. I have listened to my colleague, the chairman who I would like to thank for a very elaborate report. I have also listened to the submissions of my colleagues and I feel this report is straight forward. It doesn’t deserve us to go spending time. I would like to move that the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2014/2015 be adopted and the financial estimates –
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you moving that the question be put? 

MR AMURIAT: I move that the question be put on this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the question be put and he has given the reasons as to why he believes that this time would be appropriate for the question to be put. I will first put the question to that motion that the question be put. I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion that the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Ministerial Policy Statement on the Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2014/2015 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank you, Members for this. We have saved some time. We have two more reports. 

(House was suspended at 12.55 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.01 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back to continue with this sitting. Welcome and thank you for keeping time. Next item. Let us deal with item 3.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO THE SECTORAL COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 176 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that the responsibility of designating or assigning Independent members of this House to committees rests with the Speaker’s Office. Accordingly, I have received communication to that effect and I now announce as follows: 
    1. Hon. Cadet Benjamin, Independent; to move to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.
    2. Hon. Chemutai Phyllis, Independent; also to move to the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

 I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

3.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Margaret Komuhangi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Before I present the report, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for Financial Year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KOMUHANGI: I also beg to lay on Table the minutes of the meeting of the committee during the entire period. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

MS KOMUHANGI: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence to present the executive summary of the Report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates of Financial Year 2014/2015 and I beg members to refer to the detailed report on our iPads.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed.

MS KOMUHANGI: Introduction. Mr Speaker, in accordance with Article 155 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, sectoral committees are mandated among other things to: 
    (i) Examine and comment on policy matters affecting ministries and departments under their jurisdiction and 
    (ii) Examine critically Government recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House. 

Scope 

The committee considered the ministerial policy statements and examined the budget estimates for the Financial Year 2014/15 for the following votes:
    1. Vote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
    2. Vote 124: Equal Opportunities Commission
    3. Votes 501-850: Local Governments
 
The report covers the following aspects: 
i. 	Sector mandates 
ii. 	Budget performance in FY 2013/2014 
iii. 	Sector achievements in the FY 2013/2014 
iv. 	Planned activities and programmes for the FY 2014/2015 
v. 	Funds requested to implement the planned activities 
vi. 	Committee’s observations and recommendations
 
Methodology

In considering the policy statement, the committee:-

Held meetings with the political and technical leadership of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Equal Opportunities Commission, National Youth Council, National Women Council, National Council for Children, National Disability Council, National Library of Uganda, Uganda National Cultural Centre and the coalition of Civil Society Organisations, which included Civil Society Budget Advocacy Group, Centre for Domestic Violence Prevention and Uganda Literacy and Adult Learners Association. 

Reviewed and analysed the following documents:
    a) The ministerial policy statement for FY 2014/2015
    b) Alternative policy statement for FY 2014/2015
    c) Budget Speech 2014/2015
    d) Budget performance report by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 
    e) Previous reports of the Committee on the Budget Framework Paper and ministerial policy statement 2013/2014

Vote 018. For tables refer to the detailed report. 

Mandate of the ministry

The mandate of the sector is to empower communities to harness their potential through skills development, cultural growth and labour productivity for sustainable and gender responsive development. 

I will move to observations and recommendations straight away.

Budgets for statutory bodies under the ministry 

The committee observed that all statutory bodies in the sector do not have their own Votes but rather receive subventions from the ministry, which in most cases are subjected to cuts once the ministry experiences inadequacies.

The committee recommends that the budgets for these statutory bodies should be given their independent Votes to enable them function properly.

The committee further recommends that the Wage Bill for the statutory bodies should be fully catered for by Government.

Staffing

The committee has over time noted with concern the declining number of staff at the ministry and the institutions under its supervision. For example, out of 269 positions in the ministry alone, only 181 have been filled leaving 88 positions vacant.

The committee had earlier recommended promotions for deserving staff so that new staff can be recruited instead of recruiting staff for higher positions directly who may not have enough experience especially for specialised departments. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, in conjunction with Public Service Commission, should address the issue of staff gaps and internal promotions at once so that the ministry and institutions under its mandate can ably execute their mandate and a report be made to Parliament by the end of the third quarter.

The committee also recommends that the funds for salaries in respect of required staff amounting to Shs 0.364 billion be provided this financial year.

Domestic arrears

The committee noted that the ministry has accumulated arrears amounting to Shs 4.768 billion and the biggest contributing factor being the government workers compensation arising out of accidents in work places. 

The committee recommends that the government should open a budget line under the ministry to provide for workers compensation based on realistic projections or any other method that would ensure timely payments of verified claims just like it is the case with statutory court awards under the Ministry of Justice. 

The committee further recommends that the ministry develops a policy to address the issue of workers’ compensation.

The committee further recommends that arrears amounting to Shs 4.768 billion be provided as a matter of priority this Financial Year 2014/2015. 

Creation of a standalone Ministry of Labour and Productivity
The committee observed that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has many departments and is congested with lots of activities and yet it is underfunded. The committee further observed that as the country see tremendous growth in the oil industry, matters of employment, occupational safety and health at workplace and inspection become pertinent and need to be separately addressed. 

The committee reiterates its previous recommendation that Government creates a standalone ministry of labour and productivity so that matters of labour can effectively be addressed. 

Externalisation of labour

The committee noted that external employment is one of the major ways Uganda can be integrated into the global economy to promote maximisation of the potential of Ugandan labour force. 

The committee was however informed that Government has not concluded Memoranda of Understanding with countries that require labour. This means that Ugandan labourers seeking employment abroad continue to be at the mercy of recruitment companies especially in the host countries outside the bilateral government arrangement, which makes complaints handling and monitoring very difficult. 

The committee was further informed that the ministry developed guidelines to facilitate recruitment and mobility of Ugandans to decent employment, and to better manage legal migration of workers between Uganda and the destination countries.

The committee recommends that the ministry in addition to developing guidelines should in conjunction with Attorney-General’s Office expedite the development and execution of Memoranda of Understanding and report to Parliament accordingly.

The committee further recommends that Government should explore creating a national labour company and or authority responsible for regulation of labour firms involved in the externalisation of labour.

Labour Productivity

The committee noted that improved labour productivity is the key to generating more and better remuneration and wealth. The committee further noted that Uganda’s labour productivity is the lowest in East Africa due to inadequate skills, negative attitude to work, poor managerial practices and poor working conditions. The committee also noted that Uganda lacks a mechanism for coordinating various activities to bring about improved labour productivity in the country.

The committee recommends that ministry should fast track establishment of national productivity centre to prepare Uganda’s labour force for competitive employment.

Cultural Institutions

The committee was concerned about the emerging number of cultural institutions in the country and observed that there are currently 15 traditional institutions and leaders in the country against the 11 that were budgeted for in this Financial Year 2014/2015 –(Interjections)– I am threatened, Mr Speaker. 

The committee was informed that the ministry is in the process of reviewing the Institution of Traditional Leaders Act, 2011 in order to address gaps that have been identified so far in its implementation.

The committee recommends that the ministry should expedite development of the policy and guidelines, which will regulate the operations of the cultural institutions and also to give powers to the minister in charge to play a key role in the affairs of these institutions.

The committee also recommends that government should allocate money to fund all recognized traditional institutions to effectively play their role in enhancing positive cultural values.
  
Expanding Social Protection

The committee noted that Government is expanding Social Protection Programme under Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) in 14 pilot districts of Uganda and in the Financial Year 2013/14; H.E the President directed that the programme be extended to Yumbe District. 

The committee was informed that Cabinet approved the extension of the programme throughout the country by 2015. The committee however noted that:
a) 	There seems to be no concrete steps in respect to a national rollout strategy.
b) 	While the programme activities have commenced in Yumbe this Financial Year 2014/2015, the budget has a provision of Shs 2 billion against the required Shs 5.7 billion 
c) 	The programme has been operating without any approved policy on social protection. 

The committee recommends that Government expedites the approval of social protection policy to strengthen the mechanism for coordination of social protection programmes in the country.

The committee also recommends that a budget shortfall of Shs 3.7bn be provided in the budget to cover the whole of Yumbe District.

The committee further recommends that Government should present to Parliament a national rollout plan detailing timelines in which particular districts will be brought on board.

Street Children

The committee was concerned that the issue of street children remains a challenge despite Government efforts to have them removed from the streets for settlement. The committee observed that issues of street children cannot be addressed if both push and pull factors are not adequately addressed.

The committee was informed that the ministry is collaborating with KCCA, Ministry of Karamoja Affairs and Ministry of Local Government to ensure that the street children issues are dealt with. Further, the committee was informed that the ministry has been renovating Kobulin Skills Centre for years now and efforts to have this as a reception centre has so far not yielded any fruits casting doubt on the construction process. This centre is important because most of street children are reported to be coming from Karamoja.

The committee recommends that Government should extend economic empowerment to the communities where these children come from so that the problem is addressed from the source.

The committee further recommends that KCCA should ensure that the mafias who make business out of these children and the people who give them money are arrested so that the streets are made hostile for these children and people who exploit them.

The committee further recommends that the ministry submits to Parliament a comprehensive report on the status of renovation of Kobulin Youth Skills Centre by the end of the third quarter of Financial Year 2014/2015.

Child Sacrifice

The committee noted with concern the increasing number of child sacrifice cases in the country and lack of a clear strategy by Government to stop this vice.

The committee recommends that the ministry comes out with a national action plan on child sacrifice which can deal with perpetuators of this vice. 

Women Enterprise Fund

While handling the sector budget framework paper, the committee was glad to note that a concept paper to set up women enterprise fund had been developed, however no mention to this was made in the policy statement. The committee strongly supports the proposal to have a comprehensive women enterprise fund run by the ministry covering the whole country to help unlock the business potential of women especially those in the country side.

The committee recommends that the ministry makes a fundable proposal in respect to women enterprise fund to be implemented in the next Financial Year 2015/2016.

Domestic Violence

The committee noted with concern that domestic violence has remained on the increase despite several years of advocacy and availability of laws against the vice. The committee also noted that most of the programme activities addressing domestic violence are donor-funded despite Government commitment to fund the implementation of domestic violence Act, 2010 as evidenced by the certificate of financial implications.

The committee recommends that the ministry comes up with a budget line to fund the implementation of activities that address domestic violence in the country. 

The committee further recommends that the ministry puts up an intra-ministry/agency committee to oversee the implementation and enforcement of all gender-related laws.

Youth Livelihood Programme

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development initiated the Youth Livelihood programme in the last financial year. In the first year of implementation ending 31 June 2014, the programme covered 27 districts and 1,563 youth enterprise groups had benefited. 

In this financial 2014/15, Shs 35.25 billion has been provided to scale up the programme to all the districts in the country against the annual requirement of Shs 53 billion. 
The committee has registered some concerns in respect to implementation of the programme based on the unverified reports about responsible government officers at the district level attempting to extort money from youth groups in order to have them selected for support.

The committee recommends that the ministry plays a very strict supervisory role to ensure that youth get procurements that reflect value for money.

The committee further recommends that the ministry enhances its monitoring and evaluation function diligently so that problems that affect implementation can be easily detected and henceforth solved with ease. 

The committee further recommends that Government provides money to cover the funding gap of Shs 17.75 billion in order to have a smooth implementation of the programme in the whole country.

Children welfare in Government institutions

The committee noted that Uganda’s population growth rate is among the highest in Africa, hence raising number of vulnerable children and yet the mandate of the ministry has not been reinforced with an enabling budget to cater for these vulnerable children.

The ministry reported that they have 2,120 children currently being looked after in remand homes and care centers which are experiencing a budget shortfall of Shs 1.39 billion.

The committee recommends that Government should provide Shs 1.39 billion to cater for the feeding of children and youth in government institutions.  

Maintenance and rehabilitation of ministry institutions

The committee was informed that the ministry intends to rehabilitate three major institutions namely: Naguru Remand Home, Kireka Rehabilitation Centre and Kampiringisa National Rehabilitation Centre.

The committee was concerned about the physical infrastructure status of all institutions under the ministry. The committee has undertaken numerous oversight visits to these institutions and is appalled by the conditions in which these are and not only those mentioned above and in addition, Ruti Rehabilitation Centre, Lweza vocational institution and Mubuku Youth Centre. These buildings are dilapidated and should be given due attention before they become condemned. 

The committee recommends that the ministry comes up with a phased out strategy to renovate and retool these institutions. The strategy should be laid before Parliament by the end of financial year 2014/2015.

The committee further recommends that Ministry of Finance provides the required Shs 3 billion to renovate the three named institutions this financial year. 

Occupational Health and Safety

The committee acknowledges that issues of occupational health and safety are pertinent as the country sees a tremendous growth in the industry sector. There is need for Government to invest in the health and safety of the workplaces so that the workforce is protected. This can only be achieved by fully implementing the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 2006 which among other things deals with licensing and inspection of work places to ensure that they are suitable for workers. As already noticed the department responsible is not only understaffed but also poorly funded and cannot therefore effectively implement the law.

Parliament had earlier on recommended that Government should look into establishing a National Occupational Safety and Health Authority just like other East African neighbors. The ministry appreciated this recommendation but did not get funds to carry out a study to see its viability in Uganda’s context.

Further in the financial year 2012/2013, following the recommendation from the committee, Parliament passed a supplementary budget of Shs 2 billion to kick-start Strengthening Safeguards, Safety and Health in work places (SSASHEW) specifically targeting statutory inspections in 55 oil rich districts. However this project was expected to receive about Shs 8 billion annually in order to meet all the targeted outputs. In financial year 2014/2015, this project has a funding gap of   Shs 5.5 billion.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the ministry should continue to look at the possibility of creating the Occupational Safety and Health Authority. The committee further recommends that Occupational Safety and Health inspectors should be deployed in regions where oil drilling is taking place.

The committee further recommends that the funding gap of Shs 5.50 billion be provided in the financial year 2014/15 to enable SSASHEW meet its targets.

The Industrial Court

The committee was happy to note that after many years of recommending for the establishment of the Industrial Court, it is now operational effective 1 July 2014. The committee also noted that the Industrial Court was constituted without the required staff to fully make it operational. In this financial year 2014/15 out of Shs 2 billion that was budgeted for, only a dismal Shs 0.3 billion has been allocated. The committee recommends that the funding gap of Shs 1.7 billion be provided to make the Industrial Court effectively operational.

Labour officers

The committee was informed that only 27 districts have duly appointed labour officers and the rest of other districts rely on community development officers to act in that capacity. This means that issues of labour remain in the periphery yet there cannot be development without issues of labour at the planning stage.
The committee once again recommends that Government recentralizes this function to the ministry.

The Uganda National Cultural Centre (UNCC)

The committee was happy to note that the National Cultural Centre fully implemented staff recruitment and also carried out a forensic audit on the institution thus introducing numerous reforms by the new leadership aimed at increasing revenue as well as improving the image of the institution.

The committee further observed that the National Cultural Centre Act, 1959 gives it the mandate to establish regional cultural centres from resources that are either internally generated or from grants and other sources.

The committee was informed that the institution has a total wage bill of Shs 944,383,187 yet it receives a wage subvention of only Shs 27 million which constrains its operations.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and SD and the Ministry of Finance should jointly look at fully funding the wage bill so that the internally generated funds can be used for various development activities.

The committee recommends that the National Cultural Centre should make all their revenue collections automated to maximize efficiency.

The National Women Council

The committee appreciated the council’s innovation to supplement conditional quarterly grants that are sent directly to districts to support women enterprises. The council in addition sends Shs 3.5 million to districts for women income generating projects.

The committee observed that with the current level of funding, the Uganda Women Council can only afford to fund 48 districts every financial year.

Further the committee noted with concern that the leadership of women council both at national level and district level is not effectively involved in decision making and this is attributed to the expiry of term of office of the council, a challenge that some district technocrats use to arbitrarily exclude women leaders from participating in selecting women groups for support.
 
The committee recommends that the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development should ensure that women councils are operational by tapping on the guidance of the Attorney-General. 

The committee recommends that Government should provide adequate non-wage budgets for the council so that all districts in Uganda can be fully supported. 
The committee further recommends that the executive secretary should be recruited and other staff on the approved structure for proper functioning of the council.

The National Council for Children 

The committee was concerned that the institution has been running without a fully constituted council since its expiry in 2011 and hence it continues to operate in a system that has no checks and balances. The committee was informed that the institution has on numerous occasions reminded the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development to appoint the council to no avail and yet this appointment does not impose any new financial implication to the ministry.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender should appoint a new council and report to Parliament on the progress of this recommendation by the end of the second quarter of this financial year.

The National Council for Disability

The committee noted the council has not advocated for and adequately addressed issues affecting the disabled persons in the country. For example, quite a number of people with disabilities are left out of special grants at the district level, special needs schools are not paid attention to and there is no single disability assessment centre in the whole country and the Kyambogo University Department of Special Needs Education, which used to produce assistive devices for persons with disabilities has since stopped due to lack of resources, among others. This casts doubt on the effectiveness of the council in advocating for the welfare of persons with disabilities. 

The committee recommends that Government through the council and Ministry of Education should give priority to special needs education schools so that disabled children can be empowered to participate in educational and development programmes.

The committee recommends that Government should revitalise production of assistive devices of persons with disabilities so that there is steady supply of these affordable important items.  The committee recommends that the ministry and the council should disseminate the revised guidelines for assessing a special grant for persons with disabilities. 

The National Youth Council

The committee appreciated the progress made by the youth council in addressing the key concerns affecting young people in the country specifically mobilisation of the youth at various levels, to appreciate and get involved in the youth livelihood programmes. The committee was also happy to learn that the council initiated a voluntarism and internship programme that is geared towards assisting in educating, providing opportunities and hands-on experience to the young people.

The committee recommends that Government should use the voluntarism and internship programme initiated by the council to prepare the youth to cope with the employment experience challenges. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should involve the National Youth Council in monitoring the youth livelihood programmes in the country.

The National Library of Uganda

The committee noted with concern that the national library does not have a strategic plan and a policy on book donation, which makes it liable to receive books which do not conform to the required standards. The committee also noted that all public libraries do not have physical accessibility and reading provision for persons with disabilities.

The committee was concerned that the institution has not yet acquired the land title from ministry of local government that was allocated to it for the construction of a permanent office. 

The committee recommends that the National Library of Uganda puts in place a book donation policy so that all the books that are donated conform to the national required standards. There is need to digitalise the library so that people can have online access to materials that cannot even be found in Uganda bookshops. The committee recommends that as a matter of priority, the institution should put in place Braille and audio materials to assist visually impaired persons to read. 

The committee recommends that the strategic plan should be concluded and a report on this regard should be submitted to the committee by the end of this financial year. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Local Government should hand over the land title to the National Library of Uganda by the end of the second quarter of this financial year.

Votes 501 - 850: Local Governments

The budget performance was 100 percent because this budget has never been increased.

Observations and recommendations

This shows release performance for conditional grants.
Monitoring and evaluation: The committee observed that local governments do not have fully-fledged monitoring and evaluation systems to assess the impact of government programmes implemented under the vote, and that the overall monitoring and evaluation framework designed for this vote cannot be effectively implemented. The committee recommends that the ministry should play their supervisory role to ensure that monitoring and evaluation committees are formed to assess progress of implementation of programmes as well as documenting challenges and lessons learned.

Community Development function

The committee recommends that Government looks for funds to cover the funding gap of Shs 6.80 billion for supporting community development functions. And the use of that function is detailed in the report.

Adult Literacy function

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as a matter of urgency should come up with a policy and guidelines for implementation of functional adult literacy. I think this recommendation is being taken over by events - just yesterday there was a policy. The committee also recommends that Government should consider increasing funding to this programme so that adult literacy can be progressively brought on board in the development process.

The Equal Opportunities Commission (EOC)

Constitution of the Commission
The committee noted that out of five constitutional required commissioners of EOC, only four were appointed. The committee was informed that the matter was presented to the responsible minister and is awaiting a response.

The committee recommends that the appointing authority should expedite the appointment of the fifth member of the commission in order to fully constitute the commission.

Tribunals and investigations

The committee noted with concern that EOC has not achieved much on its output, for example, out of 24 planned investigations, only two were achieved while the tribunal remained redundant during the period under review. The committee recommends that the commission needs to operationalize the tribunal as well as concentrate on the key outputs.

Human resource gaps

The committee was informed that the Equal Opportunities Commission has an approved structure of 45 staff and only 26 have already been filled leaving a gap of 19 positions. The committee recommends that the commission should liaise with the Ministry of Public Service to find suitable personnel to fill the remaining gaps.

Methods of disseminating information by EOC

The committee noted that although the commission has been carrying out sensitisation on the understanding of equal opportunities, its impact has not been felt on the ground. The committee recommends that EOC should put in place a communication strategy that targets all categories of people in the country.

Annual reports

The Equal Opportunities Commission is mandated among others to produce annual reports. The committee was informed that the first annual report on the state of equal opportunities in Uganda was produced and submitted in 2014. The committee was concerned about the process of submitting reports. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should ensure that the reports of EOC are laid before Parliament.   

Auditing compliance with equal opportunities

The Equal Opportunities Commission is mandated among other things to audit compliance with equal opportunities in all MDAs and local governments. The committee was informed that four MDAs and one local government had responded to the request and exercise is still on-going. The committee therefore recommends that the EOC should explore modalities of phasing out the plans for compliance and also enforce it as a law prescribed.

Conclusion

In light of the above observations and recommendations, I beg to move that this august House approves the budget estimates for the votes under the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for the Financial Year 2014/2015 as follows:

Vote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
Wage: Shs 2,454,416,000, Non-wage: Shs 17,318,388,000; Development: Shs 38,971,350,000 and Arrears Shs 1,048,214,000 making a total of Shs 59,792,368,000

Vote 124: Equal Opportunities Commission
Wage: Shs 1,374,183,000, Non-wage: Shs 1,380,000,000, Development: Shs 416,672,000 totalling to Shs 3,170,855,000.

Vote 501-850: Local Government Conditional Grants
Recurrent–Non Wage: Shs 7,141,000,000 only, the grand total being Shs 70,104,223,000.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson, for a very clear presentation of this report. I thank the committee members for the amount of work they have put into this.

Honourable members, I now propose the question for your debate. The motion is that the report of the sectoral Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2014/2015 be adopted. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. We hold the time of three minutes for each contribution. 

But before we start, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of staff of the Budget Office from the Parliament of Kenya. They are here to benchmark and share experiences with their counterparts at the Parliament of Uganda. They include: Robert Nyaga, Frederick Muthengi, Lucky Makara, Joseph Ndyarangu and Millicent Ojambo. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

We also have, in the public gallery, Mr Tabu Job, the Clerk to Council of Moyo District. He is here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming him. (Applause)  And of course Moyo District is represented by very able members here.

Debate starts now and there were members who were earlier caught by the bell – if they would still like to speak, this may be an appropriate time and I think there is only one who is here now and I will start with him; the member for Kigulu South – but the member contributed. 

3.44
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The motion caught up with me and I was unable to say something on the previous report. Allow me first of all salute the committee and the chairperson of the committee. I also salute the ministry of gender for the efforts put into executing their mandate.

Allow me start on a bad note with social protection. So many issues have been mentioned in this report regarding social protection but my voters have been demanding and asking for the SAGE Programme. They are asking for when the people of Iganga – the LOP is asking for Bugiri and Namayingo – when will they benefit from SAGE. We are taking so long to roll out because of so many years we are basing and banking on donors. I want to appeal to the ministry and our Government to ensure that all elderly people in this country benefit from this scheme. Donors should not be an issue and we should always appropriate resources to ensure that the elderly are taken care of.

Mr Speaker, it is the same case with the Young Livelihood Programme. We have mobilised and I remember that when they were launching this programme in Kololo, Members of Parliament were invited and apart from attending the launch, none or very few of us know how this programme is being implemented, how it is going to benefit our youth because very few were brought on board. So it is of interest and very great importance that the ministry does the needful by including all districts in the country, and also letting members know because we are supposed to do oversight. So if we are left out, then I think that things may not move on well. 

About child sacrifice, I am not comfortable with the recommendation of the committee where they call for an action plan on fighting child sacrifice. I feel that we needed to make a stronger recommendation and in my own opinion, the ministry has not had a lot of interest in child issues because for so many years, we have been demanding for the amendment of the Children’s Act. It is also on record that the minister has made so many commitments here that they are bringing amendments to do with the Children’s Act but up to date, there is no mention and they are not moving and that is why we are having so many cases of child sacrifice. 

Even the lack of a National Council for Children shows that the minister is not putting issues to do with children as a priority and that is why she has not instituted this commission to be in place.

Secondly, we are also losing so many children under the adoption law. The lawyers or learned minds are ferrying children here because according to the existing legislation, it is them to apply and then the court grants and that is why –(Member timed out.)
	
3.48
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also add my voice in thanking the committee for the good work done.  

I will start on the issue of the Youth Livelihood Fund. We were given letters from the ministry indicating how much money each of our districts was going to get under this programme. What we never got were the guidelines on how this money is supposed to be applied for. When I interacted with one of the members where the project is already running in their district, we were told that the money is going to be like NUSAF whereby the youth groups have to apply and the ones that the district say qualify, will be sent to the ministry and the money will be sent and that is the information that I got. 

But when you go on the ground, the youths are flooding the districts with applications knowing that the money has already been sent and it is on the accounts of the districts. I want to ask the minister to help the Members of Parliament get to understand how we apply for this money and how it is going to work.

The ministry of gender is a ministry that has got so many departments and the departments in this ministry tackle on the lives of people. When looking for the youth, you will find them in the ministry. What I do not know is whether it is a deliberate effort that this ministry has remained less funded because it gets very little money and yet it has a lot of work to do. We are talking about SAGE which is a programme that is running in very few districts and every time I go to my district, it is the first question on the list, “Hon. Netalisire, when are we eating Museveni’s money before we die?” Yes, they have termed it as “Museveni’s” money – that is what they call it in my district. I do not know what they refer to it in your area and when you look at the money that the ministry is getting, it cannot meet the demands of all the districts. What I want to find out from my minister is whether she has tried to lobby her colleagues and lobby the high table for this sector to get some increment as far as this appropriation is concerned. I thank you.

3.51
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for a good report. This report has given us a clue on what Uganda should be like. But the fact of the matter is that we are still falling short of that. As you know very well, what is going on especially in the industrial sector is worrying. I want to thank the committee for recommending the full implementation of the occupational safety and health policy.

Last week on Friday, I sat one on one with a victim who is a worker of one of the factories in Kabarole but I do not want to name the factory. His hand was chopped by a machine because of lack of the safety gears but the work and the Indians whom I do not want to mention – (Interjection) – yes, the investor said that he has the money to pay in court so the employee should go to court instead of putting the safety gears in place and seeing that his workers are safe. This is not the only thing; there is another factory here on Jinja Road whose smoke that is emitted is literally killing the workers and this pollution can result into cancer and other diseases.

The time is now; this is our moment as Members of Parliament to stand and be counted to see that we are working for our people especially we who are given the opportunity at this hour - (Interruption) 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Member is giving very revealing information to this House and as Members of Parliament, we represent these people who are vulnerable out there and he is sure he talked to the victim. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the member to help out so that we help this very victim who is told to go to court and we are sure he doesn’t have the money equivalent to an investor’s? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the investor is mentioned and we save Ugandans under the mistreatment of these investors?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is within the discretion of the member with the information to volunteer; we cannot force him to.

MR EBIL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason I am saying that is because I have tried to handle this matter as a leader because this employee comes from Lango and he has gone all the way to Fort Portal to earn a living. Right now he is incapacitated and he cannot do anything; he is left helpless. What I am saying is that at an appropriate time, the country will know because we are trying to help him out to see that he gets remedy for his problem.

I am trying to say that what is important right now is for the ministry to implement fully. In other words if it is about money, can the Ministry of Finance provide money to the Ministry of Gender which has been neglected for a long time to implement and do its function as it should be. This is what is causing us problems. I thought of deliberating on this matter because of the pain that the victim is going through and many others who are there who live in people’s homes as slaves among others. Thank you very much.

3.55
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. My concern is on EOC composition. You are aware that we have been advocating for the gender equity certificate to be implemented by Equal Opportunities Commission, and this is a commission supposed to be looking into all the ministerial policy statements to see whether gender is incorporated within. But the fact that up to now this commission has never been fully constituted, how is it going to manage that kind of mandate in case we give it that equity certificate mandate?

Year in and year out, we have been decrying the issue of the women council. As you are aware, some districts actually have been implementing some activities of the Shs 3.5 million they have talked about which is not even enough. I want to support the committee recommendation of starting the women entrepreneurship fund because with that little money that they have been using, it has been helping our women to uplift their economic status especially in the work that they do but without the women council, the technocrats misuse that money instead of benefitting the women group, it is spent in workshops, it is spent on the allowances, it is spent of functions and not benefitting the people it is supposed to. I think it is high time we demanded for the elections of the women council. I do not know – women we are the biggest voters – we support government but when it comes to our women issues, especially in establishing the councils, we have been left there hanging. I do not know what the minister has for us. Have they ever pursued this? When are we having these elections so that our councils can perform? These are our connections with the grass root movements.

The issue of labour externalisation – I do not know whether they come up with guidelines particularly with those groups that deal with exporting our people to go and work outside. Up to now, they keep on complaining about mistreatment and sexual harassment – who monitors them? Where are the guidelines? How far have you gone in terms of dealing with those companies that export labour abroad? Thank you.

4.00
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I have two issues: One, the committee is recommending re-centralisation of labour officers. This is killing the spirit of decentralisation. The committee should dig deep into the problems of the labour officers because it is well known that they are not facilitated at all. They need facilitation so that they do a good job. I do not agree with this recommendation – instead the committee should change the recommendation to read that the labour officers at the district are well facilitated together with the community development officers because these are the officers who deal with the communities. They are facilitated by being given transport and offices well catered for so that they do a good job instead of –(Interruption)

MS KOMUHANGI: I would like to inform you. The recommendation is about labour officers not being there – it is not about them not doing their work or not being paid. They are not there.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: No, you said in your recommendation that this issue should be recentralised to the ministry. I think they should remain at the district.

The second issue, Mr Speaker, is about cultural institutions. I need an explanation so that I can understand better what the committee is trying to bring about when you say that you want the minister to look into the affairs of cultural institutions. Is that not interference with the cultural institutions?

Secondly, you need to explain this properly so that we do not misunderstand you. Recently, there was an issue that took us by surprise. If you are trying to smuggle the same issue again by bringing such a recommendation, I think you are- So I am requesting the chairperson to come out and explain what you mean by this recommendation –(Member timed out.)

4.02
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also want to thank the committee for the work done. There is one area that the committee has not made mention of in the report and it is one of the areas of the Ministry of Gender. I want to bring it out and find out why it has neglected the area of baby homes in this country.

Right now, if I ask either the chairperson or the minister how many babies’ homes we have in Uganda and how many babies are being kept in those homes, none of them will answer because they have neglected that area.

Honourable minister, we do not even have a very clear policy in this country on how people are adopting babies in Uganda. Recently in the papers, there was a lady in Iganga whose entire family was crying because indirectly, their child was stolen and taken to USA. They thought they were giving their child to go and get an education but in the end, they realised that they had given their child over to be adopted. If our ministry was there to teach people and educate them on the policies, I do not think that right now that family would be crying.

Therefore, can I recommend that, that is a very important area that the ministry should take on because there are other people who are saying they want to be homosexuals and do not want to produce, why should they come and adopt our own children?

Mr Speaker, I also want to appreciate the Ministry of Gender for proposing the women in entrepreneurship funds. I appreciate that it is a very good initiative. However as women in this country, we need to look further. Let us now have women banks for the women with special interest rates. That should be low interest rates so that we encourage our women to borrow and do business and not only the entrepreneurs’ fund.

Mr Speaker, another thing that I want to mention is that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should have a data base to inform us of how many victims in this country are suffering from gender and domestic violence. This is because we are reading every day in the papers of women, men and children being killed but the ministry cannot tell us how many people have suffered - (Member timed out.)

4.05
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryadongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also want to thank the chairperson for the presentation of their report. In Kiryadongo district, there is an increasing number of children dying as a result of child sacrifice and this is majorly due to the activities of witch doctors. These witch doctors advertise their services on radios and even hold talk shows on radio and promise Ugandans visas, jobs, riches and all sorts of things. As a result, they request these desperate Ugandans to go with heads of human beings. Indeed Kiryandongo district has suffered a lot as a result of these activities of witch doctors.

I want to pray that the government regulates or streamlines the activities of these witch doctors otherwise –(Interjection)– I do not know whether they are witch doctors or traditional doctors but you have understood them.

I also want to comment on the issue of monitoring and evaluation in the country. Monitoring and evaluation in Uganda is actually a very big challenge across all ministries. In all these ministries, there is no functional M&E unit with funding and qualified staff across all these ministries yet these M&E units are responsible for baseline studies, for mid-term evaluations and impact evaluations. 

The government has lost a lot of money as a result of procuring consultancy services to do very simple things for example undertaking baseline studies. Therefore, I want to pray that this government builds capacity for the M&E staff at various levels so that they can monitor and evaluate Government projects and programmes.

On the issue of domestic violence, I hold a different view. In my district, these cases are very high in very poor families. Therefore, I want to pray that as we are talking about domestic violence, let us focus on reducing the levels of poverty and also improving on our education system otherwise even if we make laws, people are still very poor and uneducated. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.08
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues to thank the committee for the job well done. Buhaguzi being part of Bunyoro, I come from one of the greatest kingdoms in the land and that is Bunyoro Kitara kingdom.

First of all, I want to commend the government because Bunyoro Kitara kingdom has, just like other kingdoms and cultural leaders, been getting assistance from Government and that is Shs 5 million every month. It is not little money although in terms of the work what that money is supposed to be doing, it is really little.

Mr Speaker, I also commend the committee especially when it came to the recommendation to do with the review of the Traditional Leaders Act of 2011 to accommodate some new challenges we were having. Recently, we had a scenario where even in our own region, small as it is, the Bagunga as a community wanted to create their own kingdom.

The biggest challenge we are having in this country is that we do not have guidelines and I think we may need these regulations on how a cultural leader emerges and on how we can have institutions of that nature emerging. Otherwise, we are going to have every clan claiming to be a kingdom and it may turn out to be a tribal issue and later on, every family might demand being a kingdom and perhaps when a leader like an an MP loses an election, he can become a prime minister of such an institution. So we need guidelines and regulations. And I support the committee on that. 

Honourable minister, I recommend that cultural institutions should not be subjected to a uniform figure. We should look at the geographical nature, the size and all that. If you are going to subject a leader to Shs 5 million which cannot even sustain – anyway, let me stop there because I may excite another debate. But my point is that we should look at the number of districts in the region. If we use such a scientific method, Bunyoro Kingdom might get about Shs 15 million while others get Shs 1 million or Shs 2 million. 

I also want to thank the committee for social assistance grants to the elderly. Recently, while I was traversing the constituency, this was the first or second question. I want to assure you, Mr Speaker, that the elders are dying while cursing because this was promised. In the first place, it has caused a lot of confusion – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Bunyaruguru, you might have already lost your right to speak on this debate; the House has just approved you as a member of this committee so you might have lost your right. I will come back to that –(Laughter) 


4.13
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the committee for this report. My concern is on functional adult literacy. The committee has rightly observed that the implementation of this programme is by NGOs like ADRA, Courtesy Uganda and many others but this is just a lean percentage of the literate adult population that is covered and targeted by these NGOs. I would have wished that the ministry interests itself and demonstrate Government involvement by engaging the illiterate adults in these five programmes. 

I therefore want to support the recommendation of the committee on increasing the funding to allow these illiterate adults to engage in these programmes. For example, when you look at areas like Karamoja sub region, the illiteracy levels are as low as 15 percent. When Government joins hands with NGOs, I am convinced that a good proportion of illiterate adults will be covered. 

My next issue is on street children. I want to recognise and appreciate the effort by the Ministry of Gender and other partners in resettling these children back to Karamoja. But it has become a very big challenge. Even when they are settled back, after a day or two they are back to the streets of Kampala. But this is also due to organised groups that have been benefiting from these children in Kampala and some are NGOs under the pretext of supporting these children. I therefore buy the recommendation of the committee to have KCCA make the environment in Kampala very unfriendly for these children. The recommendation of the committee to have economic empowerment provided is right because the pushing factors have been food insecurity, but I think some other line ministries are trying to address these challenges especially the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs. In the past few years, there has been food production that has been encouraged hence part of the challenge has been addressed. But the most serious challenge that should attract the attention of Government is to make sure that the pulling factors on the streets are addressed more seriously. 

Lastly, I want to look at the renovation of Kobulin Skills Centre. Kobulin is an area that should have been a social centre for these children. But I am surprised the ministry has been negligent of its construction. It is indicated in the report that the college is in the construction process –(Member timed out.)

4.16
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report they have brought to this House. I have an issue on the externalisation of labour. In their report, the committee said that externalisation of employment is a way Uganda can be integrated in the global economy. I appreciate that but we realise that there is no clear guideline on this employment. We have quite a number of companies recruiting our people and our people are at their mercy. Our people are being exploited. Sometimes the money they are promised while they are here is not the amount they get wherever they go. In other cases, their passports are withheld and they cannot come back to their country.

Mr Speaker, if we follow the UN legislation on human trafficking, you will realise that this is part of human trafficking and I feel that if possible, let the Ministry of Gender, as a matter of urgency, come back to the guidelines and scrutinise the labour companies. They should not exploit our people. I feel this is a serious matter. 

Mr Speaker, another issue is that of street children. In their recommendation, the committee only talks of street kids in Kampala and they are talking of KCCA. I have on several occasions told this House that street children are not only a matter of Kampala. In my district, the issue of street kids is so enormous. Several NGOs have come on board to take them off the streets but it has not helped. Mr Speaker, this country must know that we are sitting on a time bomb; these children have not gone to schools; they have not grown with their parents and they have not been tamed. Some of them are out growing the streets. So at the right time, these will turn into thugs we have bred. I feel Government should come up to deal with the issue of street children. It is not only a Kampala issue. If you went to Mbale, they are there, if you went to Tororo they are there and in Lira they are there. Let Government come up with an economic strategy where they could place them based on their ages so that they can be sustained and controlled – (Member timed out.)

4.19
MR JOHNY SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee has done some good work and I do appreciate them. But when you look through the budget of the Ministry of Gender and what they are requesting for and compare with the budgets of other ministries, you will realise that the Ministry of Gender is underfunded. Sometimes the challenge we get – like when we interface with the Ministry of Finance, they say that they cut the coat according to the size of the ministry and they say that largely it is the ministry itself which under budgets. I do not know if that is true or not. 

The second one - when I heard about the 14 piloting districts of the SAGE funds, from the UBOS statistics, Sironko District has the highest number of the elderly –(Interruptions)– yes and so, I wonder why it is not among the 14 districts being piloted with the SAGE funds. When will it be a beneficiary? It cost the NRM Government heavily and now that it has the highest number of the elderly, it will again cost you if you don’t address that issue.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I was privileged under the leadership of the former chairperson of the Equal Opportunities committee, hon. Hanifa Kawooya, to travel to some countries to benchmark on this issue. But what we learnt was very important of how other countries do it because the Ministry of Gender is in charge of the youth, women, the disabled and that is why we are in this Parliament; to plan for such categories of people. But in those countries, without a certificate of gender budgeting and compliance from that ministry, the Government budget is not always passed. So, Mr Speaker, it is important that we strongly move that ministries always get certificates of compliance from the Ministry of Gender, which has the experts working on behalf of – they can scrutinise all sectors in Government, they scan and really recommend. Otherwise, year in, year out, committees of Parliament will be recycling the same recommendations. We will also keep on lamenting but –(Member timed out.)

4.22
MS JOY RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I will start with the issue of street children. Honourable members, as we debate these issues, we need to ask ourselves why we have such a big number of street children. In child protection, there is what is called rings of responsibility where we have the parents as the first ring next to the child. When the parents fail on their responsibilities that is when that child can be abused.

When that first ring fails, we have the community where we have the clan members, uncles, clan leaders and the community leaders to take up that responsibility. What are all these people doing to stop these children from walking from Karamoja to Kampala? We should really ask ourselves to find out what has happened to us.

The girl children on the streets are being abused by men. Yes, the committee made a recommendation that they will do economic empowerment to the families from where they come from – Mr Speaker, may I seek your protection?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have my protection, please.

MS ACHENG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I was saying the committee talked about economic empowerment of the families of those children and bringing the perpetrators to book, but another thing I want to talk about is the health of these girls. Before we mobilise them to go back to Karamoja, have we tested their status? Most of them go back when they are HIV positive and –(Interruption)

MS ROSE AKELLO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I respect my sister so much, but she is disrespecting us yet I know that Langi’s history is that they came from Karamoja. It is not only the Karimojong children who are on the streets. The honourable member from Lira has just said that they also have street children in Lira Town. I have also been told that they are in Tororo. So, is she in order to say that it is only the Karimojong children who are on the streets?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Kaboong raises an important issue. However, what we do not know is whether those street children on the streets of Lira are actually from Karamoja or not. (Laughter) We don’t know that because there is no information to that effect. Anyway, honourable member, please respect the rights of communities as you make contributions in a national parliament.

MS ACHENG: Mr Speaker, thank you so much for your wise ruling. Yes, I do respect rights of communities but I also ask of us to take responsibilities as leaders.

Mr Speaker, I also would like to inform the House that some of the sub counties have not been getting the money though it was sent. The service providers and the workers connived to eat that money. 
I want to call upon the minister to take it up and investigate that matter so that we can all get to know what is happening in Kole District.

The other issue I want to talk about is: honourable minister, when are you tabling the Children’s Act for amendment? There are so many issues that we would like to see covered by that law especially on the abuse of their rights. It is important that you do that because that law in place doesn’t bite properly – (Member timed out_)

4.27
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a big concern to bring to the attention of the minister. About one or two years ago, the President constituted a multi-sectoral committee to address the problem of the nodding syndrome, which is still a big problem in the Acholi Sub Region with Pader District being the most affected. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is part of the committee. However, I have not heard anything being done by the ministry to address this problem. The Ministry of Gender was supposed to intervene because of the many social issues surrounding the households. 

I also recall that about Shs 100 million was given to the ministry to get onto the ground to do an assessment so that they could come up with a plan to support these households and the affected children. However, I notice that nothing is being done.
A few days ago, I was in Pader and we had a function at Ataa Health Centre III where some students from the College of Health Sciences at Makerere University are trying to support these households with support from the development partners. But it is very sad to hear the testimonies from people in these affected households. There are many men who have abandoned their wives to suffer with these children.

According to the testimonies, some of the mothers are contemplating committing suicide but here we are with Government not doing anything to support these families. Honourable minister, you will recall what we saw when we went with you to one of the villages. You saw the situation of the affected children and the households but nothing is being done to support them.
It is very sad – and unfortunately the same sub region affected by this problem also has a very high poverty rate. Unfortunately the social protection programme that is benefitting elders in other districts where the poverty rate is not even so high is not considering this sub-region and districts – (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had picked PWD Eastern, Isingiro and this is how I am going to draw to a close. I will have Youth Eastern, Youth Western and Youth National.

4.31
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have three areas, one of them being that I want to call upon the ministry to take the issue of recruitment very serious. We have the women council for the last six or seven years and people are acting and we need recruitment and money is allocated but there is no recruitment. I think this has to be taken as an urgent matter. With the absence of the political wing – the women council monitoring the staff there, it becomes a challenge. I think we need to take this seriously and make sure that in the next financial report, maybe we might not be able to support these funds for gender.

I also want to say the issue of rehabilitation centres, like the Kireka Rehabilitation Centre, Mpumudde and we used to have one in Lweza; whenever budgets come here, no money is allocated to them not even for renovation. These centres have turned into places that people are using for prayers; many people are getting into these things and I am wondering what happens to this land. We hear the one of Kireka is supposed to be attached to something. We need to know where our rehabilitation centres are, which used to train people with disabilities at least to get some skills and they are able to do something.

I also think that this training given to these people should be certified through BTVET so that you can get a certificate to show that you are good in catering, in tailoring, and you can be marketable and helped.

On the issue of the youth livelihood project or programme, we find that the policy recognises youth with disabilities but in my constituency in the East, the youth keep asking, “How are we getting this money?” I think the ministry should come up with affirmative action of targeting youth with disabilities to benefit from this programme because they are young people who are supposed to benefit from it. In the policy, the money is planned for but when it gets out there you do not implement it – you put a blind eye and do not look at those people. I think you need to become serious so that when we do assessments, we have a good report.

The other thing I want to say is the issue of risk at work – right now you will agree with me that when people get disabled at work, the ministry does not have a mechanism of supporting these people. We had a case of some young man in Mukwano here who was being tossed up and down with nobody telling him how he will be supported. I think the ministry needs to take care of the workers even when they get disabled. Where are they going next? (Member timed out.)

4.34
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the chairperson and the committee for the good report and I have only two issues to raise. 

One is about the labour officers. The report raises the issue that it is only 27 districts in the country that have got labour officers and I am worried whether the minister for labour has any connectivity on the ground – who implements the policies, the programmes that he puts in place. The problem I have with the committee’s recommendation is that it does not tally with the observation. The observation is about the inadequate numbers not about failure to work because of being at district level. I would recommend that the recommendation tallies with the observation. It is not about recentralising the labour officers; it is about having labour officers in place at district level. I wish that could be corrected. It is an anomaly in my opinion.

Two, I want to thank the committee for coming up with the women enterprise fund. This is long overdue. In fact this should have come much earlier than the youth livelihood fund. In my district, it is the women that are supporting families and this economy and doing everything. I wish the committee could revise the recommendation to the effect that this fund takes effect in this financial year for us to help the women. I do not see why the committee thinks of postponing to the other financial year. This should have come much earlier.

Otherwise, I am very happy about the presentation and if those two recommendations are worked on, I will be very excited. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.37
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee and I have only two issues to address. One, the funding for the National Youth Council - I would like us to address the Shs 600 million the government gives to the youth council and let us divide this money by 112 districts – it gives us about Shs 5 million per district. Divide this again by 30 sub-counties in Manafwa District and it will give us Shs 167,000. The fundamental question I would like the minister to address today is: what is the work of the Shs 167,000 Manafwa town council gets? I am bringing this out because I do not want to blame the Ministry of Gender but I want to address the Ministry of Finance. Hon. Kasaija, how many sub-counties are in Kibaale District? If they are 25, how much allocation goes to those sub-counties? Let us be realistic when we are budgeting.

I am happy we are beginning to put in very many funds but for you to even begin an argument here of youth versus women, the statistics are self-explanatory. My argument is that when we are giving money, we should give money which is deserved by a specific project. I do not want her to go to issues of arguing youth versus women – I am talking about the funding for the National Youth Council. As a matter of priority, hon. Minister for Finance, we are putting you on notice for this. We cannot continue to allow you to only play with the young people of this country as far as giving Shs 167,000 per sub-county is concerned. That is totally unacceptable. We would rather scrap it and we know that there is no money for the National Youth Council. It is better for us not to talk about it than playing with the little money.

I thank the Ministry for Gender for the youth livelihood programme. Today, I am happy we have allocated some money. But again in line with our daily work and what we do in the field, there is again a problem with community development doctors and chief administrative officers in the implementation of this programme. People have begun only picking their relatives because it is a community driven project –(Member timed out.)    

4.40
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Specifically speaking about the youth livelihood programme, this programme was launched in Ntungamo District and a number of groups on that very day were said would benefit from this very programme. Now, it is not only disheartening but exceedingly disgraceful to these young people that even the same group that was part of the very groups that were launched in Ntungamo District - some of them have up to today not received this money. When you check the records, they are part of the 1,563 that we see as accountability for the youth enterprise groups that have received or benefitted from this programme. 

Now the clarification that I seek from the ministry is; One, is this list of the 1,563 groups the list of the intended beneficiaries or is it those who have actually received or benefited from this programme? Consistently, we have been told that it is those that have benefitted but we have clearly seen that even in the presence of officials from the Ministry of Gender, these groups come up and say, “You have us on your list but we have never received this money.” So, we want clarification.

Two, we also know of a number of youth groups that are complaining that when they are told to receive Shs 12 million, they first say Shs 2 million cash and then they are given the Shs 12 million. Precisely they get Shs 10 million and this money is supposed to be refunded and specifically again, this was also reported in Ntungamo in the presence of the officials of the Ministry of Gender. So what are they doing about that?

Three, there is this whole business of capacity building. Now I believe this money is specifically intended for youth groups. We have seen cases where money intended for given projects, most of it is spent under the disguise of training, workshops and seminars. Now we want to also know from the ministry how much of this money for the Youth Livelihood Programme is going to capacity building and how much of it is actually being received by the youth because –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, hon. Gerald Karuhanga is saying something very interesting. First of all, the people from the Ministry of Gender are here listening and they are quiet. The Minister for Gender is here with her deputies – he is saying that people ‘ate’ money for the youth in Ntungamo and instead of giving them Shs 12 million, they were given Shs 10 million. These fellows who are seated here probably took Shs 2 million – (Interjections) - you see! So is hon. Karuhanga in order to speak in tongues without saying the names of those who took the money because we may end up criminalizing everybody in the Ministry of Gender? Is he in order to say things without saying the names? Substantiate on the names in the Ministry of Gender that are ‘eating’ this money because Shs 2 million is too much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that may not be a matter of order but seeking further clarification from the member on if he can give the names - (Laughter). But it is within the member’s right to give or not to give those names. 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. This is a very serious matter because – (Member timed out.)

4.45
MRS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative, Female): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to just make a few comments in line with the committee report. The first issue is around the externalization of labour of which the committee makes very good recommendations. I would like to thank the committee for this recommendation which I think if the country follows, can be a big opportunity for the country in terms of addressing the labour excesses that we have, the unemployment challenge and of course the cash inflows that we expect from the externalization of labour. 

I would therefore, like to support the committee report and particularly the recommendations that are talking about establishing an authority but also the guidelines or a memorandum of understanding. However, I am perturbed that sometimes when they talk about externalisation of labour, a lot of times it is talked about in the negative and the Ministry of Gender seems to be quiet all the time. I want them to own up because this programme was established under a ministerial instrument and therefore, you should take ownership in terms of sensitising the public and also ensuring that there is a regulatory framework to facilitate this process because the programme is very good but little is talked about and little is done to support its running.

I want to thank the committee on the issues of labour productivity that they are raising in their committee report. I think that as a country, we have fallen short of this glory. We are the last in the region and we cannot certainly compete in the global market in terms of our productivity as people and citizens of this country. Therefore, I want to thank the committee for that proposal that they make in terms of an attempt to improve labour productivity. 

However, I would also like to ask the minister to facilitate some work around to ensure that there is also apprenticeship. You have heard a far cry from the youth all over the country especially the fresh graduates who are always talking about the challenge or skills and they spend all their life learning knowledge in class and then later on when they are supposed to get jobs, they are asking them for experience and they do not have the experience. 

So, Mr Speaker, we had proposed through the National Youth Council which is our oversight body a plan that we have a national entrepreneurship, internship or apprenticeship policy such that both private and public employers can provide young people with such placement where they can prepare and get trained in terms of their relevant experience and then gain relevant skills.

I thank hon. Huda for raising issues of children and I have also not seen an area that is mentioning issues of day care policies in this country. I want to commend Parliament and the Parliamentary Commission for putting into place a day care centre that we have established as Parliament. This is being a role model in the nation as policy makers. But, Mr Speaker, women across this country have a problem of being able to work without pressure of going home to breastfeed especially during the first six months when children are supposed to be enjoying the breast milk. 

I would like to know from the minister if there is any plan by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in terms of establishing sort of a national policy through which all employers both private and public – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the time is up. Let us hear from the shadow minister for four minutes and then we come to the minister. You have four minutes, proceed.

4.48
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the clear presentation that she has given us. I would also like to thank her for integrating our alternative views in that main report. 

However, it is important for me to just give highlights of very few key areas. One of the areas is on education. We know that gender is crosscutting. On education, we must know that a lot of our girls actually drop out of school too early and so there is need to have some deliberate efforts which we have not made very much at the grass root levels to keep girls in school, to have some facilities like changing places for bigger girls in schools and also maybe sometimes to rest a bit when they are in their periods so that girls remain in school. Although that one seems to be more of education, it is also for gender.
 
I would also like to say that reproductive health services should be gender sensitive and easily accessible to both women and men and not only for women. Usually we emphasise women only but it is important to also emphasise men and I wish to emphasise the decongestion of the gender ministry. This ministry is over congested. Probably we should have a labour ministry – somebody may challenge me that in the Opposition you already complained about the number of ministers. Yes there are some ministers that are not very relevant but we need the Ministry of Labour to stand alone so that it is more effective.

Let me also comment a bit on youth. When we talk about youth livelihood programme, it looks like we are very satisfied but tomorrow we will come back to know that this programme is not enough. If anything, there are some parishes which are not going to even receive a cent from the youth livelihood programme. So for me, and for us in the Opposition, we would think it is important to have national youth services programmed to address the issues of the youth holistically; not just politicising them the way we have politicised a lot of other youth programmes.

It is important for us to borrow a leaf from other countries. We go a lot to benchmark; when you go to Kenya, you will actually get to know that their national youth services are in an Act of Parliament. Maybe we also need to borrow a leaf from them and we involve our youth more. It is very unfortunate that we know that the youth can transform this country but when it comes to budgeting, we do not budget at all for youth –(Member timed out.) 

My emphasis really is on the youth. The population of the youth and children is very big. It is over 80 percent of the Uganda population and we give peanuts to the ministry of gender; is it about 0.49 percent, which is very small? I am very happy that our gender committee chairperson articulated very well – we need to allocate a little more to gender so that we are able to perform better services to our people. Otherwise we are not doing anything at all and people are not satisfied with what we are doing. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The hon. Aol happens to be my Member of Parliament. (Laughter) 

4.54
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will also take the opportunity to thank the chairperson and the committee for a fantastic report. I want to thank the Members that have contributed, asked questions; we are going to take them into consideration. In actual fact, Mr Speaker, the ministry agrees with more than 99 percent of these recommendations, and for those where we have not started, we are going to make sure that we implement them because they make a lot of sense and thank you for pointing out that this ministry is about humanity. But when you look at the budget, really, please let us fight together.

People are rightly concerned about the youth livelihood programme and they have raised a number of issues but I will just summarise them in this document which I am going to lay on Table. And periodically, the ministry has been printing this document: periodic update on progress in implementation. If it has not reached your pigeon holes, I will make sure I whip my staff so that it is always there as well as on the iPad. So I wish to lay this document on Table but it will be on your iPads tomorrow before the end of the day.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KARORO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, women can talk and talk but without economic empowerment - for several of you who are married, if you are economically empowered and you are in a very cruel marriage, you will walk out and have your own home. But if you have no economic empowerment, you will stay a slave.  (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have some order, honourable members?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, the minister is my very good friend but as a member of the Ninth Parliament and the person here to protect the institution of marriage and family, I cannot tolerate on the Hansard of Parliament, the minister in charge of family to be seen to be advocating for divorce on a point of economic empowerment. Is the minister therefore in order to insinuate that women who are empowered should not tolerate remaining in marriage? My point of order is to the effect that the minister cannot be on record to be seen to promote divorce on economic reasons, as a mother with a family. Is the minister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statements attributed to the minister could well have that interpretation but the core of it does not have that interpretation. (Applause)

MS KAROORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your wise ruling. I want it to be on record on the Hansard that I never advocated for divorce but I was talking about cruel marriages. Mr Speaker, I was talking about the economic empowerment of women and it is my pleasure and honour today to lay on Table the proposal for the Women Enterprise Fund.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member shall cease from using the facilities of the House for campaigning. (Laughter)

MS KAROORO: Mr Speaker, I wish to inform honourable members that we received the Children’s Act (Amendment) Bill from the Attorney-General this week and we are presenting it to Parliament next week. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have heard from the committee, we have heard from the honourable members in your very elaborate debate and we have heard the minister’s very passionate appeal, which has energised the House somehow. I will now put the question to the report- (Hon. Kwizera rose) - Can I first put the question because you cannot amend before I put the question. I will now put the question that the report of the sectoral Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement on the budget estimates for the Financial Year 2014/2015 be adopted. There is an amendment.

5.03
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee. However, I wish to move an amendment on page 53, 6.7 under cultural institutions. There are two recommendations and my amendment is to delete part two of the recommendation which says, the committee also recommends that Government should allocate money to fund all recognised traditional institutions to effectively play their role in enhancing positive cultural values. I move the amendment.

MR ALEPER: Mr Speaker, I also second that amendment of deleting that provision and I would like to refer to the constitutional provision. If you refer to Article 246(3)(d), it says, subject to paragraph (c), which you may all refer to since you have your Constitutions there, of this clause, no person shall be compelled to pay allegiance or contribute to the cost of maintaining a traditional leader or cultural leader.

Given the fact that this money that the committee is recommending to be given to traditional leaders comes from the tax payers and since these tax payers have not been consulted as to whether this money should be allocated thus, I want to support the amendment that that provision be deleted until such a time as when all Ugandans have been consulted. This Constitution remains the supreme law of this country and it says that no person shall be compelled to pay for the maintenance of any traditional leader. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the amendment was for deletion of the second recommendation in which the committee also recommends that Government should allocate money to fund all recognised traditional institutions to effectively play their role in enhancing positive cultural values.

I put the question to that amendment, which is for deletion. I put the question that this particular recommendation be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the sectoral Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2014/2015 be adopted as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you rising on procedure? No, there is no guidance from the chair. Procedure, yes.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue that I wanted to get guidance on is to the effect that the people of Uganda, including the great people of the Jopadhola land now watching this procedure- When I get out of this House, I need to know the procedural implication of the deletion. Would it be that there will be no more funds or any form of funding? (Interjections) I am asking the Speaker and there is only one Speaker here. This is so that I can be confident enough and able to explain to the great people of Jopadhola and Ugandans at large.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was a recommendation from the committee and this House has chosen to reject it. That does not stop the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development from making a proposal for funding. The committee has said there should be a policy framework under which this arrangement can be finalised. In other words, this should not be an ad hoc thing but there should be proper frameworks for its implementation. So it is not saying, no but it is saying do it properly.

So honourable minister, you are encouraged to make these things proper and bring it back to the House and the House will pronounce itself on it properly. Next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, do you have a summary?

5.10
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona): Mr Speaker, I will try to summarise. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have come to present a report of the Committee on Health on the ministerial policy statement and then the budget estimates for the health sector for Financial Year 2014/15. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a hard copy of the report of the committee together with the minutes of the meetings during the time we spent scrutinising this policy statement, including a copy of the alternative option from the Opposition. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

DR OMONA: Mr Speaker, in accordance with our rules, Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Health examined the policy statement on the health sector for the Financial Year 2014/2015 and in addition the committee examined critically the recurrent and capital budget estimates for the health sector for Financial Year 2014/15. The health sector comprises on the following vote holders: 
    1. Vote 014: Ministry of Health
    2. Vote 114: Uganda Cancer Institute
    3. Vote 115: Uganda Heart Institute
    4. Vote 116: National Medical Stores
    5. Vote 134: Health Service Commission
    6. Vote 151: Uganda Blood Transfusion Services
    7. Vote 161: Mulago National Referral Hospital
    8. Vote 162: Butabika National Referral Hospital 
    9. Vote 501-850: Local Governments – Primary Health Care
    10. Votes 163 – 176 for 14 Regional Referral Hospitals (Arua, Fort Portal, Gulu, Hoima, Jinja, Kabale, Masaka, Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Mbarara, Mubende, Moroto and Naguru Hospital).

Arising from the examination of the policy statement and budget estimates of the Health Sector, the Committee made observations and recommendations that are intended to guide the House in its appropriation process.

In the interest of time, Mr Speaker, I invite you and honourable members to look at our terms of reference and the methodology we used to scrutinise this policy statement. Suffice it to mention that Last Financial Year, Parliament approved Shs 702 billion excluding taxes, arrears and external financing for the health sector votes excluding KCCA and Uganda AIDS Commission. Of this amount, Shs 402 billion was for central Government votes and Shs 299.96 billion for Primary Health Care under Local Governments as can be observed in Table 1 below. By the time of writing this report, the committee had received information on both release and expenditure figures for the Financial Year 2013/2014 for only Central Government votes and the only available Local Government performance figures as per the Health Sector Policy statement are up to end of March 2014. I invite you, colleagues, to look at the table below. 

I wish to speak briefly about the projected budget for Financial Year 2014/2015. The Health sector budget excluding arrears and Non-tax revenue is projected to increase by 13 percent in Financial Year 2014/15 as can be observed in Figure 1 below. The increase is mostly attributed to the increase in external financing to the sector which explains the decline in Financial Year 2015/2016. It is important to note that this figure does not include health sector allocations to all the institutions that contribute to health as mentioned in the National Health Accounts like Ministry of Education and Ministry of Defence, among others as indicated in this figure down here. 

Mr Speaker, before I can go to the recommendations, in the interest of time, going by the MTEF allocations, the sector is projected to get a biased estimate1 of 8.4 percent of the total budget. This is a slight decline from 8.6 percent which was approved last Financial Year. These figures translate into a marginal increase in the per-capita allocation from Shs 32,426 in Financial Year 2013/2014 to SHS 33,442 in Financial Year 2014/2015 as can be observed in Table 3 attached.

It is important to note that Uganda is a signatory to the Abuja Declaration that requires governments to appropriate 15 percent of their national budgets to the health sector by 2015.  While it is clear that the target will not be achieved, it is necessary for the country to have a fairly true picture of what is allocated to the sector.  

With regard to policy, the National Health Sector Policy II is the sector’s guiding document until 2020.  It prioritises the provision of the Uganda National Minimum Health Care Package (UNMHCP), more efficient use of available health resources, strengthening public and private partnerships for health and strengthening of health systems during its Implementation. 

Other sector documents, especially strategic plans such as the Health sector Strategic and Investment Plan, Health Sector Quality Improvement Framework and Strategic Plan are expiring this fiscal year together with the current National Development Plan. However, the Ministry plans to develop a new sector development plan this Fiscal Year in line with the National Development Plan II.

With regard to allocations within the sector, the Ministry of Health will maintain the greatest share of the total sector allocation in the Financial Year 2014/2015 as can be observed in Table 2 below. This allocation is mostly attributed to external financing under the Ministry of Health.

Mr Speaker, I wish to draw your attention to the observations and recommendations that our committee made as far as this financial year is concerned.

Arrears in Ministry of Health

The committee observed that the Ministry of Health has allocated Shs 372 million towards the payment of water and electricity arrears.  However, the report of the Auditor General for the Financial Year 2012/2013 revealed that the Ministry had accumulated arrears to a tune of Shs 8.5 billion and of this amount, Shs 3.1 billion is for water and electricity and Shs 3.7 billion is owed to National Medical Stores. 

The committee further observed that the policy of Government is that all arrears carry a first call on resources. In the first and third budget call circular for the Financial Year 2014/2015 dated 29th October 2013 and 26th May 2014 respectively, accounting officers were asked to ensure that budgeting for utility arrears is prioritized after a thorough verification by internal audit.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should prioritise the payment of utility arrears.

Salary enhancement for civil servants

It is true that poor remuneration has been a big de-motivator in the Health Sector for a long time. In the budget for the Financial Year 2014/2015, Shs 450 billion was earmarked for salary enhancement for civil servants. The increment is not uniformly spread across board. 

We are concerned that primary school teachers who are graded at the same level (U7) as enrolled nurses and midwives are getting a salary increment of 25 percent as opposed to the enrolled nurses and midwives who are getting an increment of 13 percent. In addition, prison warders at the same salary scale (U7) were given an 18 percent increment. The committee observes that these discriminatory increments are bound to cause deeper dissatisfaction in the health sector, which in turn will reflect on the health services offered to Ugandans.

On the other hand, the committee is concerned that some of the doctors who in the financial year 2012/2013 were recruited to work in health centres IV with a promise of an enhanced pay amounting to Shs 2.5 million in salaries and retention allowances have to-date not accessed the payroll. As a result, some of them have deserted their work stations.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Public Service should explain why there are different salary increments for different jobs within the same salary scale; and that the Ministry of Public Service should ensure that all the recruited health workers access the payroll by the end of October 2014. 

Under-grading and under-paying certain health workers

The committee was informed that the recruitment of health workers in financial year 2013/2014 did not attract an adequate number of critical cadres like consultants, anesthetic officers, public health nurses and midwives. The committee learnt that one of the reasons for failing to attract anesthetic officers and public health nurses was that people are discouraged from specialising in these areas because of the de-motivating payment that is not commensurate with their advanced and specialised training. 

An anesthetic officer in Uganda receives the same salary as a Nursing Officer (Salary Scale U5), yet an anesthetic officer first trains as a nursing officer and then trains as an anesthetic officer for two years. The same applies to public health nurses who must first acquire two different diplomas, one in general nursing and the other in midwifery before they undergo further training in public health. 

The salary scale for people with each of the above diplomas required before training in public health is U5. The salary scale for the public health nurse, despite the additional two diplomas, is still U5.

With regard to midwives, the committee observed that the government policy of training comprehensive nurses as opposed to midwives has caused an acute shortage of midwives in the country. Instances have arisen where comprehensive nurses have been recruited to perform the role of midwives, yet, they are not adequately skilled for the task. 

The committee noted that this creates a risk for both mothers and new borns. The committee is further concerned that the capacity project under the Ministry of Health is taking up the comprehensive nurses to train them in midwifery for six months. The committee observes that this period of training is not enough to make the comprehensive nurses, midwives. We, therefore, wish to recommend that the anesthetic officers and public health nurses should be upgraded from salary scale U5 as a way of attracting health workers to train and be retained in these fields.

Secondly, the Ministry of Health should come up with a deliberate strategy to train midwives as a matter of urgency.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee chairperson, you promised to summarise. But it looks like you are reading word per word. 

DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me take your advice and just read the recommendations. That means I will now invite colleagues to just read the parts of the report.

Health workers in teaching hospitals

Mr Speaker, the committee made a number of observations on health workers in teaching hospitals and we realised that this was worth recommending. So, the committee recommended that the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education should study this matter and come up with the best operational relationship between the teaching institutions and teaching hospitals and report to Parliament within three months.

On monitoring and supervision of health service delivery, the committee recommends that the restructuring in the health sector should be given a special consideration.

Secondly, that deployment of critical cadres from medical officers should be recentralised; and three, that the department of sector monitoring and quality assurance in the Ministry of Health should be rejuvenated.

We also noticed a lack of coordination of programmes run by development partners together with Government. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health should strategically coordinate and monitor programmes run by development partners.

The committee also noted the shortage of BCG vaccine nation-wide. The committee after an interaction with different stakeholders, recommends that the Ministry of Health should ensure that all children who have missed the vaccine and are still eligible get vaccinated as soon as the vaccine is available.

Hospital Infrastructure

We wish to recommend that funds should be sought to repair all the remaining general hospitals in a holistic manner. This will go a long way in improving health service delivery in Uganda.

The committee further recommends that a portion of the funds from Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) collected from the hospitals be used for rehabilitation of hospital structures.
 
Kidney Transplants

We were informed by the Ministry of Health that by October 2014, Mulago National Referral Hospital would have the capacity to carry out kidney transplants. However, we noted with concern about our state of readiness because this kind of operation requires a law on organ transplant, which is not yet in place. We recommend that the Ministry of Health expedites the process of drafting the necessary legislation to regulate organ transplant in the country.

On the Uganda Heart Institute, we wish to recommend that Government should fast-track the Uganda Heart Institute Bill, which has been anticipated for over a year now. Also, that Government should provide the Uganda Heart Institute with funds to procure second sets of super-specialised medical equipment so that the necessary services are available at all times; and that Government should explore the cheaper alternative of leasing medical equipment so as to save on the cost of maintaining and disposing them.
 
Uganda Cancer Institute

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should expedite the process of drafting a law on the Uganda Cancer Institute, which has also been anticipated for over a year and also that Government should increase the allocation to Uganda Cancer Institute so as to operationalise the six-level cancer ward as soon as possible. Capacity should be built in regional referral and general hospitals to manage cancer patients.

We also made an observation on governance issues at Mulago Hospital, which is not a new thing. Last year, it again came up and the committee made some recommendations but in the interest of time, the committee wishes to reiterate its previous recommendation that the Ministry of Health takes immediate action on the matter observed above in order to prevent paralysis of service delivery at the National Referral Hospital, Mulago and reports back to Parliament in three weeks.

The committee also recommends that the investigations into one Ms Alison Kantarama’s acts by the police be fast-tracked with a view of possible prosecution. This is contained in the observations made by the committee.

The committee faults the Ministry of Health for failing to take action to ensure that the intended objectives of the African Development Bank loan towards the MHUWA are achieved.

The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Health re-organises MHUWA with a view of achieving the objectives for which the ADB loan was intended.

On the Burns Unit, Mr Speaker, I wish to state that the committee recommends that Government should provide the Shs 1.6 billion to properly equip this unit. 

On mental health in the regions affected by war, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should build capacity of health workers to handle mental health cases in health centres II and III in the high-burden regions.

On the issue of hospital land, we recommend that the entire perimeter of Butabika Hospital land should be fenced in a phased manner. The Ministry of Health should ensure that all the land belonging to health facilities is surveyed.

Utilities in Hospitals

The committee recommends that Government should explore the possibility of having health facilities pay for electricity and water at special discounted rates.

Supply of Oxygen to Hospitals 

Oxygen cylinders from National Medical Stores should be embossed to reduce theft at hospitals. Government should establish mini-oxygen plants, which are estimated to cost Shs 1 billion per regional referral hospital to ensure efficient supply of oxygen to the respective regions. 

Mr Speaker, you recall that our committee was tasked by this House to investigate into allegations and concerns about the National Medical Stores and the Speaker also directed that some of these issues raised be answered when we report back on this report. We have captured quite a number of them here and I will only read the observations and recommendations.

One of them is about the procurement and supply of drugs. The committee recommends that National Medical Stores and Ministry of Health find a mechanism for disseminating relevant information to the public on the procurement and supply of drugs.

The committee reiterates its previous recommendation that the capacity to requisition of drugs by health workers should be built to avoid unnecessary drug shortages.

The committee also recommends that district health officers should organize quarterly reviews of their procurement plans.

Expiry of drugs

The committee recommends that hospitals should computerise their drug management systems and tailor requisitions to their needs so as to reduce on the expiries. 

Health facility managers should be trained in basic logistics management.

Ministry of Health should put in place a mechanism to coordinate donations and procurements of medical commodities by development partners.

Laboratory Supplies

Suffice it to mention that there is no budget line for procurement of laboratory supplies and these supplies were largely provided for by development partners under CDC but we have been affected by the withdrawal particularly this financial year of the CDC funding. The Ministry of Health gave the NMS, and assured this committee that this financial year there will be Shs 5 billion that has been mobilised to cater for these laboratory reagents.

Our committee recommends that Government urgently provides Shs 45 billion for laboratory supplies to facilitate effective disease diagnosis and other forms of management.

Upgrading of health facilities versus supply of drugs

The committee recommended that all districts should only upgrade a health facility after consultation and approval from the Ministry of Health. This is so because different grades of health centres are allocated different amounts of money. So, before a health centre can be upgraded, there must be sufficient funds to operate it at a higher grade.

Exceptional considerations should be given for establishment of health facilities in areas with peculiar geographical challenges, for example, islands and highly mountainous areas to increase access to health services.

Adherence to clinical guidelines 

The committee recommends that health workers should always adhere to the up-to-date clinical guidelines of Uganda.

Ministry of Health should ensure that health workers in all health facilities access updated clinical guidelines.

And also, the Ministry of Health should operationalise the redundant printing unit so as to reduce costs of printing currently incurred by the ministry. This is because there have been inadequate copies of hard copies of these clinical guidelines and yet, they are very essential in disease management. With operationalisation of this printing unit, we hope that there will be enough copies for the health workers.  

We recommend that there be continuous medical education to equip the health workers with the necessary skills.

Let me say something about the treatment of jiggers because this was also an issue of recent debated in this House. The committee observed that there is a notable burden of jigger infestation in the areas of Busoga and Karamoja. The committee was informed that National Medical Stores, in collaboration with the Ministry of Health, have identified a cheaper means of treating jiggers using Benzyl Benzoate Emulsion(BBE) solution in petroleum jelly. 

The committee further observed that though BBE treats jiggers, it does not eradicate the fleas, which develop into jiggers. However, the mainstay of eradicating jiggers is through observation of both personal and household hygiene. 

It was also of concern that there are isolated cases of wrong perception about jiggers by some members of the affected areas. For example, some believe that jiggers are an inherited curse.

The committee recommends that Ministry of Health should embark on massive sensitisation about personal and household hygiene aimed at preventing and controlling jiggers in the high-burden areas.

There should also be sensitisation aimed at changing the community mind-set on the use of BBE as treatment for jiggers because it is not a new drug. BBE has been used for a long time as treatment for scabies. The community needs to appreciate that it can also treat jiggers.

Leaders in the affected communities should embark on an aggressive campaign to sensitise their populations about the prevention and treatment of jiggers.

Family planning

The committee recommends that Ministry of Health should make deliberate efforts to train health workers in family planning services to enhance their competence in the provision of services.

There should be increased promotion of family planning among the general public. 

Quality of Medicines

This was debated in this House recently. We wish to recommend that Government should fund some critical NDA activities that need support and in particular, Government should facilitate NDA to upgrade its laboratories to carry out bio equivalent tests and other vital tests on the drugs.

The committee reiterates its previous recommendation that National Drug Authority should be given a vote so that Parliament can appropriate funds for its operations.

Need for Regional Blood Banks

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should ensure that regional blood banks are established in all the regions of this country.

Hepatitis B

The Hepatitis B prevalence in Uganda is relatively high in certain regions as you may see in the report. The committee notes that the Ministry of Health had not provided any specific funds for the management of Hepatitis B which has been a big debate in this House, following petitions that were handled in this House.

The committee noted that we need about Shs 14 billion to carry out vaccination against this disease in the high-burdened districts as indicated here. We also note that management of Hepatitis B is a very urgent matter that must be handled immediately to stem the escalation of the disease and we wish to recommend that Government urgently finds some money for the management of Hepatitis B including vaccination in the high burden districts as mentioned above and the most at risk persons in Uganda and this should be reported to Parliament in one month’s time. 

Mr Speaker, as we scrutinise the ministerial policy statement, we identified areas where we think funds should be reallocated and this is where I want to invite you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. One is that there are funds for other utilities in immunisation services under Ministry of Health. I beg that, as I conclude, allow me read these areas where we propose reallocation. 

The committee observed that Shs 417 million had been provided to purchase other utilities under the output named “immunisation services provided”. Upon inquiry into these outputs, the committee was informed by the ministry that of the Shs 417 million, Shs 123.88 million was for the Revised Immunisation Practice Manual in Uganda and the Health Management Information Systems tools, Shs 60 million was to procure spare parts for 50 faulty immunisation fridges and Shs 56 million was to procure 400 gas cylinders. These outputs added up to Shs 239.88 million. The committee noted that the purchase of these immunisation supplies is the mandate of the National Medical Stores.

We wish, therefore, to recommend that Shs 239.880 million be reallocated from the Ministry of Health to the National Medical Stores to purchase the same outputs. 

Two, Shs 100 million without activities in the Uganda Sanitation Fund; the committee observed that Shs 100 million has been set aside for the purchase of motor vehicles and other transport equipment under the Government of Uganda budget. However, no activities were listed. The committee was informed that these funds are for payment of Value Added Tax (VAT) on machinery and furniture for procurements to be undertaken.

The committee noted that the explanation on VAT does not relate to purchase of vehicles and other transport equipment. We, therefore, recommend that Shs 100 million be reallocated from the Ministry of Health to cater for the management of jiggers by the Ministry of Health - (Interjections) - Honourable colleagues, I wish you could be patient with me. There are other reallocations. Let us wait and see this also. 

Mr Speaker, Shs 600 million for responding to public health emergencies. The committee observed that Shs 600 million had been provided for responding to public health emergencies under the Ministry of Health. However, the committee was concerned that no funds had been specifically allocated for the management of jiggers for this financial year. 

The committee further observed that Shs 2.5 billion has been provided under National Medical Stores for the supply of emergency and donated medicines. The committee recommends that Shs 500 million for responding to public health emergencies be used in the management of jiggers by the Ministry of Health – (Interjections)– and in addition, the National Medical Stores should use part of the Shs 2.5 billion to procure BBE solution and petroleum jelly for the treatment of jiggers in the high burden areas of Busoga and Karamoja. 

In conclusion, subject to the recommendations above, the committee urges the committee of Supply to supply to the following votes under the health sector; the following revised recurrent and development budgets for the financial year 2014/2015 as indicated on the tables below here. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chair and the committee, for this very comprehensive report. Honourable members, I will propose the question for your debate. The motion is that the report of the sectoral Committee on Health on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2014/2015 be adopted. That is the motion for your debate. Debate starts now.

5.47
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report they have presented to Parliament and one concern I have is about beds in hospitals. When you move across all health centres in the countryside and even in Kampala, they do not have beds. People fall sick and they are sleeping on the floor. Even us as Members of Parliament, if we got problems in our constituencies, the first places to go to would be our health centres. All of them have no beds and I would think that in doing reallocations, we should provide Shs 15 billion that will cater for all beds across all centres in the country. (Applause)

I also want to know about health insurance. When you look at health, this is one of the most expensive things we have. A common person cannot afford treatment. If he goes to government hospitals with the way you have seen the report, the drugs that are there are not the best drugs. We have interacted with doctors in Government hospitals who have private clinics and they tell you that the Government procures the drugs at a minimum cost to keep life. 

Now, to cater for that, I would like the minister to tell us how far we have gone with health insurance so that we can contribute a little across the board, people who are earning, so that we do not have to incur heavy costs of treatment. 

I also want the minister to highlight on the issue of free treatment. You are saying that you are giving free treatment to people but what is in the hospitals is Coartem, which is funded by the Americans and paracetamol. The rest, they will tell you to go and buy in a health centre or clinic and people will go to that health centre or clinic to buy that medicine that has been prescribed. Can we put user fees back so that people can find drugs in hospitals rather than going to those clinics where they also get fake and expired drugs?

I would agree with the committee that we fund the National Drug Authority to test the drugs that we have on the market. These drugs were on the market until I started preventing falling sick – (Interjections)- I have not fallen sick for 15 years but before, you would get treatment today and you take your drugs but you do not get cured and then they begin injecting you. Now to avoid that, can we fund this National Drug Authority so that we have the best drugs entering the country? We have small pharmaceuticals here making fake drugs and the ministry is turning a blind eye.

On the blood bank, the government has not put money –(Member timed out.)

5.49
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to compliment the committee for the good report. I have three issues which I want to note. The first one is on the shortage of the vaccines for the young children. I want to entirely agree with the committee recommendations because shortage in vaccines especially for the young children exposes children to health hazards. It exposes children to death and even exposes them to disability. So, the earlier the government provides the vaccine, the better for our country.

Mr Speaker, in the same vein, I have been looking through the report. I know some time back, the Ministry of Health started vaccinating and immunising the young girls against cervical cancer and I have not seen any mention of the districts, which remained without getting this vaccine. I want to find out from the Minister of Health because I know cervical cancer is a killer disease number one especially for the womanhood. We want to find out from the minister, what programmes do you have for those districts, which did not get this vaccine and which have not been immunised so that we can protect the woman in future?

I would like to comment on the hospital infrastructure. Some time back, Masindi Hospital had been earmarked for rehabilitation; this is one of the oldest hospitals in the country. I have seen in the report that it is among the 13 hospitals going to be rehabilitated. But during that time, when it had been earmarked for rehabilitation with the other hospitals, some equipment had been procured and delivered at the hospital. Today, those equipment are still in a container and it is locked. I want to find out from the minister whether that equipment will live to serve the purpose for which they were procured. 

The third issue I want to talk about is the diseases that have become rampant in our country; the heart disease, the cancer cases, kidney cases. I want to find out from the minister whether they have plans in getting the community to know some of the causes of these diseases and how they can be able to protect themselves –(Member timed out.)

5.49
MR KENNETH BBOSA KIYINGI: (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the comprehensive report. I only have two issues that I will address. The first one is when you look at page 33, the committee proposes a reallocation within the sector – I am a bit worried about diverting monies that could be very important in public health emergencies. You are all aware that in Uganda, we are prone to public health emergencies. Talk of Ebola, cholera and many of those emergencies that can come up. I request the chairperson to be very observant in this regard so that we do not put ourselves in a ditch. You well know what happened recently when Ebola came in – you look for funds and they are nowhere to be found.

I agree that jiggers are a problem here in Uganda and not only in Eastern Uganda but also here in Buganda. But what brings this problem is known to all of us – we need to embrace the avenues of promoting hygiene and cleanliness around us so that we avoid the problem of jiggers.

I have observed the report says little about the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund. I do not know whether we are still hoping to get funds from the Western community. It is my appeal to the chairperson and to the minister to consider monies to this trust fund so as to finance HIV/AIDS related programmes and to be on a safe side. I thank you.

5.55
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I know there are issues, which I believe have to be addressed. On the issue of the doctors’ pay and the health workers generally, I think we needed to have addressed this. I do not know if the minister is going to tell us. Recently, we were visiting some health facilities and we realised that even with the interaction we had with the local governments, most of these health workers have failed to report to duty, even the ones who were recruited recently, because they say the money, which was promised to them has not reached them. Some of them have even abandoned their stations already. I do not know what the minister has to say about it.

On the regional referral hospitals, most of the regional hospital beds are in an appalling state. I have been to a number of them and there is a big problem right from Soroti and in Hoima and we saw big people sleeping on small beds meant for children and it was a big shame. I do not know what the minister has to say about what we have allocated for the beddings and construction of accommodation in the regional referral hospitals.

I was a bit disturbed when I looked at the list of the districts, which are affected by Hepatitis B and my district of Serere was not mentioned and yet, we are having a big problem in Serere of Hepatitis B. I do not know whether the committee did not get that information or it was just omitted. I want some explanation from the chairperson and maybe, the minister knows what is happening on the ground because we have been getting a lot of reports and complaints of loss of a number of people because of Hepatitis B. But in the report, Serere is not mentioned as one of the districts to be handled.

We have had a problem of drugs. In most of these health centres, they still tell us that the drugs they get are not the drugs they always request for. They are getting drugs which they have not asked for. There is still that push mentality from the National Medical Stores and I need to get it clearly from the committee because we needed a strong action on this because then, our people should get the drugs they want and which are for the treatment of the common diseases that are disturbing people. 

In most of the health centres, the only drugs you get there are Coartem. When the people get to know that it is coming, everybody is lining up to get the Coartem and after getting the Coartem, they abandon the health centres and when they go to the clinics, most of them have unqualified workers. Our patients believe that when they go to the clinics, they will get the drugs and yet, we would be advising them to go to the health facilities owned by Government. This should have been addressed and I hope the chairman and the minister will –(Member timed out.)

5.59
MS FLORENCE NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Committee on Health for the good report. However, I wish to comment on a few issues: One, I would like to raise concern to the Minister of Health delivering equipment to referral hospitals. Busolwe Hospital recently got a non-operational x-ray machine and again, we recently received new machines from JICA. My worry is that these machines were delivered but we have no personnel trained enough to operate these machines. That is a very big concern and I welcome the recommendation they made earlier that training is needed so that these machines can be used effectively.

Also, I would like to comment on the issue of rehabilitation of most of the referral hospitals. I welcome the recommendations made but I want to ask the minister what criteria they used in the selection of the rehabilitation of the referral hospitals.

Again this time round, Busolwe Hospital is being left out, yet, as Members of Parliament representing Butaleja, we remember contacting the Ministry of Health and of late, we had the Committee on Health and the minister tour the hospital and they saw the condition it was in. The mattresses are really in bad shape, most of the patients are receiving treatment on the floor and the sewerage systems are all broken. Electricity is not available. So, I am wondering what criteria the minister used so that Busolwe Hospital was left out.

Thirdly, I would like to ask the minister to take the issue of shortage of health workers seriously. We put in a request as Butaleja for more health workers but most of them did not turn up and we did not know why. As the district leaders, we discovered that most of them had abandoned their duties because there was no accommodation to cater for them and yet, they have families. So, we ask the Ministry of Health to come and intervene and assist us.

In the next five years, Busolwe Hospital will face a shortage of health workers because most of them are going to retire in the next five years and we shall remain with no health workers especially midwives and nurses. Thank you.

6.01
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues and thank the Committee on Health for the report presented. I have a few issues to raise. One, Kamwenge District has been left out for many years without a district hospital and I would like to ask the minister and the chairperson for the criteria that is always used because Kamwenge District has special diseases. For example, I have been talking about Elephantiasis, which has been in Kamwenge. It is on the increase and an investigation team has been sent to go and carry out investigations but up to now, no report has been given to the people of Kamwenge. 

This is a district that is hosting 50,000 people from Congo and there is a likelihood that the people within the refugee camp normally go back to their country and come back. We are in a state of emergency and in case of any Ebola outbreak, Kamwenge is going to be in a sorry state.

So, I am requesting the committee that instead of transferring that money, which is allocated for emergency, let it remain there because we have a danger across our border.

Secondly, I would also request the ministry to think about delivery beds in health centres. We have maternity wards but they do not have delivery beds. Mothers are delivering on cement, which is very hazardous to our babies. In fact, some of them get problems during delivery where they fall down on the cement because there are no delivery beds. I recall last financial year that we budgeted for beds and I do not know why these beds were not delivered.

Lastly, I would like to inquire regarding the issue of health centres II. I remember there was a circular that was given out in our districts that there are no more health centres II. In the report, however, it is stated that some areas are going to be considered because of the geographical nature of certain places, for example, those that are hilly.

In my district, we have areas, which are very hilly and health centres were constructed there but at the time that circular was given out, they were not considered to be functional health centres II. So, I beg the ministry to also consider such areas so that our people, especially the women who are taking our children for immunisation or who are going for antenatal care, are catered for at health centres II. I thank you.

6.05
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report. However, I have a number of issues to address. First of all, honourable chairperson, you may agree with me that most sicknesses come at night but what happens is that we have a problem in health centres, most of which do not have electricity. I think you are aware of that. Where Government provided solar systems, they were either stolen or exchanged with poor quality ones. So, these solar systems are not working. Therefore, in the budget, this Government should provide for electricity in health centres. (Applause)

My second issue is on medical supplies. We have just carried out census. I urge the Ministry of Health to expeditiously use the results of the census so that we dispense medical supplies based on the number of people available.

One of the reasons we do not have enough medical supplies in health centres is because the data we are using was provided in the census of 2002. Therefore, when you provide medicines in a health centre for 100 people and yet the area has more than 1,000 people, everybody will come to pick whatever is delivered and the rest of the people will not be catered for.

There is also a problem in our health centres and this concerns absenteeism of medical workers. It is becoming a practice that during weekends from Saturday to Sunday, medical workers close health centres and go away. This issue should also be addressed, honourable minister - (Member timed out.)

6.08
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to also join colleagues in thanking the chairperson and his committee for bringing out a very good and important report about our health facilities.

I have a few issues to raise and one concerns issue number 20 of the report, sub-section 2 on upgrading health units and exceptional conditions for upgrade. I thank the committee for highlighting these special areas with special terrain especially geographically.

I happen to be either a beneficiary or a victim of such a situation. In some areas, you do not find enough people to command allocation of Government resources simply because people have moved where there are facilities. When a population is not facilitated to stay in an area with facilities such as health facilities, good roads, electricity, water and the rest, people tend to move away and yet, the government formula mainly factors in the population in allocation of resources. As such, those areas are usually affected namely islands and mountainous areas.

So, I think we need to embrace this recommendation of the committee that highlands and other mountainous areas should be facilitated so that people are motivated to stay in those areas rather than overcrowding in areas that are over facilitated.

Mr Speaker, my other concern is about the shifting of resources. It is very good the chairperson has pointed out that the problem with jiggers has got something to do with the mind-set. I agree with that issue. However, I do not know how much we are going to pay to change people’s mind-set. This has got to be dealt with by us the leaders. We need to sensitise our people about the bad side of it.

In addition, I have pointed out that the Ministry of Health should intensify sensitisation; I do not think the sensitisation would take so much money like Shs 600 million that is pointed out. I would rather this money is maintained in the Ministry of Health to buy emergencies so that when these jiggers occur, they are treated as emergencies. For example, I have heard of jiggers only during the past few years. I never heard of them before. That means there is an emergency, they can be dealt with once and for all. So, we should leave it as emergency money, as hon. Bbosa said, there are more emergencies we are yet to face. The jiggers are better managed –(Member timed out.)

6.11
MR MICAH AKASILE LOLEM (NRM, Upe County, Amudat): Mr Speaker, mine is on the issue of supply of medicine to the hospitals. This is to the Minister of Health, we have NGOs and health centres IV but the health centres VI refer patients to private clinics owned by the same doctors or staff in those health centres. I have not seen the remedy for those doctors who send patients to their private clinics. When patients report to the hospitals, they refer them to their clinics. I wonder what answer you have for that. 

The other matter is about jiggers. I see that the report mentioned of jiggers in Karamoja – Karamoja has got many districts but I have never seen a jigger in my constituency. Be specific, which district. That is one way you might be promoting corruption because when you talk of Karamoja, the entire Karamoja has many districts including Amudat. Do you have any case of jiggers in Amudat District? I know they are not there. 

So, my brother, who is the chairperson of the committee and his committee, should know that when mentioning Karamoja, they should avoid making blanket statements. They should mention particular districts. 

The other issue is on the money; the Shs 500 million. My brother, that Shs 500 million is very important. But I will not be on your side because the money goes to jiggers and you have not sensitised the communities but you simply want Shs 500 million to go for jiggers. (Member timed out.)

6.14
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me also thank the committee for the report.  I have some few concerns. One is inconsistence in committee work because often times, we receive committee reports on the Floor of Parliament. During the exercise of our oversight function, our committees go into the field, make reports and we debate them on the Floor of this House. To my surprise, many recommendations are just left here. They are not fitted within the budgeting process. If those reports were taken seriously, then Rakai Hospital would be in a better condition. 

One time, we debated a report here from one committee and it was found out that Rakai Hospital was in a sorry state. But when you look through the list of hospitals to benefit from the hospital infrastructure, it is not there. 

Secondly, I would like to appreciate government efforts in improved drug supply in our health centres and hospitals. But the National Medical Stores still deliver drugs that are not required. For example, when you go to a health centre III, you find drugs for leprosy, yet there is no leprosy in my community. Initially, there was the system of push and pull. Although that system had some loopholes, it was very effective in the sense that drugs would be delivered – that actual drugs requested for were the ones delivered in regard of the ailments in that particular society. 

I also want to reiterate my colleague’s submission on staff in our health centres who run private clinics. This raises suspicion of loss of drugs. I do not know what remedy the ministry has in terms of guidelines to stop this vice because –(Member timed out.)

6.17
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have four issues. One is about availability of blood in our health centres. Blood must be availed once needed if you are to save the lives of Ugandans. But in many health centres, there is a shortage of blood. Many people have died simply due to absence of blood in our health centres. 

Secondly, when we have ambulances in the various health centres, they must be fuelled all the time. There must be fuel in those ambulances at all times. We have lost many Ugandans simply because there was no fuel in the ambulance to rash them to the nearest referral hospital. Having ambulances without fuel is as good as not having them. 

Thirdly, I do not know how the Ministry of Health is going to help in regard to entrance fees to Mulago Hospital. Mulago Hospital is our National Referral Hospital but the moment you enter there, whether you have taken a patient or to visit someone, as you are getting out, you must pay. I do not think going to Mulago is like taking a tour. There are many patients that have been stopped on the gate simply because the drivers do not want to incur the extra cost. 

Mr Speaker, this is our national referral hospital; people do not go there simply because they want to go there, but it is because they have problems. I would like to request the ministry to ensure we do away with entry charges at Mulago Hospital and –(Member timed out.)

6.20
MR VINCENT SEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairman of the committee for doing a good job.

However, I want to inform the chairperson of the committee and the House about what we usually forget and this is something to do with land that belongs to health institutions. In the case of Masaka Referral Hospital, we have over 80 acres of land that are being taken by unscrupulous people. And our efforts to inform the ministry have resulted into nothing. I now want to call upon the Ministry of Health to pronounce itself on this issue so that we can see that land being recovered from the grabbers.

Two, I want to talk about the issue of understaffing. Unless we handle this – we can handle it in phases starting with referral hospitals where we get accidents. It is very sad to note that when we get these accidents, you find nobody at the hospital and especially the referral hospitals. Let us phase our recruitment to make sure that we cater for - we put staff starting with referral hospitals and then we go to different hospitals until we reach where we want to reach. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

6.23
MS KEVINA TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for presenting this report. However, allow me comment on immunisation, which is the beginning of a new born’s life. We immunise them against whopping cough, diphtheria, pneumonia and the like so that we prevent future sicknesses. Yes, the committee talked about a vaccine like BCG being scarce like other vaccines. However, I would like to propose that all vaccines be supplied to the people freely. It will help children to access these vaccines. For example, the pneumococcal vaccines are very expensive. One could cost about Shs 90,000 or Shs 100,000, which villagers cannot afford. That is why I now call upon the House to adopt my recommendation that all vaccines be supplied freely.

Secondly, there is the issue of upgrading some of the health facilities located in certain areas of Uganda. Mr Speaker, we should not look at health needs in terms of geographical location. Instead, we need to look at how many patients are attended to; with or without the census reports, we can discover that. This will help us to plan for the supply of drugs because it will be done according to the number of patients being treated in those health facilities. 

For example, in Busia Municipality, we handle more patients than the district hospital, it being an urban area.  We handle emergencies, bodies are brought there, we do not have a mortuary yet this is the centre of the district, it is a border town. Can you imagine we also treat patients from Kenya and other districts? We have other drugs like the anti- rabies drugs, we get patients from Soroti and other districts. The other time, there were two students who were shot at Namayingo but they were passed through all the hospitals, including the district hospital but they brought them to Busia Municipality for treatment. That is just an example of how far we go in treating patients. So, we handle very many –(Member timed out.)

6.27
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to commend members of the Committee on Health for presenting a very good report. However, I would like to ask the minister to explain to us how far he has gone with procuring the pneumococcal vaccine. I am saying this because at one time, the President came to my constituency to launch this vaccine when it was not available. So, is it now available in the country? Was it a hoax? What was it?

Two, what is the ministry’s plan for immunising people against Hepatitis B? This is also important to know because many of our people are suffering and many are dying. Hepatitis B is not only found in the northern or south Uganda; it is in the entire Uganda. Even in Kyankwazi, we have regular burials because of Hepatitis B.
 
There is this issue of jiggers. My sense is that we just need to do sensitisation to the people for them to live a clean life, other than allocating Shs 2.5 billion for management of jiggers. However, I would like to suggest that this money be transferred to take care of the health workers’ allowances. (Interruption)

MR SIMON ALEPER: Mr Speaker, the information I want to give to my brother is that when the committee recommends for the reallocation of these funds to the management of jiggers, it does not mean that we would continue to use the funds for sensitising people. We are talking about the people who are already affected because they are the ones to be treated. 

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, honourable colleague. Mr Speaker, I suggest that we should leave a small amount of money for sensitisation of the people so that they can be clean in their homes. Otherwise, the rest of the money should be used to enhance the allowances of health workers because we – (Member timed out.)

6.30
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. I will talk about hospital infrastructure. The report talks about rehabilitation or revamping some hospitals and I do not know the criteria which they used to select these hospitals. There is a very big concern because it is a policy that every parish must have a health centre II, every sub-county must have a health centre III, a constituency must have a health centre IV, a district must have a district hospital and a region must have a regional referral hospital. But up to now, it is surprising, Mr Speaker, that there are some constituencies that do not health centres IV. 

I will give an example of my constituency Busongora South; it has no health centre IV and there are some other sub-counties with no health centres III. Here, I have not seen any new construction of health centres IV and III. We are only talking about revamping or rehabilitation of hospitals but health centres are not considered.

This takes me back to the issue of jiggers. If this Shs 2.5 billion can be allocated to my constituency for my health centre IV, really, this would be –(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: I rise on a point of order. I always restrain myself from rising points of order. But it is true, like the committee was recommending, that we need to scale up issues to do with sensitisation but it is also true that many people are getting maimed because of these insects, they are finishing them. So many people are getting amputated because of the jiggers.

Is the Member in order to keep talking of diverting resources that are being proposed to treat people that are suffering and saying that they should be diverted to his constituency?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member now knows that that matter is of serious concern. Your time is up. Honourable members, I think you have noticed how I have been choosing people to speak. I have been choosing Members who have not been contributing in the previous debate. I am going to reduce the time to two minutes so that I can accommodate all. Two minutes each.

6.34
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): I want to thank the committee for the report. On the issue of salary increment, we do agree that lack of increment is a de-motivator and a demotivated staff cannot deliver. There is also an issue of indiscipline. In the last increment, the doctors got Shs 2.5 million. When they are posted to the district, the district adds Shs 1 million, which makes it Shs 3.5 million but you find a doctor who wants to work only two days a week and wants to do three other jobs. So, there is an issue of lack of discipline and we need to enforce the Hippocratic Oath. 

The nurses do the donkey work and they do not receive the increment. So, they should be considered. I want to agree with the report that there should be harmonisation of pay so as to iron out the discrepancies.

I support the recommendation that money be borrowed to rehabilitate the hospitals and I hope with the rehabilitation also retooling because even if we pay, if we do not put the right facilities in place, then we will not have done much. I hope that retooling also includes ambulances. Mitooma health centre IV has been without an ambulance for very many years.

The issue of jiggers has been commented on. Local governments used to inspect homes for hygiene to make sure that homes were safe, that they were smeared with mud to deter the jiggers - (Member timed out.)

6.36
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Nepak): Mr Speaker, I stand to support the committee report and the recommendations that the committee has put forward.

I call upon the Ministry of Health to consider some regions, which have been in conflict like Karamoja, in building health centres II and III. For example, in my district, I have a parish in Apecolim, a distance of 80 kilometres to the nearest health centre and in that parish, it is only a health centre II which is there. In this health centre II, you hardly get there a midwife for a population of more than 50,000 people. I really call upon the Minister of Health to consider Karamoja. We are still recovering from insecurity; we now have peace, our people are resettling to fertile areas where the population is growing. Karamoja districts should be given an opportunity to upgrade health centres II to health centre IIIs where the populations have grown.

I support the committee recommendation on allocating Shs 14 billion for vaccination of Hepatitis B. The figures are too high for Karamoja sub-region. Recently, we had Hepatitis E, which killed so many people and it is still there. All this was because of sanitation and hygiene and lack of clean water sources in the region.

I call upon the Ministry of Health and the honourable Members of Parliament to support this Shs 14 billion –(Member timed out.)

6.38
MS PHYLISS CHEMUTAI (INDEPENDENT, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like take the opportunity to thank the committee for the report, which was well done. My concern is about the recommendations, which were made. They were good but there was one thing, which I felt that they should have done, that is recommending for more referral hospitals for the regions, which do not have.

Kapchorwa District Hospital serves more than six districts. It serves Bukwa, Kween, Amudat, Nakapiripirit, Bulambuli and Sironko. If you go to Kapchorwa Hospital right now, you will find all categories of patients in our hospital. Therefore, I would like to request the ministry to upgrade Kapchorwa District Hospital to a regional referral hospital in the Sebei region. (Applause)

When we come to jiggers, they can be a menace. I experienced it one time when I was a teacher in Sebei College Tegeresi. We had that invasion of jiggers in the teachers’ quarters. This happened because the teachers kept pigs in their compounds. We tried to be very clean but we could not manage until we sprayed everywhere in all our compounds. You can talk of hygiene in the house but even those animals in the compounds should not be there.

Animals should be kept far away from humans if we have to remove jiggers - even animals should be sprayed. If we have to eliminate them completely from those regions that have been affected, we need to spray the compounds and the insides - (Member timed out.) 

6.40
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you. I also take the opportunity to thank the committee for the job well done. 

A Member has written to me a chit on the issue of jiggers and he is suggesting that if we are using soldiers to distribute seedlings for NAADS, why can’t they use the same staff for distributing paraffin to eliminate jiggers? (Laughter) It is a note that a Member has written. 

We are looking at salary disparities. We appropriated here money for health workers especially for those health centres but we forgot to harmonise with the districts. Right now, the challenges which are there – doctors leave hospitals and they go to health centres IV. We initially had a doctor who left and went to Nebbi and now, when this pay rise came in, he wanted to return but we had got a doctor who left Mbale and came to Bulambuli. I think we will need to harmonise the pay such that we avoid all those movements.

Number two, we need to fast-track the issue of medical insurance. Since the last Parliament, we have been talking about the issue of medical insurance. This business of giving money to those elders – I think the best way is to put them on medical insurance –(Member timed out.)

6.42
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to find out from the minister when the nursing school in Kitgum will be built as it was promised by the former Vice-President, Prof. Bukenya. (Laughter) I want to also find out whether you have land titles for the hospital land. 

I was surprised by the committee that of all things, they could forget to take note of the Nodding Syndrome. I have been on this Floor and everybody has gone and seen these children suffering. I have contacted the minister everyday on phone on the Nodding Disease and what is going on. Right now, the children do not have enough food, the drugs are not there for them, the designated centres are not functioning and there is no provision for them. I would want to know why.

Mr Speaker, what is more disturbing is that we recently heard about the crystals in the brains of these children. Can the minister explain what type of crystal is found in their heads?

I was also disappointed that as we were crying for money for the Nodding Disease children, I met one of the development partners who said that they sent their people to come to Uganda so that they can give a helping hand to these children but the Ministry of Health told them that they have enough capacity and everything was in control. Mr Speaker, you are aware that even in your own constituency, had it not been Humans for Hope, an NGO operating there, these children would not have the attention that they deserve. What is the government up to? Is it a deliberate effort to make these children suffer to death? Why are you –(Member timed out.)

6.44
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you. I start by requesting the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Public Service to put in place the Salary Review Commission before the next budget because I have listened to all the committee reports and most of them are asking for enhancement of pay. Enhancement of pay is not possible and what we should first do before we talk of enhancing and increment is the rationalisation. Why should a driver in KCCA and URA get more than a judge or medical consultant? That is where we should start; we should provide leadership and address that problem. 

Secondly, prevention is better than cure. Health is wealth. I thank the ministry for the vaccination and the provision of mosquito nets. But most of these diseases including jiggers that we are talking about and epidemics like diahorrea are preventable. Why don’t we put more emphasis and money in prevention? On that note, most of our young children who are getting these diseases are school going. Why don’t we reintroduce Health Science and Home Economics as subjects instead of Biology - because people will never become doctors? With Health Science, all these jiggers, clean water and nutrition that you are talking about is covered. So Ndugu, we count on you to reintroduce this at the level of policy with the Ministry of Education so that we go preventive and stop wasting money. This country will never have enough money to treat everyone. Actually right now, access to our medicine – 40 percent of the people who go to health centres just get prescriptions and so, where is the – (Member timed out.)

6.47
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee. I rise to support the committee report and I add my voice to calling upon Government to prioritise issues regarding health. We are all here because we are fairly healthy and we have not seen a doctor in a few minutes. 

To have us debate for long about the budget on health tells us that we do not take health matters seriously. A country that does not take health seriously will find that there will be no money. But if we took it seriously, there would be money. You have heard of the CDC withdrawing all the support - whether for blackmail or at end of their term, we need money and we need to find Shs 45 billion, which the committee has observed that we need.

When you talk about jiggers, the scientific name is something like Tunga penetrans – (Laughter) - the Japadhola call it Sunja – so close. Because it is not affecting most of us across, we may talk about it like it is minimal but it is a problem. Really, if we are now still talking about jiggers, it is also a sign and symptom of primitivism. When you find a community with jiggers and lice – (Laughter) - and they will need to face the reality. We have to help Government to help our people. Hon. Okeyoh, it is not about affecting a particular community. We have to hold the bull by its horn. We have to tell our people that they need to be clean. I have people who suffer from jiggers and the problem is primitivity - (Interruption)

MR OKEYOH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am constrained to actually put my brother on order. I want the Hansard to actually – because he has mentioned hon. Okeyoh and he is well aware that I come from the island and hygiene is considered highly because we have water. (Laughter) The honourable member from Kapchorwa was very clear and stated that at one time, Sebei College Tegeres, a school of high repute was at one time attacked. 

Is the Member in order to really impute that jigger infestation is as a result of dirtiness, primitivity – (Interjections) - is the Member really in order to impute?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that we will go by the recommendations that are being made; sensitisation and things like this. It may be about lack of knowledge. (Laughter)  
         
MR JACOB OBOTH: Thank you very much for the wise ruling. Until we come to terms with the reality, we shall be going into circles. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if somebody says that shame, it is a revolutionary sentiment. If you can no longer feel shame, then you know we are heading for problems.

6.51
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson. Three things; One, accidents on highways. There are some hospitals which must be equipped as priority areas in the budget in terms of emergency medicine. For example, Kawolo on the east, Kiryandongo on the north and in Masaka and Nebbi. We are all candidates to these problems. I request you to do that.

Obongi Health Centre II is now on a highway connecting –(Laughter)– Arua, Yumbe, to Juba. It is a very big place, Mr Speaker. We have seen things we never saw before, for example, accidents due to cars because that place was an isolated place in the park. One day, Members of Parliament passed through there; they were almost involved in an accident. But that place needs to be taken care of and prepared to handle emergencies.

Two, it came to my notice that Obongi Health Centre IV, like others in the area only received Shs 2 million according to the dispatch of money sent for the previous two months. Shs 2 million is not enough to run a health centre IV which does operations, emergency, primary health care etcetera. Why that figure - Shs 2 million for the generator fuel – there is blood transfusion in that health centre, which needs refrigeration, meaning more money is needed.

Number three, we have health centres and services provided by NGOs but I got communication from the Inter Religious Council of Uganda complaining about the support they give to the religious supported hospitals –(Member timed out.)

6.53
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the well detailed report. I want to address myself to the issue of human resource gaps. This has a bearing on service delivery. In all health centres, we have gaps; there are inadequate staff, which means there is inadequate service delivery because they are not able to deliver services to our people. This has discouraged people from going to our health centres especially mothers. They have ended up in the hands of untrained personnel; the traditional birth attendants because they are readily available in villages and this has resulted into many problems. We have lost mothers, children and the survivors have lived with deformities and some of them have fistula and I have not even seen this condition in the report of the committee.
Fistula is a serious problem and Bunyoro is highly affected. We have the highest number of cases in the whole country. I thank the ministry for organising fistula camps, at least, after every three months in Bunyoro. We are requesting for a resident surgeon for that problem in Bunyoro because the place is highly affected.

The Hoima Regional Referral Hospital – I have heard my colleagues lament – for us we are lucky. We have a regional referral hospital but the situation the referral is in is alarming –(Member timed out.) 

6.55
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for their report. The committee mentioned areas where the health centres could be upgraded and Koboko is one of those areas, which should be considered because it is at the border of Congo and Sudan where many people come to attend clinics at Koboko Health Centre and also, it is on a newly tarmacked highway, which may have more accidents.

Koboko has been talked about becoming a hospital since 2006 and even the minister told me that it is in the process of becoming a hospital and indeed, last year, they increased the funding for drugs but if you do not have enough doctors and nurses and midwives, those drugs cannot be utilised. I am really asking, how long is the process for Koboko to become a hospital? How long will it take? We have really waited long enough. Our people are dying because of lack of this hospital. 

Rumours say you have said it is already a hospital. I would like to hear from you so that I can go tell my people of Koboko. Is it true?

The issue of midwives - all health centres III should have at least two midwives. If they have only one, in case that one gets sick, the women suffer and nobody is there to attend to them. We had appropriated funds for training mid-wives; why are we not employing enough of them.

Thirdly, we are wasting money in these comprehensive nursing schools. They just give a shallow training and it is more dangerous to have somebody who is half-baked than somebody who is not trained at all. At least the one who is not trained will not attempt to deliver a woman. Let us say –(Interjections)– what about my time. Okay, you can give the information.

MS LEMATIA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving me way. Anything to do with health needs to be handled with care. If you begin to tell the public here that the training of comprehensive nurses is a shallow one and they are already out there - please, use the language that may not discourage people very much. This is a medical area that we need to handle with care, otherwise, the people who are being handled by these people can easily sue Government in court.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time, hon. Baba Diri, was already up. But I am giving you one minute.

MS BABA DIRI:  It has been mentioned on this Floor that the comprehensive nursing schools are not doing a good job – they are not good mid-wives. That is why we are wondering why we are spending money on training them. To make it worse, Arua Hospital, which was training good nurses and mid-wives, has been turned into a comprehensive nursing school. I would like to ask the minister to replace these comprehensive nursing training schools so that we can train better and useful people. Thank you very much.

6.59
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to ask the Minister of Health, Dr Rugunda, why he has reduced Members of Parliament to mini governments by them now providing ambulances in most of the health centres. You go across the country, you find ambulances donated by honourable so and so. You had a policy of providing ambulances to every health centre IV; what happened? You must have been to Apapai Health Centre IV, which for the last four years does not have an ambulance. Government has promised, you have promised, we have written, the CAO of Serere has also written. When are you providing ambulances to these health centres IV? Thank you.

7.01
MS FREEDOM KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the report and support it. Regarding immunisation for Hepatitis B, it is urgent and we do not need to wait for a long time. We need that money now so that we can survive for a few more years.

Two, the primary health care budget to local governments and NGO hospitals has been stagnant for the last three years and maybe, that is the reason we have these strange diseases increasing. So, I would like to say that instead of putting money to jiggers only, let us add money for primary health care to all the districts for sensitisation, for education and for all those things that go with it.

Three, I do not know who is responsible for rehabilitation of health centres III. Warr Health Centre II in Zombo District is older than I am but since I was born, I have never seen any structure or paint added on that health centre. It is the same age as Pakwach Health Centre III but Warr Health Centre has remained the same. 

The maternity ward, which is there, is now housing babies, infants, maternity and even adult units. The only section for adults is divided with papyrus into two parts, one for men and another for women.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I will now have the shadow Minister of Health for four minutes.

7.02
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Michael Bayigga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Four minutes will suffice for me to make a few comments on what has already been said and what was obtaining in the ministerial policy statement and the alternatives.

Let me say that Uganda is continuing to train doctors, health professionals and other health cadres, which she cannot recruit, motivate or retain on job to care for its sick population. As a result, we have got brain drain to neighbouring countries not in the diaspora in Europe but to countries like Rwanda. We know the causes. 

Our alternative was bold to state the entry salary that we would need for our health workers and I want to repeat this. A graduate medical officer should come to a salary of Shs 2.5 million, a clinical officer Shs 1.5 million, a nursing officer Shs 1 million and an enrolled nurse Shs 800,000 including village health teams. If we can give honoraria to LC I chairpersons, village health teams also need honoraria to carry on their functions.

Mr Speaker, this is one of the major issues that has affected maternal and child health and we can reverse the death of our mothers and children through human resource motivation, recruitment and attraction.

Secondly, health access has remained a challenge but Uganda can do better. We can invest in mobile hospital services to prevent morbidity and mortality by giving level five health services to communities. We have invested a lot in static hospitals but they continue to be white elephants especially if we cannot provide for health workers and maintain them therein to work.

Therefore, you can have a hospital move to the community and keep thousands of people and prevent them from looking for access to health services in Mulago Hospital where it is congested. It has been done in Zambia and in other African countries. It is cheap, cost effective and it prevents preventable deaths. Uganda can do better.

Thirdly, we can prevent people from becoming sick but the budget for public health and the budget for controlling epidemics is so little. In this attendant budget, we are talking about Shs 2 billion only for the whole of Uganda. That is why you have got Hepatitis B whose budget we have not even identified, by the way. Under the ministerial policy statement, we do not have a budget for it. We are simply identifying a budget for jiggers. It is a very big problem but I do not know why Members of Parliament do not recognise this.

Jiggers are a big menace and are affecting our people all over. I was surprised to find jiggers in my place. As a shadow Minister for Health, I would be embarrassed to talk about it but this is a very big problem and we need to create a solution for it.

This rainfall you are seeing is enough to kill the jiggers subsisting in the dust. You can then cater for the rest of them, which are being incubated in the feet, hands and nostrils of people in Busoga through BBE. Let us deal with that and say we have now gone through that state and we need to address it squarely.

Immunisation of immunisable diseases –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One minute.

DR BAYIGGA: Nodding disease. A whole committee was set up but this Parliament has not been informed. How can a Ministry of Health continue to exist without providing solutions for these people? They are going to become an economic burden to Uganda if we do not act now. Why do we continue to get reports from outside as if we do not have scientists here who are studying this? Post-mortem per se can be a very good start in trying to investigate some of these things.

Finally, Uganda can save money within the current budget. I want to sit with my colleague, the Minister of Health, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, and the junior ministers so that I can show them that in this budget are many double entries, which I identified. I cannot talk about it here because I have got one minute but I identified a lot of money through double entry, which we are going to pass. Parliament is going to appropriate but there are double entries, which can accrue to Shs 30 billion, which you can use for Hepatitis B if you want to find money. This money can also be used for most of these unfunded priorities, which we have continued to lament about.

I want to support the committee report because I participated in it but I want these things to be taken quite seriously. I would also request you to ensure that as we are passing this budget, we sit with the ministry so that we can identify some of these double entries and some of this money, which is redundant and which is going to be eaten. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, one minute. Please, summarise.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much. For instance, Mr Speaker, the Public Accounts Committee was investigating the Ministry of Health for Shs 13 billion. As we are struggling to ensure that the Ministry of Health gets towards the Abuja Declaration of 15 percent, the money which we are supplying here is mis-charged and used for other things.

I had written to hon. Mwiru to see whether they were satisfied with the expenditure of Shs 13 billion, which is under the Ministry of Health. They were not satisfied. It was used for Easter packages, travel abroad to negotiate for loans and so on. This is unimaginable and we need this money to come back. We also need to identify similar sources within the budget. This budget can perform better this time. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Health, you have 10 minutes.

7.09
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to salute the chairman and members of the committee for a good report that they have presented to this House.

Two, I want to salute colleagues for many good ideas that have been generated during the debate, which ideas the Ministry of Health will take seriously, examine and see how best they can reach our work in the health sector.

Specifically, on the points raised to me, the shadow Minister of Health has raised a number of points. I agree with his points on human resources that we need people who have reasonable environment and income in order to be able to render appropriate health services to the people. I do believe that Parliament and the country will continue to support this programme of improving the conditions of the health workers. 

Number two, on the condition of health workers, a point was raised that nurses have been badly treated in terms of salaries when their colleagues, the police and teachers have had a better deal. This matter has been discussed with Public Service and we have agreed with Public Service that it is going to be re-examined and in our view, an appropriate solution will be found. 

The issue of jiggers has been extensively raised by the Leader of the Opposition and by the committee. This is an enemy we must defeat. We should not let just the health sector address it but we the political leaders, the civic leaders, religious leaders and family heads must ensure that their homesteads, their environments are hostile to jiggers –[Ms Anywar: “Send the UPDF”]– UPDF is engaged in higher levels of struggle and I think we should support them to do that work. (Laughter)

On double entries, the Leader of the Opposition should have raised these issues well before today so that the appropriate amendments can be incorporated. Nevertheless, the Ministry of Health is still waiting for you to bring in these issues so that everything – if it is mistaken or has errors, it can be corrected. 

Now, on the general principles, it is true that the biggest burden of the diseases in our country is preventable and that is why Government has, for example, focused on immunisation. Immunisation alone covers many of the diseases that used to kill our people and especially the children. But secondly, that is why Government has prioritised water supply to the population because clean water alone has eliminated many diseases. No wonder infant mortality rate is now 54; it used to be much higher and contributory factors to this are immunisation and better water supply so that the young children are not fed on infected water. Mosquito nets, I hope they have reached in everybody’s constituency. We believe that the 22 million mosquito nets will significantly reduce the rate of morbidity and mortality from malaria. 

On prenatal or antenatal care, let us ensure that all the ladies in our constituencies are attending antenatal care so that the problems associated with pregnancies can be diagnosed early and referred early enough for them to be treated properly to deliver in a good environment – this alone will significantly reduce maternal wastage that we are facing today. 

It is true that sometimes we get overwhelmed by negative things; stinking hospitals, health centres that are not functioning – but Mr Speaker, I few things are happening. Let me just illustrate the point. It is true that with the World Bank, Government – the people of Uganda have borrowed money to rehabilitate 22 hospitals. The people of Uganda are going to re-pay this money and therefore, it is us paying for that rehabilitation –(Interjections)– as to who built those hospitals, the people of Uganda built those hospitals. (Laughter) There is no doubt about that. As to what leadership, it is the duty of leaders to ensure that their people have services. (Laughter)

The next point under ADB, you should visit Kiludu Hospital on Salaama Road and Kawempe where new modern hospitals are being built and shortly, we will have Mulago Hospital rehabilitated under ADB loan. These facilities will help the people of Uganda and especially the people of Kampala. Mulago today has been a National Hospital, a district hospital, a regional hospital –(Interjections)- because of time, my brother we will have the discussion after the debate. (Laughter)

Therefore, Ndugu Speaker –(Laughter)– under ADB, Uganda is going to borrow money and do a few things including rehabilitating Mulago and two new hospitals in Kampala. A new maternity hospital and male natal hospital is being built. Within the next few months, work is going to start at Mulago Hospital so that mothers do not have to be congested in the corridors of the current Mulago Hospital. (Mr Fungaroo rose_) Now, I will accept the clarification. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, honourable minister. This is about financing. I got on the notice boards of three hospitals supported by NGOs, churches and Muslim community saying that they cut down on the number of staffs and programmes in their hospitals because the funding that was originally sustaining this was withdrawn by partners from the West. 

How is the Ministry of Health affected by the withdrawal of money by Western, European and American countries on account of the Anti-Homosexuality Bill, which Uganda has and is about to be brought back here?

And lastly, have you made any arrangements to appeal to countries that can fund Uganda, countries which do not support homosexuality like Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and China to fund Uganda in case the other ones refuse?

DR RUGUNDA: Well, Mr Speaker, we have jurisdiction over the money paid by the tax-payer of Uganda. However if other countries that have been assisting us decide to go because of different reasons, it is up to them. Uganda will continue and we will replace those gaps. (Applause) In my view, this is even the impetus for us to build capacity as quickly as possible so that we do not depend on anyone else except ourselves. (Applause) Mr Speaker, we are going to have several hospitals financed by JICA – these are the Japanese. 

On referral hospitals, to develop a referral hospital, you need to inject in resources and we do not have enough resources now to have new referral hospitals. On the contrary, we are spending the little money that is available to improve the existing referral hospitals and ensure that they are referral in reality. 
Hon. Fungaroo raised a good point, he said road traffic accidents are a big problem and hospitals that are by highways should be prioritised. This is one of the reasons we have prioritised the rehabilitation of some of the 22 hospitals. That is why work is going on at Kiryandongo, Kawolo, work is going to start soon financed by the Spanish. So, a number of hospitals, mainly those on the highways are going to be done.

Pneumococcal vaccine is also free. Somebody raised a point about non communicable diseases. This is an important point as we control infectious diseases; non-communicable diseases are going to increase; diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, cancers and other related diseases. We need to be on the lookout, we need to encourage ourselves as leaders and the population to have regular medical examination because many of these diseases you do not know that you have it until it knocks you down or when you are just going for routine check-up. So, we encourage Ugandans to ensure that they are checked.

There was a problem that drugs are not reaching the population. NMS is attempting to ensure that drugs reach people where they do not reach, we want to get a feedback and we appreciate this feedback. Busolo hospital appears to be not in this country - the way my colleague raised it.

But Busolo hospital is going to be rehabilitated. We are already discussing its rehabilitation and many other hospitals that we have not talked about. Our aim as Government is to rehabilitate every hospital, every health centre to ensure that they are fully functional. 

Kamwenge - the fears of ebola, elephantiasis and other related issues and the point she made about maternity beds. We have talked a lot about ebola; the people of Uganda are ready for any situation to deal with it head on. That is the truth of the matter. There should be no cause for alarm. Let us concentrate on our work. We will deal with whatever comes. 

Electricity - we have covered Bukomansimbi. 

Absenteeism is a problem and you and I know why this absenteeism is there. The main reason is simple - these health workers work day and night and when it comes to over the weekend, they are tired and they are also trying to get something to supplement their salaries.

Of course, we want them to work throughout and indeed, we should encourage them to work throughout but let us make conditions as conducive as possible because they are human beings like you and I. 


Let me say this quickly that we have a problem looming and that problem is lack of reagents in our hospitals.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Ndugu is a big boy, so, I never wanted to raise this. When I say a big boy, he knows. Hon. Ndugu the Minister of Health said that these health workers are human beings and they must be allowed on weekends and some days to lock the health units so that they go and look for top up. 

Is it procedurally right for a whole Minister of Health who is supposed to provide for these health workers to come and tell us that they are free to do what they are doing and he is here telling Members of Parliament that should also endorse his statement. Is he procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the point the minister is trying to make is bigger than that. He is calling upon this House to do the needful to make those people comfortable.

DR RUGUNDA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have nothing useful to add to that wise ruling over the matter. I have nothing to add because this was a gross distortion of what I had talked about. But fortunately, Rt hon. Speaker put it right and I am extremely grateful.

To conclude, Kitgum Hospital nurses training school will be handled by the Ministry of Education.

I was mentioning the point of reagents, which was not completed. We will have Shs 45 billion to be able to equip our hospitals with reagents. We have actually been relying on the US government to supply reagents to our hospitals. So, we will have to work hard and see how to fill this gap.

On nodding syndrome - my sister, hon. Anywar and I have had many interactions over this problem. I have to commend her activism in sharpening the awareness of the nation and working closely with the ministry to sensitise people and all of us about nodding syndrome. It is a serious problem and Government, academicians and the international community are working closely together to look for an answer. We do not have the answers yet, we have some suggestions as to what may be causing this problem. It is true that there have been studies involving the National Institute of Health in Washington DC and Centres for Disease Control and some of our country men and women who have travelled to Washington to have some of these studies made.

It is true that some of the specimens showed some crystal-like structures in the brain. There is still debate among the pathologists as to what this could be. Some think that this may after all, be an artefact and not any specific pathology. But I propose that we give enough time to the researchers and scientists to help us with this problem.

It is true that the conditions of the patients have been really bad. Initially, the patients were isolated from other patients and in this process of isolation, they were neglected in some areas but now, the new approach is that they are patients like anyone else and they should be looked after like anyone else and we have seen some improvement in the way they are being looked after.

It is true in the course of their treatment and care, there have been issues of accountability and we are already following it up with accounting officers in the districts concerned. It is an on-going problem which requires more attention by both Government and local leaders so that we can combine together, get the diagnosis and deal with the problem.

This interaction between us at the centre and our friends in the affected areas is something that is extremely helpful in defeating this disease.

The question of ambulances is very interesting because Government of Uganda has actually not directly bought ambulances in recent times. They have often come as donations. (Interjections) I am afraid those are the facts. It is not something that we would want to be identified with but that is the truth.

In the next several months – actually, early next year, we are going to receive some more vehicles –(Interjections)– Ndugu, in the interest of time – since I am concluding, it is good to know that there are going to be some ambulances coming from the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunisation (GAVI) and they will be here primarily to promote immunisation but also promote the health of the mothers. It is some kind of integrated approach. 

So, when they come, we would like to request all of you leaders to ensure that they serve the purpose for which they were procured. [Ms Anywar: “Clarification.”] Mr Speaker, in the one minute, I will be able to answer her and conclude. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for giving way. I interacted with the alliance group supplying the ambulances when I travelled to the UK lobbying for the Nodding Syndrome and I was told that initially, they were designated to be positioned in northern Uganda because of the predicament that we are in. But they were told that they first supply west and central Uganda and then they would come to northern Uganda in second phase. What was the issue at stake knowing that we have a very big problem with Nodding Disease in Uganda?

DR RUGUNDA: Well, I must say I am being informed for the first time about this project of the ambulances that are supposed to be in western Uganda. I am not aware of any ambulances recently - in the last one year - procured by the Government using the Ugandan taxpayers’ money. But this is a matter that my sister and I will be able to pursue together.

I want to once again thank the committee and the chairperson for work well done and by the way, we work very closely together and they bring their view points earlier than the Leader of the Opposition. So, the Leader of the Opposition should emulate -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the shadow minister. 

DR RUGUNDA: I am sorry for promoting you prematurely. (Laughter) Well, I know that you are yearning for that but please, hold on. (Laughter) But earnestly, I would request my brother, Dr Lulume Bayigga, who has been doing very good work, by the way in the health sector, to emulate the methods of work of the health committee so that you can bring points of importance in time for us to be able to deal with them instead of waiting for this important forum of the House. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, the minister is imputing that he is not aware that we even posted the alternative health policy statements and tabled them here in Parliament. Being a minister, he should also know that he was entitled and indeed, he has an iPad and can access Alfresco where these documents are juxtaposed with the ministerial policy statement.

Is it procedurally right for a full minister to mislead this House by saying that I did not procedurally bring these issues in time? Is it procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going by the demeanour of the minister when he was making this statement.  I trust that he meant what he said and he believes that he was right. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The final comment on jiggers -, I have just received clarification from the Minister for Finance and it is important that we share it. One is that the Shs 100 million that is suggested for jiggers is actually meant to pay taxes for motorcycles which have been given to Uganda by development partners to help rural health workers. As you very well know, these days, there is no tax exemption and so Government must pay the tax. Therefore, I propose that this Shs 100 million should be spared for that taxation or else we will have motorcycles from our development partners given to us but unable to use them because we cannot pay the taxes. 

Otherwise, I thank you, Mr Speaker, and we will endeavour to perform better in the health sector taking into account the report of the committee and contribution from the honourable Members of Parliament. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware, the final decisions will be processed by the Budget Committee and final figures will be supplied and brought here and we will have to deal with the figures at a certain stage. We cannot agree on figures as of now here as it will not be a House properly constituted to deal with figures.

The time is now for me to put the question to this motion, which we have intensively debated. I now put the question to the motion that the report of the Sectoral Committee on Health on the ministerial policy statement on the budget estimated for the financial year 2014/2015 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, procedure. (Laughter)

MR MWIRU: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I will seek your guidance. I have had the benefit to read through the report of the committee and I have not seen any item to do with orthopedic services in this country. Yet, I happen to have visited the orthopedic department in Mulago and I came across information that there are approximately 4.5 million Ugandans who need orthopedic services and the Government Chief Whip is also a candidate for the orthopedic services in the country. (Laughter) 

I was seeking your guidance whether we would pass this budget without necessarily taking into consideration the 4.5 million Ugandans which is approximately 12 percent of the population of Uganda and whether we could find a way of dealing with this kind of –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it is a matter to do with money, it will go to the Budget Committee and we will come back to that. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.48 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 September 2014 at 10:00 a.m.)
