Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Wednesday, 18 September 2019
  
Parliament met at 3.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I apologise for the late start of the proceedings. We had a number of activities this morning; all of them important to the Parliament. I think in our usual way, we shall be able to catch up with the items on the Order Paper. 

The second one is to announce that after the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference, we shall host the Executive Committee Members of the Organisation of Islamic Conference (OIC). They are not very many so I thought I should let you know that from the 1st to 3rd October, we shall have our other brothers here for a meeting. When they come, please have time to meet with them. 

I have just had a meeting with the mother of the young girl who disappeared in Murchison falls in October 2015. She was called Sophia Koetsier. She was an intern at Rubaga Hospital but she had gone to the national park for a weekend and then disappeared. The mother has travelled here 11 times and she said she is frustrated that there appears to be no progress in the investigations. 

Hence, I would like to call upon the Minister of Internal Affairs to take an interest in this matter and probably update us. She says that she is going to start writing to me to see whether anything is happening. She has just left this place in tears. 

Therefore, I appeal to you, honourable minister, to follow up this matter and see that some justice is served in the situation; either the body or the girl should be found. 

3.17
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A few days ago, we witnessed a very ugly scenario at the court when four of the late Andrew Kaweesi murder suspects were granted bail, as per the Constitution. 

Everybody is aware of what happened at the court. The reason as to why I am raising this matter is that I have been approached by families of the four suspects that were brutally re-arrested after court granting them bail. Their whereabouts are not known. They have gone to various police stations and they are not there. 

Madam Speaker, the Deputy Chief Justice, the Uganda Law Society and the Uganda Muslims Lawyers Association all condemned this act. 

We are seeing situations that are not in conformity with our Constitution because granting bail is the mandate of our courts of law. If there was any other charge or case, there is a civilised way of re-arresting these people and taking them to court. 

I would like to know from the Ministers of Internal Affairs and Security here where the four suspects are being kept. When are they going to be arraigned before courts of law? 

The families are in tears and do not know where their people are and want to find out whether there is any case to answer so that they can be brought to the courts of law. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have not given us the names and we are sending the minister on a wild goose chase. Who are the people involved? 

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I do not have the names right here but the ministers of Security and Internal Affairs are well aware of those four people, who were given bail and brutally arrested at the court. They are aware of this. 

THE SPEAKER: Does the Minister of Internal Affairs have anything to say about this issue? 

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, I will get the details of the names from the honourable member and follow up on the matter. Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, the ministers of Internal Affairs and Security are in the know of the people that were brutally re-arrested. The minister is trying to hide information. They know where these people are and how they were arrested. It is public knowledge –(Interruption) 

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you for giving way, honourable member. Minister, the names are: Yusuf Nyanzi, Jibril Kalyango, Joshua Kyambadde and Yusuf Mugerwa. Those were dramatically picked from court by officials who had guns. We all know that is the security that is responsible for guns so it is Government that took them to where they are. That is the information I would like to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think this is a debate. We have supplied the names to the minister so we now require him to come and explain to us.

3.22
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding total electricity blackout in Nakaseke Referral Hospital.

Nakaseke Referral Hospital serves eight districts and a lot of activities have been affected as a result of scarcity of electricity. Therefore, I am calling upon the intervention of Government such that we can save the lives of people, especially those that are undergoing operation. 

Lastly, there is also scarcity of medicines in Nakaseke main hospital. Every time patients go there, they are usually referred to the private wing where all medicines are just bought. 

My prayer is that the Minister of Health urgently comes out and helps the lives of the people of Nakaseke, which are being lost per now. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Minister of Health is required to examine the situation of electricity at Nakaseke Hospital for the last two weeks and report to this House.

It is also interesting that sometime back, the problem was lack of water in the same hospital. Therefore, the Minister of Health should come back to us next week on Tuesday and give us an explanation. 

3.23
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Madam Speaker, in March this year, Parliament was informed, with an assurance from the Minister of Health, that a sewage line was to be constructed at Kiruddu Hospital, Makindye - which is now a national referral hospital - before the end of this year.

Madam Speaker, it is now September 2019, just few months to the end of the year, but there is no progress on the construction of this sewage line. The problem of pollution of the environment is still there and escalating. The residents do not have any information about the progress of the construction of this sewage line. We had been informed by the minister that before the end of this year, the construction would be done but it is now just three months to the end of the year.

I, therefore, would like to get more information about the progress of the construction of this sewage line.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter came up in this House earlier in the session; I would like to remind the Minister of Health to come and explain how far they have gone with handling the issue of sewage in Kiruddu Hospital. It was a matter for public concern and it was even in the media. Minister of Health, give us an answer next Tuesday. 

3.25
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. We have seen in the media, reports of sanctions against the former Inspector General of Police (IGP), Gen. Kale Kayihura. I would like to believe that Gen. Kayihura worked under some commands. He never worked alone and served for a long time as IGP and did his best to maintain this Government in power. He was praised and appreciated by the President and Government as one of the Government’s best cadres. This good cadre has now been sanctioned by the American Government, in respect to abuse of human rights and torturing Ugandans.

My concern is that Government is quiet about this good cadre. Now that Government is quiet in respect to these sanctions,
is this an indictment to Government? What about the image of the country and our human rights record? I would like the ministries concerned to tell us the Government’s view and response on this good cadre of Government. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a matter that requires the Prime Minister to come and address the country.

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, as you have said, it is true we have received that information and we are studying it. The Prime Minister will come and address the House on this issue at the next sitting.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, join me in welcoming a number of guests. We have youth leaders from Dokolo District. I do not know which side they are seated. Dokolo youth leaders where are you? Oh, they are very many. I think they are more than the youth. They are led by Mr Bonny Daniel Anyar, the leader of the delegation. Their Members of Parliament are hon. Amoru and hon. Ogwal. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have another delegation from Kalongo Primary School, Agago District. You are welcome. And they are very smart. They are represented by hon. Otto Edward, hon. Ogenga-Latigo and hon. Franca Akello. You are welcome and you are very smart. (Applause)

3.29
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, I raised a matter of national importance about the Higher Education Students' Financing Board, where 7,000 students applied and I would like to raise it again. The rule is that before you are given a loan scheme, you have to first get admission. These students were admitted in universities on science courses but the board took only 1,800 students out of 7,000. 

By last week, over 4,000 students had petitioned the board, asking why they were not taken. The honourable minister seated in front of us, assured this House that he would come back to see how we could sort out the problem of these students because they have nowhere to go.

As we speak now, I have been there; students are flocking the board and parents are crying because these students were admitted in the universities and have no other remedy other than getting money from the financing board. 

Madam Speaker, this money is not taken free of charge; it is a loan and after qualifying, they will pay back. How can Government fail to give people who want to borrow under an Act? How can Government fail to raise money for students who are going to study science courses because all the other courses were left out? Someone is going to take a loan, study and after four years, he is going to work for Government and pay back and you are not giving them money?

THE SPEAKER: I would like to ask the Minister of Education and Sports when he will answer this question. 

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Students’ Loan Scheme has got procedures. The issue my colleague has raised - I think we need to come back with a written statement to explain the procedures and how much is allocated per year. It is not something that I can simply answer - why 1,000 students were admitted and others left out.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, when will your ministry answer the question because this was asked last week and the students are reporting this September?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, by next Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we will get an answer from the ministry next Tuesday.

STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

3.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to submit a request to this House under Rule 140 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to seek extra time for the consideration of the National Coffee Bill, 2018. 

The Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is currently considering the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee Bill, 2018”, which was referred to it on 30 April 2019. Rule 128 of our Rules of Procedure requires that the committee examines the Bill in detail and make all such inquires in relation to it as the committee considers expedite or necessary and report to the House within 45 days from the date the Bill is referred to the committee. 

I stand to inform this honourable House that the committee started consideration of the Bill at the beginning of July 2019 and now the 45 days have elapsed, and yet consideration of the Bill is still underway. 

Due to the controversial nature of the Bill, the committee had resolved to visit four regions - central, western, eastern and West Nile for proper representation. The committee has however, so far only carried out consultations in the districts of Kalungu, Bushenyi and Kasese. The next leg of our consultation was to be in eastern Uganda in the districts of Kamuli, Sironko, Bududa and central region in the districts of Kayunga, Mukono, Mubende and Zombo in West Nile. 

The committee will resume the consultation process in October 2019 to carry on with the remaining field consultations. In line with Rule 140 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I would like to inform this august House that the committee has been unable to complete consideration of the Bill within the required 45 days. 

I, therefore, seek permission from the House that the committee be granted an extra period of about 45 days to allow it carry out adequate consultations on the Bill. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, does anyone have an objection to the 45 days? The Coffee Bill is an important Bill and so, it is necessary that consultations are adequately carried out. The House hereby grants the committee the requested 45 days. 

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is on the matter that has not been concluded on the loan scheme. 
In a sitting where you, Madam Speaker, were in the Chair, I raised the same matter and you ruled – it is there on the Hansard – that the ministries of finance and education should jointly table a supplementary request to this House to accommodate those people who are being denied access to education. The matter was exhaustively debated. 

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who is here, to update us on how far they have gone with that supplementary request?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I recall that there was an undertaking. I had not checked whether the ministers fulfilled it. Can you update us on where you are with the supplementary? 

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, in that sitting, we promised that we would have a meeting between Ministry of Education and Sports and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to look at the gravity of the matter because as you recall, we had approved a certain amount of money for that loan scheme. 

I would like to inform the House that that joint meeting has not taken place but we are having it this week. Next week we shall conclude and see whether it shall be possible to fund the number of students who are stranded. 

THE SPEAKER: Of course you are aware that the universities have commenced and there are people floating. It is important that you put a closure to it as quickly as possible.  

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, last week on Saturday, 14 September 2019 – I do not know whether they should be called potential recruits of the police, reported to Masindi Police Training School despite the fact that we were saying that we needed to rectify the process of recruitment. 

To add salt to the wound, all the recruits from Nebbi have been turned back from Masindi on one reason that they should have presented their admission letter at the time they were joining the school where they claim they have completed from. 

They are being asked to present the admission of when they were admitted into senior one yet when they were recruiting in Nebbi, there was no such a requirement. 

Madam Speaker, would it not be procedurally right that you invoke your powers to make the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell us why those young men are being sent away based on senior one admission letters yet they passed the process of the interviews back in Nebbi? That is for all Ugandans by the way. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday the minister said that he was working on a comprehensive response including the names of all the children from all the districts and we allowed him to come tomorrow. Please raise that question tomorrow; it is premature today. Thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

I) AGREED MINUTES OF THE THIRD SESSION OF THE JOINT MINISTERIAL COMMISSION (JMC) BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA AND THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Agreed Minutes of the Third Session of the Joint Ministerial Commission between the Republic of Uganda and the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Joint Ministerial Commission meeting documents are available for your perusal. 

However, may I appeal to the Government - there are so many state visits that we have had before, for instance, the Turkish President came here but we do not yet have the Joint Ministerial Commission up to today. He was here almost three years ago. Maybe the Office of the Prime Minister – we do not follow up – look at the issue of the Prime Minister Modi – I think we need to pull up our socks together. 

II) RE-DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 184 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baryayanga is not here. I think the Clerk should look for him to come and execute this activity because some members are not yet re-designated. Let us defer this to later in the day. 

Okay, I understand that hon. Baryayanga is at Munyonyo for a joint review meeting with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the Committee of Natural Resources. He should, however, still delegate if he is still busy with the ministry.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO GALVANISE THE PARTICIPATION OF MEMBERS FOR THE SUCCESS OF THE 64TH COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY CONFERENCE SLATED FOR 22ND TO 29TH SEPTEMBER, 2019

3.43
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to move a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to galvanize the participation of members for the success of the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference slated for the 22nd – 29th September, 2019 at the Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort, Kampala – Uganda.

Madam Speaker, this motion is being moved under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda:

“WHEREAS, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) was established in 1911 as an Association of Commonwealth parliamentarians united in pursuit of the common ideals of the rule of low, respect for individual rights and freedoms and parliamentary democracy irrespective of the diversities of nationality, creed, gender, race, religion or culture;

AND WHEREAS, Uganda is an active member of the Commonwealth, including its organs, as demonstrated by hosting the 13th CPA Conference in 1967, the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in 2007 and is slated to host the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC) on the 22nd – 29th September 2019;

NOTING THAT the 64th CPC will be held under the theme: ‘Adaption, Engagement and Evolution of Parliaments in a rapidly changing Commonwealth’ and will tackle intricate thematic areas such as climate change, youth unemployment, the plight of persons with disability, urbanisation, transparency and accountability and various other aspects of governance;

AND NOTING THAT, the 64th CPC as a CPA flagship event will bring together over 500 parliamentarians, parliamentary staff and decision makers from across the Commonwealth and provide a unique networking opportunity for CPA’s global membership of parliamentarians and parliamentary staff to address the critical issues facing today’s parliaments; 

RECOGNISING, that hosting the 64th CPC will not only accrue immense dividends to Uganda as a country in critical areas such as tourism, hospitality and foreign exchange but also positively cascade the image of Uganda in the international community of nations;

AND FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT the hosting the 64th CPC, like other Commonwealth gatherings, is a necessity for the continuity of the Commonwealth and building consensus and commitment among member states in pursuit of an inclusive, fairer, more secure, more prosperous and sustainable future;

AWARE THAT at the 64th CPC, the Rt Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, Rebecca A. Kadaga, will assume the presidency of the CPA - (Applause) - during a year in which the Commonwealth celebrates 70 years of the London Declaration of 1949;

AND FURTHER AWARE of the immense effort and diligence of the honourable members of the Tenth Parliament, staff of Parliament and the people of Uganda in ensuring the success of the 64th CPC;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this august House that;

    1. Members and staff of Parliament unreservedly dedicate their utmost effort and commitment to ensuring the success of the 64th CPC.
    2. The Government and the people of Uganda successfully play host to the 64th CPC.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Yes, it is seconded by several members from both sides of the House. Please, justify.

MR AMORU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. These are the justifications. The Commonwealth is one of the oldest political associations of states. It is a voluntary community of former colonies of the British Empire. The Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, as an association of the Commonwealth parliamentarians, was established in 1911 in pursuit of the common ideals of the rule of law, respect for individual rights and freedoms and parliamentary democracy irrespective of the diversities of nationality, creed, gender, race, religion or culture;

Madam Speaker, it is noteworthy that as a necessity for the continuity of the Commonwealth, regular gatherings are convened at various levels. At the level of governments, the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings (CHOGM) is usually held annually just as at the level of parliamentarians. The CPC is a flagship annual gathering. Such gatherings enable the building of consensus and commitment among Commonwealth member states in pursuit of an inclusive, fairer, more secure, more prosperous and sustainable future.

This year, as the Commonwealth celebrates 70 years of the London Declaration of 1949, Uganda will be hosting the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference on the 22nd to 29th September, 2019 under the theme: “Adaption, engagement and evolution of parliaments in a rapidly changing Commonwealth.” This will be the second CPC that Uganda hosts, having hosted the CPC in 1967.

Madam Speaker, the 64th CPC will tackle various thematic areas, namely; people’s participation, rights of persons with disability, technological changes, youth unemployment, sustainable urbanisation, fostering of culture of respect, fairness and dignity, transparency and accountability in governance and post-legislative scrutiny, among others.

Madam Speaker, the 64th CPC will bring together over 500 parliamentarians, parliamentary staff and decision makers from across the Commonwealth and provide a unique networking opportunity for CPA’s global membership of parliamentarians and parliamentary staff to address the critical issues facing today’s parliaments. The 64th CPC, besides generating far-reaching resolutions of the thematic areas that the discussions will tackle, will also have a significant multiplier effect on the tourism and hospitality sector as well as boosting the stature of Uganda among the international community of nations. 

The hundreds of delegates will also inject a considerable amount of foreign exchange in the local economy as they partake Ugandan goods and services, including Rolex – they are looking forward to that, Madam Speaker.

In preparation for this conference, various members and staff of Parliament, officials of other ministries, departments and agencies and various other non-state actors have been involved at different levels and in varying capacities. They have played a commendable role in ensuring the attainment of the requisite levels of readiness.

Madam Speaker, as the conference is now a matter of days away, this is a clarion call on all members and staff of Parliament and all the relevant stakeholders to align their effort and commitment towards the success of the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC) as the nation will accrue immense benefits from the CPC. Madam Speaker, these are some of the justifications I have. 

We would like to also thank you, Madam Speaker, for your international leadership that has made it possible for Uganda at this particular time to gain the confidence of members of the Commonwealth community that have accepted to visit us and be part of this historic event. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Amoru. As I invite hon. Komakech, join me in welcoming in the public gallery leaders of the Pakistan Society of Uganda. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Actually, there is a delegation from Pakistan that will come and attend this meeting.

3.54
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I wish to support the motion moved by hon. Amoru Paul as regards to the 64th CPC that will take place in this country between the 22nd-29th of this month.

Madam Speaker, it will be 70 years and 52 years when Uganda hosted this Conference. It is a very important one week of serious engagement for members that come from the tradition of the Commonwealth practice. Much as it started as a session, it has evolved and created a lot of other positive attributes in development of parliamentary democracy. Uganda has been one of those countries that have benefitted and yet to benefit more from this.

This conference is important in the sense of looking at where we are at the present – I witnessed when I participated as an observer in Zanzibar, when the Commonwealth Africa Region had a meeting. That was when I could see the seriousness they attach to this country called Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, this country is very important. We should ensure that we create all mechanisms; constitutionally and otherwise, to ensure that Uganda remains peaceful for the present and the future because it is very important. Otherwise, we have come a long way from situations of conflict for a very long time from 1964 when the first shot was made against a few Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, I come from an area that was in conflict for over 20 years. Today, when we look at the benefits that peace can create in this country, I think we need to put Commonwealth at the centre of selling this country in terms of tourism. I hope the entire team from the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities are here.

When you look at how Zanzibar in one week sold the country – I was a witness. In one week, Zanzibar sold that country to Africa alone but this time, we are going to be exposing Uganda to the entire globe. This, therefore, needs a lot of concentration of Members of Parliament, all agencies of Government and the citizens of this country.

Madam Speaker, I witnessed in Zanzibar where the transport sector was put in a serious business for one week. In Uganda, I think we are at that situation. I must thank the leadership of the Speaker for creating committees that are dealing specifically with the various target areas that need to be achieved to make the conference a success.

Madam Speaker, from yourself as the Chair and other committees, I have seen – as I speak, there is a joint dry-run organising to welcome visitors from Entebbe. They have all gone there to plan how to welcome visitors. 

I am the vice-chairperson of protocol but I have been told yesterday that Members of Parliament these days smile very lightly or not smile at all –(Interjections)- That is what I was told. Madam Speaker, smiling is a very important investment of happiness. For our colleagues who are here, if you have never smiled in your life, for this one week that is coming, pretend to have a happy face.
 
When Russia was bidding for the world cup, they almost lost the bid because by culture, it is said Russians never smile even if they are happy. I think Ugandans we are always joyous. I, therefore, hope this time and as part of the protocol team, urge all members regardless of domestic and other issues to show joy and happiness to the visitors that will be participating in the conference.

I was also amazed when I was in Zanzibar about the level at which the delegates were accorded importance and respect. When we are there as part of your team, we could see the seriousness that was attributed to your Chair. This is why I am urging members that for anything we do in life, we should always be careful and for anything we say and act in life, we should always be guarded because the whole world will always be watching you.

When the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda arrived in Zanzibar, that was when we knew that she was a very important person. In Acholi, there is a word called “DMM”. It means Dano Madit Mada” Indeed, Madam Speaker is a DMM in terms of her protocol as the Acholi people say. 

On that day as she assents to that presidency, Uganda will be having a global attraction on what this country is. This is therefore an opportunity for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to critically be well positioned to sell Uganda beyond the Commonwealth. I know we still have few challenges but I would like to urge through your Chair, Madam Speaker, that the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and Uganda Tourism Board abandons all other things and concentrate on selling Uganda.

There are traditional foods that are already being asked by the delegates. They are asking “What are we going to eat when we come to Kampala. We hear that Uganda has the best fish, the eternal Angara.  Madam Speaker, we need to provide all these foods to these people. The team for culture is well organised. 

Madam Speaker, I know many members have been assigned various committees but all in all, for the first time, regardless of our internal challenges - I know we disagree but I think this time as Parliament of Uganda and people of Uganda, we should stand together and host the 64th CPC so that the benefits and the outcomes radiate to all.

Madam Speaker, as the Chair that time, you will be the one in charge of the whole conference. You will be our only spokesperson to ensure that Uganda, the “Pearl of Africa” continues to shine among other states of the world. I beg to move.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When my colleague was calling upon us to work together, he repeated the statement; “although we disagree, let us work together.” 

I would like to inform him that we agreed to disagree when we decided to shift from the movement system to the multiparty political dispensation. This disagreement should not even be talked about; it is a normal political system. 

We are moving together because we agreed that you sit there and we, this side – and we are happy. Saying that “although we disagree” does not make any value addition. I would like to put the record clear; we agreed to disagree.

MR KOMAKECH: I am being cautioned that I should also be smiling. I am just happy. I agree with hon. Ruth Nankabirwa that disagreement in a democracy that is mature is very fine.  We are in that transition but certain disagreements should not compel us into other things. We should not fight like we did some time back.

We should demonstrate that we are an evolving democracy for the future of this country. Any disagreement should be taken in good faith and we should not turn it into enmity. That would be bad for this country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was a motion and the man is seconding.

MR KOMAKECH: Madam Speaker, I beg to stop here but I would like to say one thing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have the other seconder. We have a procedure.

MR KOMAKECH: Madam Speaker, I conclude my support for this motion by saying that that day you will be leading a delegation from Uganda and observers. This is yet another opportunity, as the President of CPA, to radiate your leadership to the rest of the world.

This is a stage that is so strategic that it will help us to galvanise on how we shall improve on our parliamentary democracy. 

It is an opportunity to show so that history should judge us as the 10th Parliament of Uganda that stood together to welcome guests from across the nations, including those who are not part of the Commonwealth have demonstrated requests to attend as observers.

Thank you, Madam Speaker, and we are all ready to participate in this conference. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The second seconder is not there; maybe you just make your contributions briefly. I am sure nobody objected.

4.07
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to start from where I should have given information to hon. Komakech. When high profile visitors like the Commonwealth Parliamentarians being in Uganda is like in the African family setting. Even if you disagree with your wife, you do not beat her when visitors are around – that is very important. Or pretend to behave funny to your husband when visitors are around.
To hear that some people are being arrested in Hoima when some of our visitors are arriving is a message which must be given to those in charge of security. It paints a wrong image.

I can only say that Uganda will reap highly in this conference because even when we were infants in 1967 – Uganda still an infant country having just achieved independence was able to hold a very successful Commonwealth conference. 

Now that Uganda is 50 years older from 1967, definitely we are going to do excellently well. I thank God that we are Ugandans and since we are Ugandans, we are the ones who will benefit. 

Allow me to say that the prayer that we held this morning was most appropriate because it was God’s given chance. If all these things had not happened, it would have been difficult for us. However, we thank God that has restored you to health; that you are going to be the chairperson of CPA and we thank God for marketing Uganda at a very high level – globally and consistently. 

I call upon Ugandans; if we have a Ugandan of this quality, let us be proud of her; hon. Kadaga is respected globally more than we do in Uganda. I know that even the Bible states that a prophet is not honoured in his or her own town. Hon. Rebecca Kadaga addressed the Pan-African Parliament when I was there. 

She was going to stand for the chairmanship of the gender slot in the CPA. The intervention she made and all the Commonwealth members in the Pan-African Parliament resolved that none of them would contest against hon. Kadaga.
 
The method of presentation made Uganda proud. Ugandans, if you have another contrary view about hon. Kadaga as a person, leave it outside. Take it up at a very high profile when it comes to the governance and leadership of this country. We must all be proud –

I know I am a member of the Opposition and I am not standing on that side because of anything. I believe that where there is quality, we must all be united. 

She has shown that she is a leader of quality and a uniting factor – not only in his Parliament but in the country. And has portrayed motherhood to each and every one of us and that is something that we need to be proud of. When visitors come, we would like to show them that Ugandans can be good wives, mothers, friends and we will smile. I am one of those who will smile everywhere I am. May God bless you so much.

4.11
MR IBARHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This particular conference is taking place when globalisation is under immense pressure. The British are walking away from the European Union and the only reason they are doing so is that they are tired of people who go to their country to work and settle there.

For that reason, I am reluctantly going to oppose this motion. If the British – the foundation of the Commonwealth – would like to disassociate from the world and walk away from other countries, the world needs to stand against them also and walk away from them. That is the first point.

Secondly, this particular association is made up of – if you look at the definition of “Commonwealth” countries that were once part of the British Empire or call them colonies. His Excellency, Yoweri Museveni, has spoken very negatively about colonialism and blamed all the traditional chiefs for not having fought colonialists. 

I would like someone to convince me why we should continue associating with colonialism by being a member of associations of former British colonies. Someone should be able to make me understand that. 

I spent the whole of my secondary school life studying history and all my teachers, who were Africans, taught me – (Interruption)

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been attentively listening to my brother, hon. Ssemujju Nganda, who is attempting to lay across emotional points. However, when a motion so sensitive and important has been laid on this Floor from which we have seen the benefits it will bring to this country but a member rises to wash it down by saying we still live in the days of colonialism. Is it in order for the member to rise up to wash it down by saying that we are still in colonialism especially in this age and era? Is it in order for the member to try to wash down such an important motion by relating it to us still being tied to colonialism when we have moved on 1,000 years ago? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the motion is clearly to create an environment where we all engage, appreciate and participate. So, those negative sentiments, hon. Semujju, no, you are not in order.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I understand the sentiments and the impatience of some of my colleagues. Maybe, we will need to even change the syllabi in secondary schools. For me, the history I was taught prepared me to hate colonialists. If there are others who were taught to love them, I am not one of them and I do not pretend. We must also, however, face the world as it is. See what is happening in the United States of America. See what is happening in South Africa. Britain is walking away from the European Union. I do not want to be a part of people who – I remember when President Trump described Africa as a “shithole” the President here said maybe he is right. We need to think about ourselves. 

I am not saying people should not prepare to go and attend the conference. I am only telling you this at a personal level and not as the Chief Opposition Whip, that, because of what I was taught, I do not want to associate with colonialism. 

Secondly, at the time when the British are walking away from the rest of the world, I do not want to be walking towards them. (Laughter)

Finally, Madam Speaker, -(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I rise a point of order. It is very important to bear in mind that we are going to host visitors from many parts of the world. Outside Uganda, people regard Uganda as a very hospitable country. That is why we have been voted as the second best hospitable country in the whole world. This year, we are going to host not only parliamentarians but also visitors from different countries. 

Aware that, Madam Speaker, you ruled, after the hon. Nyakecho raised a point of order against what hon. Ssemujju was articulating. I would have loved to learn that he took that ruling seriously. However, the member has continued with a language, which is not good to especially the visitors who have started arriving in the country. 

Therefore, is hon. Ssemujju, the Chief Opposition Whip, in order to continue washing down the achievements you have made, as the Speaker of this country and also hosting the forthcoming Commonwealth Parliament Conference in Uganda? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the sentiments of hon. Ssemujju are appreciated but are not appropriate at this time. Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I do not want to defy you. I will stop my submission there. 

4.19
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion but also to inform the House that Uganda is a very important country in the Commonwealth. You have been told that after we received our independence, just five years later, we hosted the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Conference in Uganda. 

Before an international conference comes to a country, that country and the members who are participating in that conference are analysed. On that note, I would like to congratulate the members of the CPA that you lead for considering Uganda to host this great conference that is coming next week. 

They looked at the performance of the Uganda CPA members at the conference and they were convinced that Uganda would manage to host such a very important conference. (Applause)

Honourable members, when you host such a very important conference, you bring in a lot of benefits for the country. You are marketing your country and making it known by many people who have never been here. 

Some of us who have sat in international conferences know that many of those participants have ben yearning to come to Uganda. They asked to come and have meetings here because they would like to see the hospitable Ugandans. 

Uganda gains a lot because when people come in, they bring in a lot of money through, for example, the payments they make at the hotels. Therefore, international conferences are very important. 

Therefore, I would like to appeal to the Minister of Internal Affairs that during this conference, we hope nothing wrong happens. I have always said we are members of the global village and anything wrong that happens damages the image of the country. So, Ministry of Internal Affairs, make sure nothing wrong happens when our visitors are in the country. 

I have looked at the list of the members who have been appointed to receive our visitors and I am going to train them on Friday. Those who have not attended my lessons should come. Madam Speaker, I heard you talking about that, we do not want to get embarrassment when the visitors get here.

I would have loved Ambassador hon. James Baba to be on the list as an international person. He has been an ambassador and he worked in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Therefore, he should have been the first on the list and made sure that we train our colleagues so that we are not embarrassed when the visitors come here.

Receiving international visitors is not an easy issue my dear colleagues. You have to learn how to receive them. Therefore, this is quite important.

Now, as a student of international relations, I would like to disagree with some of my colleagues. Because we are Members of the UN, Commonwealth, ACPEU, African Union and we subscribe to the international organisations; we cannot live alone. We are members of the international community and so we must live with others. Even here, we are members of the East African Community. Therefore, when we get such an important conference, it is very important and pride for the country.

I would like to thank and congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for the role you have played in all these international conferences. If you had not been a very good leader, these conferences would not be coming here.

Now, when you Google and search for the name “Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga”, you will see what it means. A very international person, known and all these conferences come here because of her. Therefore, we congratulate you for assuming the presidency of the CPC. We are proud of you as our Speaker and the third most important person in this country. You have marketed Uganda and it is known all over; we thank you, for that and we are looking forward to working with you to make Uganda known in the whole world. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very happy motion. I do not know whether we have objections.

4.25
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, before I proceed, I would like to thank, the right honourable Speaker. About two weeks back, when she was in Zanzibar, I was watching her live on one of the televisions in Zanzibar that is on Zanzibar Broadcasting Company (ZBC).

I would like to thank you, for marketing Uganda to the effect that this conference was being appreciated before it is even here. I would like to join my colleague, hon. Komakech; what he was saying was right because the integrity that you exhibited in Zanzibar was enormous.

I would like to support this motion. Honourable members, this is a very important conference for this nation. Some of us who have been able to live abroad for so many years, Uganda has been known - when you go back to 30-40 years, for negative history. Now, is the time for Uganda to be seen as a positive nation.

Madam Speaker, I believe this conference is going to promote rule of law, democracy and its principles, issues of human rights considering the issue, which are going to be debated. And it is going to put the country on test; because this conference is going to bring so many avenues where by this country is going to promote issues of separation of powers. It is good that that is one of the issues in the Bill which was table before Parliament. What do I urge Government to do? The issue of security is paramount if we want to promote this nation. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, however much elections are on-going, as a reality, if arrests are being executed, they do not promote a good image while as we are waiting for this conference to take effect.

Lastly, I urge my honourable colleagues that this is high time to come together as a nation. However much we are in a multiparty dispensation, but as a nation, there are values which have got to bring us together as a nation. I beg to rest my case. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.28
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate you heartily for the lobbying skills and mobilisation that you have exhibited. These conferences do not just come; somebody must exhibit those skills and I am sure before they decided to come to Uganda, they looked at you especially as a woman. As women, we should applaud our Speaker. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, if we oppose this motion, it is like we even do not want you to be the President and yet we have a very great privilege for Uganda to shine, as hon. Ssemuli put it. Even in America, they still think that Amin is still around. Therefore, if our Speaker is going to become the President, isn’t that lighting the candle of Uganda? Therefore, let us work together.

Madam Speaker, the only matter that I am not happy about is that we have not publicised this conference. Even among Members of Parliament and we are saying, it is good that we have had this motion today but it should have come yesterday so that everybody knows what is going on.

I remember when Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) was coming here, there was so much publicity. We even talked about it everywhere in the taxis, on the streets and wherever we were moving; people were talking CHOGM, the language of CHOGM, the Queen is coming. Now, some thing is lacking. Can we in this week, before the conference starts, make Ugandans know –(Interjection)- yeah few days but we can do much so that Ugandans know what is happening.

“Madam Uganda”, -(Laughter)- I am not even mistaken, in fact she is Madam Uganda from now. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I always quote Egypt on tourism. When you reach Cairo and step on their soil, everywhere on the lips of the Egyptians; once they know you are not an Egyptian, they will ask you if you have visited the pyramids and seen the hanging church. We want this to be on the lips of Ugandans so that they can talk about the source of the Nile, tombs and the mountains. Those who do not see the benefits; at least we are seeing it now. 

Madam Speaker, I feel that Hon. Ssemujju should not have brought that up because he is even speaking English. How do you avoid it in the commonwealth? How do you avoid the commonwealth suit? You are going to live alone.  Thank you.

4.33
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, a media house in Western Uganda hosted me yesterday. They asked for my thoughts about the coming Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC) and this is what I told them: this is an opportunity for you and I, for Uganda and Africa to showcase what we have been talked about as being very hospitable and clear in as far as communication is concerned. 

By the way, it is not that very common. When we are communicating, we are clear and very many people like us just because of that and for being one of the well-endowed countries with food in the world. Go across the border and look at their food, go to the South at our border and you will not believe it. When you go to the South Western part of this country, you will starve but what do we have here? There is a variety of food. 

I told them that this is a time for us to showcase the natural wonders of the world that we are endowed with; the source of River Nile, Kasubi Tombs, the gorillas, Bwindi Impenetrable Forest, the flora and fauna and the holy land at Namugongo. They are incredible. 

I am reiterating that this is a historical moment for us. It is almost over 50 years since we last hosted this very important conference. It is time for us to showcase what has been known about Uganda. The best out of this country is going to be showcased. It is between you, him and I and every other person to do so.

They talked about smiling. It is very fantastic. By the way, a smile keeps you healthy, handsome and beautiful. Please, extend this to our visitors whether you are on protocol, health or whichever committee. Even if you are not on any committee, be part of that committee in your own way.

I was even telling the taxi drivers that if you were charging Shs 20,000, charge Shs 15,000 so that you can take as many people as possible. That way, people will go from here with a memory that we are very hospital, kind and generous. 

Let us also urge our people to be smart so that even our cars and motorcycles are washed. 

Finally, the fact that you are going to be the next President for CPC, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you. I have had an opportunity to travel with you to various conferences and you have never let this country down. (Applause)

You have been there for us, just like hon. Cecilia Ogwal. She is in the Opposition while I am in the National Resistance Movement (NRM) but whenever I travelled with hon. Cecilia Ogwal – I remember when we were in London with you, Madam Speaker and she gave such a moving speech. I asked, “Is this person in the Opposition?” I almost knelt before her and I still respect her for that. (Applause)

Love Uganda. This is the only Uganda we have. This is what I have seen in you, Madam Speaker. Let us maintain it. We may not be as good as you are but we are trying to emulate you as much as possible.

I would like to urge each one of us that wherever you go and whatever you are doing, let Uganda be first and foremost. That is why you are attracting a lot of conferences in this country. No wonder, you are going to be our best in as far as the whole of next year is concerned. You are the face of Uganda in CPC. Keep that smile; that smiling face is beautiful.  (Laughter) It is not only beautiful but also very captivating. That brings us together as a country. That is what makes Uganda to be renowned. 

I would like to congratulate you, Uganda and the Tenth Parliament for being the biggest hosts of the biggest commonwealth conference that we are yet to see. It is very historical. 

By the next conference, not many of us will be around. Let us make the best out of this. I support the motion and may God bless you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to confirm that there are things hon. Ogwal does here, which are sometimes objectionable. However, she is totally a Ugandan once she boards a plane. She will never speak against this country. (Applause)
4.38
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by hon. Amoru Paul. This is an opportunity for us to say, “Wow, now we can move forward and demonstrate what we have as a country.” 

Madam Speaker, 52 years is not a joke. In my language they say that the stones follow the storm. Thank you for being a storm that has moved all these nations to choose Uganda to host the whole world from 22 to 29 September. 

One writer said that a rose by any other name smells sweet.  Thank you for being decent, an African and a true Ugandan to pull these masses to Uganda.
The motion states that we galvanise support and participation. It is important that the whole world witnesses the decency of Uganda and the unity that we demonstrate. We have been talking about tourism. I represent the great guerrillas in the world; the climbing lands of the world. 98 per cent of the climbing land is in Kinkizi West, Kanungu District. 

This is the time to demonstrate that we have the green oil, which is not perishable. I call upon colleagues, as hon. Byarugaba has said, to become ambassadors. In the seven days we shall be here, we showcase that we can even take over because the Speaker will be taking over the mantle to lead all the 54 countries in the commonwealth fraternity.

Madam Speaker, we would like to congratulate you on being there for us and speaking for Uganda and Africa as a whole. This motion is intended to pull the support of the Members and Ugandans because this is a House of representatives. My mother can see that from 22nd to 29th, we shall host people from all over the world. 

Over 2,000 people will be hosted in Uganda. The committee on excursion has already mapped the areas to visit. We can talk of Busoga, Masaka and the Equator; the source of the Nile and Namugongo. All those areas are going to be seen by the people who knew Uganda far back in the dark days. Today, sanity is clear and seen.

I would like to add my voice that we could do better. It is important that Government, Parliament and all sectors participate in making sure that this becomes a reality.  Thank you.
 
THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Macho, join me in welcoming two teams of children; the Dove Chest Academy. There they are very smart with many medals. They have just returned from Grandmaster Tournament in the Netherlands where they got eight gold medals. They are here under Focus Youth Forum. You are very welcome, indeed. (Applause)

We also have another set of children; the National Woodball Team. They are here. You can see how smart they are. They have been representing us in international competitions. They are ranked second in the world. (Applause) We congratulate; Lillian Zawedde - she got six gold medals, one silver and seven bronze; Onesmas Atamba got one gold; Denis Nanjeru got three gold and three bronze; Sandra Nabaggala got three gold and two bronze; Joyce Nalubega got four gold and three bronze; Joan Mukova got four gold and three bronze. Congratulations. 
They were organised by hon. Tumwine. Thank you very much for keeping our flag flying high.

4.44
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, you always keep making Uganda make history and you remind me of what my history teacher used to tell me that: “Every message has a messenger and a messenger looks the message.” I would like to appreciate the good job you have done to market Uganda through your unique approach as a stateswoman that has built confidence in the international community for us to host this very important conference.

Madam Speaker, you are a great woman, not only in Uganda but also in Africa and the world at large. Because I know many countries bid, did a lot of lobbying but you and Uganda did a lot of talking and we are going to make history once again.

History always comes with good acts. Therefore, I pray and request that wherever there are international conferences, our good friends who call themselves the champions of governance and democracy go over the streets and begin making noise in the name of activism.

I am sorry for saying this when the Leader of the Opposition, who is like the representative of the Opposition in this country, is not in the House. However, I request that whoever is stepping in for her, that this time, kindly our brothers and sisters from the other side of the House, who keep calling themselves activists - moreover they are not - that they should make sure that the seven days we are here with our guests, the image of Uganda is kept and protected.

Madam Speaker, Uganda, as a country is going to benefit a lot. I request the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I seek your protection from my colleagues because you have not permitted them but they are interfering with my very good submission.

THE SPEAKER: Allow the Member to contribute.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, as I continue, I would like to call upon - (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, I still seek your protection from my colleagues. 
As I continue, I request the planners who are the ministers who are going to market the tourism of this country that many times we have had international conferences, they only talk about mountain gorillas. I pray that you talk about every part of this country.

We have Nyero Rock, Elgon Park, Kidepo - make sure that you market the whole of Uganda because these guests are coming to feel Uganda. Market Uganda with not only wildlife but governance as well. The first time I stepped in the United States of America, I was asked whether President Amin was still alive. Therefore, I request that the people who are going to send messages to our guests talk about the historical leaders of this country who where there because the ones we have will be seen talking.

Lastly, I would like to appreciate all my colleagues in this august House because I see everybody is excited and promoting the conference. I believe this one as the ruling party is a very big achievement. We have sent a message to the Opposition that at least something has been done. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.48
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to attribute this achievement to your wonderful leadership and indeed, the good leadership of the NRM Government because we are the branches of the tree and CPC and others are part of the fruits from the tree.

I would like to thank honourable members and indeed, the public for the good publicity. By circumstance, I found myself on the voluntary hospitality team and I know that is where a majority of Members belong. I would like to call upon you to go and market CPC so that even in our constituencies, people know what is happening.

Madam Speaker, I am of the opinion that the organising committee and the Commission move steadfast - as a Member highlighted - to empower - they can even empower Members of Parliament in terms of their communication tools so that they take the message up to the grassroots. 

I know CPC is going to be a success. Thank you. 
I have been with the Speaker - we met in one of the big countries in Africa and I can attest to you how the Rt hon. Speaker is respected internationally. Therefore, I attribute this achievement to you. Thank you.

4.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, I would like to join my colleagues in thanking you for having used your skills to lobby for a commonwealth meeting to be held in Uganda. Of course, we all know the commonwealth and the organs therein, including the CPC are determinants of our history. However, that is exactly the nature of countries and people - we are always part of our history whether from our parents - or in this political case from our parents, the British. Therefore, if we can use our history well to gain something and propel ourselves to a higher level, so be it. 

Therefore, I would like to congratulate you and to associate personally with this motion. Although this morning I did not attend the prayers, I was in spirit with Members in thanksgiving and I will continue to be in prayer.

Having said that, I would like to make a comment on behalf of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  

I assure the member from Mbale, all other members here and you, Madam Speaker, that we are part and parcel of the arrangements of this conference. We shall make sure that it succeeds. Our agents, the security organs and all the departments under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, including the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control are already fully geared for this conference. We will make sure our visitors have a very smooth entry and exit.

On the side of security, we, at the Ministry of Internal Affairs, in connection with the other agencies, have proved our efficiency in securing such functions. In the recent past, you have seen how successfully we secured very many pilgrims at Namugongo. That was not a small achievement. It was not because the enemies of society did not want to disrupt it but because of the efficiency of our security organs. (Applause)

After that, we also secured very many Catholic Priests, the Bishops and Cardinals who came here; it was a successful function. 

Earlier on, we welcomed and held the function of the visit of His Holiness, the Pope, which was not a small function. I could go on and on but those three demonstrate that our security persons and security institutions are in charge. There is absolutely no need for anybody to get worried. People should go ahead of these functions with all the happiness that you have been called upon to showcase. We are there to secure them. Of course, there may be one or two incidences. Those are absolutely natural but we shall try to minimise them. 

We urge Ugandans to demonstrate the spirit that has been demonstrated by the Speaker and in passing, as demonstrated by hon. Cecilia Ogwal; as it has been mentioned that whenever she gets on the plane, she demonstrates that she is a Ugandan. Let us all be security agents. Let us all act as guidance to our neighbours to ensure that this function becomes successful. We shall all do our part and be winners. I thank you very much. 

4.55
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I equally would like to voice my appreciation for your able leadership, as previously spoken by my colleagues. We are very proud of your leadership and how you have done us proud, to host such an important conference in our country. 

We have been speaking here about how we should do our best to receive these guests. However, there are some grey areas, which I would like to talk about that we should work upon. There is something to do with garbage collection and waste management. These visitors are coming to see the beauty of our country but Ugandans have a habit of throwing garbage everywhere. Wherever you go, by the side of the streets, you find “kaveeras.” Waste management is still a problem. 

Therefore, I request that we declare a day for national cleaning so that we have a very clean country by the time these visitors come. 

Madam Speaker, there is also something to do with cleaning up our sewage system. Many times, when there is heavy rain, many parts of this city get flooded. This is as a result of having our sewage system blocked with sand. We need to have a cleaning exercise to avoid such situations. We need to pray to God that we do not have very heavy rains, otherwise, we shall get embarrassed during this time. 

Another grey area is the issue of traffic management and the boda-bodas. This morning, as I was coming towards Parliament, we had a crash with a boda-boda rider, who used a pathway for pedestrians, as we turned to a petrol station. Most of these boda-bodas do not have manners. There are those that are disciplined but many of them are indisciplined. Therefore, we need a session with the boda-bodas to show courtesy and follow the rules of traffic. 

Madam Speaker, I thought these are the grey areas that we need to work on. Otherwise, we are very happy. We shall have a good conference. Thank you.

4.58
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to galvanise members of Parliament for effective participation to ensure that the CPC is successful. 

We are proud members of the commonwealth family. Despite what hon. Ssemujju said, although, of course, he is entitled to his opinion, the British taught us well. They left us a rich legacy. We run the Commonwealth system of Government, have the common law system and so much more that we are proud of. 

Hon. Byarugaba mentioned how people praise us for being effective communicators. We speak good English because English has been our official language all these years. All this time, we share a lot. For example, we are working together on the modern slavery system; there is so much that we share in common. We are really proud as we welcome members of the cmmonwealth family for CPC. 

It has already been said that there are very many benefits, including the hotel industry, transport and crafts, which will be bought. We have already seen a fleet of vehicles parked in our parking lot and we know that our staff and other Ugandans from the civil service have been taken through training. All these are benefits. 

This is a chance to showcase our culture, the food, the dances and our hospitality. It is an opportunity for us to let the Pearl of Africa shine. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on hosting this year’s CPC, on your effective leadership and lobbying. As many honourable colleagues have said, probably, it would not have been possible without you. You are a monumental role model for us to emulate. We are proud of you and we heartily congratulate you. 

Although we are galvanising members of Parliament to attend this conference, I do not think people know what is expected of them and how to participate. Of course, this is our activity. It is us to take the information down to our constituents and other Ugandans out there but those who are not on the delegations do not specifically know how to participate. I thought that this would be the opportunity to tell us who the delegation is, how many members we are sending and how others can be effectively involved. 

I would like to thank hon. Rose Ayaka for pointing out these issues, especially about cleanliness and waste disposal. It is shocking that when you drive along our roads, including newly built ones, especially in towns, users of the markets along the roads push rubbish in the middle of the road. For instance, there is a town called Kawagonya on Masaka road and I always ask myself: “What do these people think?” 

As we try to attract tourists, for example, they will be visiting Kisoro and Queen Elizabeth National Park and you go through these streets that are littered with rubbish - I hope that the Government, Kampala Capital City Authority and Wakiso are listening. They should clean our towns so that when these people come and we serve them meals, they will not have reservations about them. We are a great country and we only need to patch up with these shortcomings so that we can have a very successful conference. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.03
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank you very much for the opportunity. As Members were contributing, I remembered the time we were voting you. I said t myself, “we really did the right thing to vote you as our Speaker.” Whatever was there, I think it was God who guided us; otherwise this would not have happened. 

I would like to thank the people of Kamuli in a special way for voting wisely. They should vote wisely again because where the flag has reached, it will keep on going high and no more going down. The people of Kamuli should look at Uganda and keep on voting nicely. 

I would also like to thank the House very much for voting excellently. You can now see what we are achieving. I do not think that we would have achieved all these if God had not guided us and our Speaker also showed that she is able.

Madam Speaker, we thought you would maybe come as a woman President for the first time. I do not know and we are still praying for that to come. Maybe, it is going to come because we have seen the capacity and the capability in you and we are behind you. The women of Uganda are very happy about this. We thank God for keeping you. There is a reason he has kept you up to this time. 

Furthermore, I would like to thank Members for their contributions. I am very proud that we have a woman in that Chair, who is flying our flag high. I wish the people of Kamuli would understand this because our flag will not go down again. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for those kind words. 

5.05
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the Members to support the motion that has been raised by the organising committee chairperson.

I would like to say that Uganda and the young people of Africa, especially those of us who are seated before you, look up to you all the time. Even when we are talking about the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA), I know that without your will and the good leadership that you have shown, not only to Uganda but to the rest of the world, we would not be talking about the CPA being held here in Uganda. Let us applaud this lady seated in front of us in a special way. (Applause)

In our villages, you could be doing good things and no one tells you when you are still able to see and hear. They only talk about you when you no longer exist. However, I think this is the right time to appreciate some of the tremendous women who have promoted Uganda and demystified the fact that women cannot make it; women can and yes, we can. In Rt hon. Rebecca Kadaga, we see that everything in this world is possible and it does not matter the gender. 

I served with hon. Ogwal at the Pan African Parliament (PAP)in my first term. She is one of those people who were outstanding at the PAP. When you see those two women seated there, do not underrate them because they have a lot of potential. As young people in the country, we look up to them. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, as leader of Ugandan delegation  to the African Union, Parliament and as a person who has watched you internationally; as one of those who have chaired with you meetings, honourable colleagues, the person that we see in front of us is very tremendous. When we were at the African Union, every time we met anybody, they would ask us: “How is Kadaga?” People no longer ask me how is Idi Amin? They ask, “How is your Speaker?” That is the name that she has created.

If we get such people going for international fora, we will be hosting very many of these international meetings because they come with an advantage of promoting Uganda. In the past, we had bad image because the whole world thought that Uganda was a place where no one could go because of Idi Amin. They do not even know that Idi Amin passed on. However, today, the top most leadership that we have in our country has tried to promote Uganda as a tourism destination.

Last week, I was in Tooro region and it is very beautiful. I would love to see some of the visitors who are interested taken there. We should harvest money and as these visitors board to return to their countries, they should appreciate how the four regions of Uganda are endowed with nature and they will be able to promote Uganda as a tourism destination.

Madam Speaker, challenges have been raised but I know that there cannot be any organising without challenges. I think we should focus on our sanitation and hygiene. When you travel to other countries, for example, boda bodas are clean. People are excited to sit on boda bodas because they are putting on helmets. Therefore, those small nitty-gritties have to be looked at as we host these international visitors because the image they go with is what will remain in their minds.

I am much delighted at my age to be serving in a House that you chair because I admired you when I was still a young girl. I kept dreaming that in future, I would be like you. I would like to tell you that you are my mentor. Mentorship does not mean talking to that person directly but it means the good things that you do in public that all people appreciate. 

I would like to say before the Almighty God that we appreciate what you do for Uganda and may God protect you on behalf of Ugandans. (Applause)

5.11
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At the beginning, I wanted to raise some procedural matters because I thought that this conference is very important, rather than it coming here as a motion, it could have come as a statement to inform the House so that we do not go into other debates. Now that we are moving, I would like to state on record that I am very happy that the country has the opportunity to host this for the second time. 

Many Members have spoken and thanked you and also the NRM Government for providing the space.
I would like to join them and also congratulate them. 

I would also like to remind you that in 1967, the UPC hosted the first conference here. That means that they did their best and in the records of the commonwealth, they find it pleasant to come back because they have had an experience before. 

Apart from tourism that has been mentioned, we are losing the major themes that were raised here by the movers; climate change that all of us are affected by; the issue of youth unemployment is a theme that will be discussed. Uganda is one of the countries that are suffering from youth unemployment. Our delegates at this conference must participate meaningfully to try to find solutions to some of these problems that are affecting the country. 

We would like to encourage our delegates that beyond this, we need to deal with other issues that exist between commonwealth countries; the issues of trade barriers because they are a result of legislations that come from Parliamentarians; the issue of restriction on travels and how visas are applied for. It is a result of legislation and we need to engage because if we are one association, we should be able to make it easy for ourselves to interact.

There have also been calls here for Government to behave. I think that it is okay for us to continue the way we are. Why should we feel ashamed at this stage while visitors are there? If your ministers have been quarreling, continue quarreling when delegates are here. Continue in the media. If we have been brutalising each other, continue because you are saying that that is good. If you think that stealing public money – the corruption that is going on – is good, continue so that the whole world can know that there is a problem. We cannot just hide. (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. 

The Member started well but is he unaware of the African culture that stipulates that when visitors are coming, you need to surely sweep the house? We learnt this and we have been able to teach it to our children. We are expected, as Members of Parliament, to pass on this to the people that we represent including our family members. 

Is the honourable member in order to say that the Government should go on as they have been doing and that they should quarrel if they have been quarreling, even in front of the visitors? Is this African? Is this Ugandan? (Laughter) Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the member is going against the traditional African culture and so, he is out of order. (Laughter)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that we should not only be doing it when visitors come. We are a community, we are a country and so, we should not continue doing the things that we think are wrong when visitors are there. We should not do them even in the absence of the visitors (Applause)

Finally, Madam Speaker, I wish to congratulate you and wish you good health and good leadership of the CPC. We know that with you at the helm, things will be okay. Sometime in future, as UPC, we will be happy to host again. (Laughter) Thank you.

5.16
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of this motion. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker for lobbying for this event. I am sure there were other commonwealth countries that wished to host it but because of your lobbying skills, Uganda got the opportunity. 

This is well evidenced by the fact that even in the Tenth Parliament, under your leadership, Madam Speaker, this Parliament hosted the Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU). We would, therefore, like to thank you for your lobbying skills. 

Like Members have said, it is not only Ugandans that admire your leadership. Many people in the world and especially in Africa admire you. 

I recall just a few months ago, I was with you and hon. Isaac Etuka in Moscow. When you presented your remarks – they called upon all the Speakers to make their remarks – Madam Speaker made very moving remarks concerning the African continent. She addressed the issue of refugees, the issue of exploitation of Africa’s minerals, which other people want to take without value addition and the issue of people affected by conflict that are not involved in issues concerning them. 

There were Members of Parliament from West Africa who were very moved and they told me that they would like to see you and they were calling you their speaker. 

You will recall that after the meeting, I came and shared it with you and before I completed, they had found their way to where we were. That is how admired you are. It is not about pampering but it is because of what you are actually doing. That is why people admire you. We pray that God continues guiding you and giving you the wisdom, strength and health to continue leading this Parliament and this country. 

Uganda has also been partly given the opportunity because of her hospitality. Last year, I was in a traffic jam near Garden City and some woman vendor came with very appetising yellow bananas in her basket. A woman, whose vehicle was in front of mine, bought a cluster of bananas. Near her, there was a boda-boda man who was carrying a white man. This lady got some of the bananas and gave the boda-boda rider two fingers and the white man two. The white man looked at her and smiled. Within me, I said that they are now seeing the hospitality of Ugandans. 

Therefore, I pray that this hospitality continues throughout the event; in our hotels, on our roads and in our recreation centres. I pray that the almighty God grants journey mercies to our visitors and keeps us all through the event. Thank you. 

5.19
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Madam Speaker, thank you. The Bible says that the wise men came from the east. Thank you very much for being among them. We are very proud of you. I am speaking as a pastor’s wife. (Laughter)

God is always saving your life because of the good works you are doing. You will live to blow more candles. May God bless you as you stay alive. 

I rise to support the motion. These visitors are coming to visit Ugandans and not a party. We, therefore, have to welcome them and be good and be smart. Let us cherish our visitors. 

If we had been sensitised early, we would have brought our women who are doing some art and crafts so that our visitors go back with souvenirs. Hon. Komakech was saying that the visitors were asking what they are going to see and carry from Uganda. 

I remember on 3rd June 2019, in Namugongo, the visitors who came, mostly our friends from America said they had nothing to carry from Uganda. Next time, when we host such visitors again, let us sensitise more women in Uganda to bring their art and crafts so that we can sell them to the visitors. 

These visitors should not only remain in Kampala and maybe go to Bwindi and see gorillas and the source of River Nile. I request that they should go and visit our historical places, see our culture, our cultural dances in Busamya and see how we prepare karo and tilapia, see embaire in Busoga, Kadodi in Bugisu and see Sipi falls in Kapchorwa. They can even see our Mount Elgon. 

That is my request. This other issue of boda bodas – I do not know how security is going to help us. Boda bodas in Kampala are very unruly and they can even spit on our visitors. Yesterday, when we were stuck in the traffic, one of them spat on us. Maybe, we have to talk to security to help us organise boda bodas in the city.

Hon. Ayaka talked about the issue of garbage. I do not know how KCCA can help us by cleaning our city and relocating the street children somewhere so that when the visitors go away, they can maybe come back. Thank you.

5.23
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the mover of this motion for superintending over the preparations for this global conference. 

It is not by accident that this conference is being held in Uganda. There must have been due diligence made for Uganda to be chosen to host this important conference. Therefore, I wish to extend my thanks to the head of the commonwealth fraternity, the Queen and the President of Uganda for blessing this conference. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for heading the preparations for this conference.

Madam Speaker, I wish to give you special thanks for being a role model for this Parliament. The success of this conference is being manifested in the way you are including everybody. As the chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, I have emulated what you do by involving everybody on that committee to contribute to the national cause. We wish to congratulate you and thank you for your persistent action in making sure that you emphasise unity in diversity for the country to succeed.

I, therefore, appeal to all Ugandans to note that Uganda has moved to another level of recognition globally and this has been achieved through continued stability and peace that has prevailed in this country. 

We wish to say, Madam Speaker, that we are waiting for more meetings to come. Continue to lobby for other meetings.   A decade back, we hosted the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) here. We have also hosted other events such as the IPU and Organisation of Islamic Conference. We also hosted a refugees’ meeting for the United Nations. 

All these are manifestations that once Ugandans strengthen their unity, peace and stability, more is yet to come to the benefit of the people of Uganda. 

We thank you, Madam Speaker, for the arrangements you have made and I believe all Members of Parliament and other Ugandans of goodwill will be participating fully to ensure that this conference succeeds. Thank you.

5.26
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister of Internal Affairs because he has kept around listening to what we are saying and he has given us assurance of security. I thank the mover of the motion.

Madam Speaker, there is a day of judgment and on that day, God is going to ask us questions. Among the questions that will be asked to the Speaker, there will be, “Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, you were the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda; what did you do when you were the Speaker?”

“I constructed the parking – more than five floors down. I managed to put up one structure that the British left behind. I hosted a number of conferences and among them was CPC. I constructed the new Chamber.” 

God will then say, “Kadaga, go on the right hand of the Father.” (Laughter)

Another Member will be asked, “You gentleman, when this person brought this conference, how did you utilise that conference?” He will say, “For us we were there. We saw the lady bringing many people but that was the end.” God will then say, “Go to hell.”

Therefore, when the Speaker brings in such conferences, it is incumbent upon you in Government to utilise those conferences.  What are those economic advantages that you are supposed to tap into as Government?

The last CPC in Uganda was in 1967 when I was not yet born – I was born two years later. The Pope came in 1969 and after he had came, the Catholics constructed Namugongo Martyrs’ Shrine and up to now, Catholics flock Namugongo every year. 

When Amin hosted the Organisation of African Union Summit in 1975, he constructed the Conference Centre, which is now called Serena. As primary school teachers – I always emphasise that point – these are some of the things we teach children. 

I have been hearing Members here saying the conference has not yet been publicised. What are you doing as a Member of Parliament if they have not done so? You go to Kalungu West; I have already told them that I will not be there next week because Madam Speaker is bringing many people from the Commonwealth here and everybody there is saying, “CPC, CPC, CPC; Ssewungu will not be in the constituency for the whole week.” (Laughter)

I have played my role of advertising the conference and that is what you are supposed to do. When you come on the Floor of this Parliament and expect the Speaker to put banners everywhere - She has played her role. You are a member of a commonwealth Parliament and that is why the honourable member has brought a motion – and we should praise him because he came ahead of us.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much but there is one issue I would like to complain about. Whenever we have such conferences, we should have something to remember. When CHOGM was here, Salama Road was made the CHOGM Road and everybody was saying, “This is going to be the CHOGM Road.” If you drive along Salama Road now, you will not enjoy what is around there.

We have our monument behind here – okay there is construction going on – but do we take care of it? 

Madam Speaker, I pray that after this conference, you help us get something that this conference will be remembered for. You talked about traffic. Do we have an official day during that function when our children in schools will be made aware? How do they become aware? We should say, “On such and such a day, schools are not going to open so that they can follow the conference.” 

That is what happens in other countries so that these children can follow and learn. When they go to school and they are asked about what function took place on a particular date, they would be able to answer in full. Otherwise, without educating our children, they will not be able to know.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for bringing such conferences to this country. The honourable member was complaining that we in the Opposition should not wear red or demonstrate – he was trying to alert us, which is not fair. When a motion is bipartisan in this House, you are not supposed to bring in political divisions. 

My interest is in the commonwealth and this country. Sometimes, we fight because of other issues that we are looking at but you cannot say: “Ssewungu, do not go to…” The Speaker is here commanding the CPC and hon. Ssewungu is supposed to be following her. Even if I get a problem, the first person I refer my problems to is the Speaker. Actually, before I tell my problem to my mother, I have to first inform the Speaker about it because she is in charge of my life as the Speaker of this Parliament.

I pray that Members use this weekend to go to their constituencies to inform their voters about the benefits of CPC. You can use the local language to sensitise them about CPC. Otherwise, there is no way you can make CPC a good conference other than Members participating in selling it. I rest my case, Madam Speaker.
5.32
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also add my voice to thank the movers of this very important motion and to express my support.

It is 52 years when we lasted hosted CPC. Like hon. SSewungu said, some of us were not yet born. I am privileged that we are hosting CPC again when I am a member of Parliament. I am, indeed, very privileged for that. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

As we debate and struggle to bring this conference to Uganda, one thing that has attracted me is: when you are debating out there, you are not ashamed to talk about the things that are core to Ugandans and Africans. 
Madam Speaker, you have always called a spade a spade and because of that, you have earned a lot of respect. They are coming to see our cultures and values. When the next CPC takes place in another country, they will see it from that point.

I remember when you gave us an opportunity to move a motion to welcome the Symposium of Episcopal Conferences of Africa and Madagascar (SECAM), one of the feedbacks that I did not give you is that that motion changed the belief they had had about Uganda because of what happened here in the past. They said they were very grateful because they had been to other countries but had never received such a warm welcome. I think this goes back to you who leads and chairs this House. Thank you very much for always being there for us and championing the cause for keeping the candle lighting.

Like other Members have said, this is a nonpartisan debate. Some of us have travelled. I remember several times, we have been going to Rome meeting with other legislators from around the world. However, when it comes to the time for the African Mass, as Ugandans, we stand out distinctively; we are different. We dress in our yellow Gomesi because that is the Vatican colour. Some people said “You are in the Opposition, why should you put on yellow.” I said, “This is a Vatican colour and this is Ugandan attire.” This is something that should always help us.

Madam Speaker, thank you very much. You have been cooking. The smoke has been burning you and your eyes have been tearing. You have been in the kitchen but I can assure you the food now smells good and the aroma is everywhere. I have just come back from my private trip but I can assure you that people know that Uganda is hosting CPC.

I was on a plane with a very old couple. They said “Since you are from Uganda, can you tell us the good things we can come and see?” I said “We have the mountain gorillas, the Source of the Nile, the Murchison Falls.” She said, “I think we need to come to Uganda.” They are a very old couple. I am praying for them to come to Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I also think that these are things we should promote irrespective of where we come from. When CPC ends - all of us travel a lot and on the planes, we meet different people and discuss with many of them. I think all of us should make it a point to at least attract one or two tourists a year. If we do this, we will make this country better to live in. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker and congratulations. I wish you the best and may the aroma continue to smell well. 

5.37
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I would like to also join colleagues to thank the movers of the motion and congratulate you, our able leader, for the achievement that we have got for Uganda to host this CPC.

For many who might be distant, they may not understand that there is a process we go through to bid and lobby to host some of these meetings. At that point, you need clear headed leadership, focused and experienced to win a favour for your country. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to thank you and your voters who see value in you for bringing you to the House. We wish you a good life so that you may live to contribute more to the better being of this country.

In the same line, I would like to thank and congratulate His Excellency, the President and the leadership of the NRM because it is the atmosphere within which we live that also adds value to the security and safety of those who are coming that beefs up our bid for lobbying that we were able to succeed in hosting these meetings.

Of course, there are other meetings that you have talked about today that will be coming. However, CPC is massive because it brings many people to this country and so, it will have an economic impact on those Ugandans who are prepared to reap something out of it. It will also have political and other effects. 

Regarding the issue of tourism, the people of Kitagwenda have asked me to request you to – we know you will be able to talk during this meeting. Recently, Uganda Tourism Board visited Kitagwenda at the point where they have constructed a dam. There is a very special shrub that is similar to a palm called the sycard. It is a very special and beautiful shrub. The history is that they are linked to the existence of the dinosaurs.

In the recent past, in the media, Kitagwenda has been talked about for being the only unique place hosting the sycard in Uganda and the world. This is a request from the people of Kitagwenda that when there is an opportunity, let the people know that this place is the host of sycard such that we do not miss on the tourism agenda of the rest of the country.

This shrub is special and it has been newly discovered. We thank the Uganda Tourism Board for focusing on promoting these shrubs. It will be an added advantage to us that they are further promoted so that we attract more tourists to Kitagwenda. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

 5.40
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to second the motion. Before that, I would like to thank and congratulate you, Madam Speaker for the thanksgiving service, which we had today early morning. It was a blessing to this House.

Madam Speaker, marketing a country has never been easy. Some of us who enjoy Premier League see very senior football teams like Arsenal and Manchester United having a tag with the words “visit to Rwanda.” That shows how hard marketing a country is.

Madam Speaker, what you have done is cheaper because Government does not inject in much. I asked how much Arsenal took to have that tag “visit Rwanda” and I was told it was billions of money a year. Therefore, thank you for marketing our country because now, we are changing from the bad image where they used to know Uganda about only Idi Amin.

I thank all colleagues for supporting the motion and I am sure we shall attract many conferences in the near future. We support your leadership during this conference and we are all winners. Thank you for giving me this opportunity.

5.42
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the President of Uganda, His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni for bringing this entire peaceful atmosphere that we are all enjoying. At one time, I left Uganda on fire and stayed in China for some time. However, when I looked back, I could see dust rising up in the atmosphere of Uganda. The entire world paid attention to Uganda and wondered what was happening.

At that time, the President was like holding a fighting bull, which was raising too much dust. We could hear about HIV/AIDS in Uganda, Kibwetere had killed very many people and Amin - 

Whenever anybody asked us where we came from, we would shy away and tell them to guess but when thy asked, “from South Africa” we lied to people. After sometime, when things cooled, we became very proud of our country. When we were asked where we came from, we would confidently answer that we were from Uganda. After some time, when things cooled down and the atmosphere became good, women were promoted in Government. We had a woman Vice President, in the military and the whole world paid attention. 

In China, I heard about hon. Rebecca Kadaga; they were asking me about this woman and why she was very famous. Imagine 1.5 billion people knew about this woman from Uganda. 

The Indians, Nigerians in millions were looking at Uganda. Why is it that she is a woman Speaker? In Chinese, they used to talk about a very famous smart woman coming from Uganda? Today, I am sitting near her and I am very proud. 

When Satan sees that you are about to do something great, he pulls his arsenal or military equipment from the armoury to clear you. Satan saw that she was becoming famous in the whole world and like in the Bible where all creatures were moving in front of God and Satan appeared as one of the creatures; God asked Satan, “have you seen one of my men who is very loyal to me” and that was Job. Satan answered, “You protect him and that is why he is very proud of you.”

God allowed him to do anything to him but not kill. Satan tortured Job in allways. Some people told him to deny God and die but Job refused. It is similar with hon. Kadaga.

God saw that hon. Kadaga was becoming famous all over the world and Satan asked God to torture her and God allowed. Satan tossed her up and down. We all prayed that she should not die and God listened to our prayers. She is alive and today she is here. I testify and I know that she will do great things tomorrow.

Uganda is known in the whole world - If you were young. one time Uganda was being given to the Israelites as their country but it was prevented by God. Again Jesus Christ who is in heaven was at one time a refugee in Egypt and drinking water coming from Namisindwa. River Nile goes up to Egypt. He remembers us. Moses was there floating on the River Nile from the waters of Uganda and so, religious leaders from all over the world are trying to search and know where Uganda is. 

Many people are trying to come to Uganda to know why Uganda is like this, because God has blessed Uganda. We are sitting on opportunities. It is high time we knew and discovered them so that the whole world can come and bring money in form of religious and historical tourism.

When Kibwetere killed people in Uganda, in China, something splashed out called Falun Gong which means those people who came to the Tiananmen Square and killed themselves hoping that they would go to heaven. At that time, Idro Philip was an ambassador; he was contacted by the Chinese to know how we stopped this cult in Uganda. We are very important people. If we nurture ourselves very well, we can as well defeat other countries in this world. Do not joke around; this is a big blessing.

When hon. Kadaga fell sick, we all prayed. If we were to vote for her…(Member timed out.)

5.49
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Indeed, a lot has been said in appreciation of your effort towards CPC and especially attracting the conference back to Uganda. This is one of the greatest conferences that we have ever hosted in this country and it is good that you are at the centre of it. It is going to market Uganda and all of us in Uganda.

I would like to thank the mover of this motion who thought it very wise to bring it to Parliament. This motion intended to galvanise the participation of Members for the success of CPC.

It has given us chance to debate and exchange ideas that we have already heard from our comrades. It has also enlightened us to know more about the CPC.

Many things have come from China like my brother who just sat down said and all of us who spoke. Indeed, benchmarking, like we have all done is a necessary arrangement for Parliament and all leaders in the whole world.

The Baganda say “if your home does not host any visitors, then you must ask yourself whether you are on a right course.” You should have a home, which can attract people to visit and when they come, they come to see what happens in your home and compare it with what happens in their country.

When these great daughters and sons of the world converge here from the 54 commonwealth countries, it is a blessing for Uganda. It is indicative that wherever you go, you make friends and tangible impacts in the world. That is why they have picked interest to come and see where you are from. It is imperative for us to host them well. 

As you have heard, Uganda is the most hospitable country in the whole world. It is us, members of Parliament, who should fully participate in this conference. Some of us may not know how you want us to participate but we are ready to participate in all forms that you assign us to make sure the 53 countries feel at home. We are hospitable enough to make them feel at home. 

Benchmarking has attracted these people here. If you had not gone to them, maybe they would not have come here. Normally, I ask myself, when you go to benchmark, what do you attract home? You must have something that attracts others to your home. How do we benefit from those things you attract? Benchmarking must have impacts that benefit this country. 

Therefore, in memory of this great conference – I do not know what is prepared in the arrangement. I would request that there must be a monument at Parliament or somewhere in Uganda in memory of this great conference. We can involve everyone to plant trees and name them according to the participating countries. That would be in memory of this great conference. All those countries should be recognised in future by our children and grandchildren. They will be made to understand that from 22nd to 29th September 2019, Uganda hosted the CPC.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I must recognise your efforts and Members of Parliament who have been helpful in the preparations of this conference a success. Thank you very much.

5.54
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also take this opportunity to thank the mover of the motion. It is a very powerful motion.

In Romans 15: 29, if I am allowed to read verbatim, “I am sure that when I come unto you, I shall come in the fullness of the blessing of the gospel of Christ”. This is the Bible. 

Honestly speaking, I am convinced as a Member of Parliament that the visitors are coming with blessings. Like any other person, when you receive a visitor in your home, you will always be happy. Things will never remain the same. If you have been quarrelling with your wife, definitely, the day the visitor is coming to your home, you will stop quarrelling. Everybody will attest to me on that. If you have been a dirty person, you will look for a better clothe and put it on so that the visitors leave your home knowing that your home is good and well disciplined. 

Above all, I was trying to scan through the benefits of hosting the CPC. It talks about good governance and democracy. That is what we are yearning for. If you want to learn morals and ethics, sometimes, you just look at how somebody behaves and talks. When I had just come here, the first day, I was looking at how senior members of Parliament talk and their body language. I learned from them.

From the members who are coming, I am sure we are going to learn something new. Uganda will benefit a lot from them. Thank you for giving me this opportunity.

5.56
MR LAWRENCE MANGUSHO (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank hon. Amoru for moving the motion and I thank my colleagues who have supported it. I also support the motion. 

This motion has come at the right time when we are going to host that wonderful conference. I thank you for spearheading the institution of Parliament. I can assure you that the image of this Parliament has changed a lot during your time as the Speaker. 

A lot has been said but I would like to say that you are not only promoting the institution of Parliament but also, you are playing a big role in developing this country. There are attributes associated with you. 

I remember how you mobilised us to support the Cancer Institute. You have been participating for decades in the fight against Female Genital Mutilation, a very bad practice. I also know that we have just adopted our National Development Plan 3 (NDP3). One of the driving forces in the NDP3 is tourism promotion and one of the strategies to promote tourism is to encourage international meetings and conferences. This CPC is in line with that.

I am sure that after a successful CPC, Uganda will have changed a lot. We shall have attracted more tourists and promoted exports. When people from the rest of the commonwealth countries come here, they will see our organic products and the various tourism sites. They will also develop love for this country and the people. I am also sure our exports will grow by a certain percentage.

So, this conference is very timely. We pray to God to continue guiding you and keeping you safe so that this country can move ahead. 

I cannot forget the many social responsibilities you have provided our communities. That is why this Parliament has changed a lot. The way you host the Muslims on their day - all these programmes you have run, including your visit to our national football team when they were in Gabon, are really good. The number three person of this country going to visit the national team in a foreign country is very encouraging.  Therefore, I would like to join the rest of the Members to thank you.

6.00
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of the motion. I am in agreement with most of my colleagues’ contributions. In the same vein, I would like to thank you, as our leader in Parliament, for spearheading the invitation of the CPC. 

As you may recall, sometime in 2002, Uganda was paying $1.2 million to be advertised by the international media. Indeed, when CHOGM took place in 2007, the Government of Uganda came up with a nice policy. One of the issues at the time was that the accommodation facilities in Uganda were not enough. The Uganda Government came up with a nice policy to promote and waive all the taxes for hotels. Whoever wanted to put up a hotel would get tax-free raw materials, including furniture. That enabled Uganda host the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in 2007.

Therefore, I would like to thank the Uganda Government, its good leadership headed by His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, who has given an enabling environment to Uganda, which is now a darling to the entire Africa and the world at large. As you may recall, last year the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities earned Uganda $1.7 billion through tourism. That means that Uganda is moving ahead and all the efforts which were put in place to market Uganda are now bearing fruit.

Madam Speaker, I trust you, and that is why I call you the “Iron Lady”. With the CPC coming here, since Brexit is happening in Britain now, I request that you put our request forward that Uganda has got an abundant labour force which we can supply to Britain. Although they are sending away some, we can be very good people as we have always been. For a long time, Ugandans have been going to Britain and they have not committed any atrocities, and they are good people when it comes to work. Indeed, Uganda is almost disappointed with the Middle East where our labour force has been abused. Now we need to find alternatives.

Madam Speaker, in the same vein, I would like to request the Commonwealth, especially the British Government, to ease the visa requirements for Ugandans. Some Ugandans find it very difficult to go to Britain because of the visa requirements, which are complicated. This will again help Ugandans to replace those who are being expelled from Britain so that they can also take up those jobs which are there – according to information available.

Madam Speaker, my colleagues have spoken a lot about what they expect and indeed I am in agreement. However, I would like to thank you for this morning’s prayers where everybody was encouraged to love and appreciate God for what He has done for others and especially for you. That was a very good move; I hope it will be emulated and remembered that people have turned to praise God. We thank you for this arrangement, which took place this morning. I rest my case.

6.04
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank you very much for lobbying for the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference to come to Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the success of CPC depends on the planning. I have been observing right from the beginning that you have involved nearly all the Members of Parliament in various committees - entertainment, the women’s side, transport, name it; everybody is involved. That is why I am sure that this conference will be a success and everybody in the world will admire. It is because of the planning you have shown to us.

Madam Speaker, CPC happens once in a lifetime. If you are lucky like us, you will experience it but some people will never see it at again. Therefore, we must take advantage of this great event which has come to Uganda in our times. Let us sell our Uganda and see that all these delegates know something about Uganda. They should be able to go to different parts of Uganda like West Nile, Kisoro, Mbarara, and everywhere else, so that by the time they go back, they know that Uganda is the Pearl of Africa that we talk about. Let them know about out good food, our sweet bananas, pineapples and matooke so that by the time they go back, they will be able to export it. Therefore, we need to sell our Uganda as much as possible. 

I am happy to see that the theme is about the environment and participation of the all the marginalised groups. We have talked about people with disability; they are even going to exhibit crafts and we have been involved in making sure that people with disability are there. I am sure some delegates are people with disability – the physically handicapped, the blind and the deaf - and we have seen that the environment will be conducive for them. I thank you for that.

The women are also planning to come up with their papers to be presented at the CPC. The people with disability should also come up so that everybody is covered. We hope problems that are affecting us like the environment, marginalisation, and human rights will be addressed at the CPC meetings. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. I actually admire you. We are very proud of you as a woman. I wish all the leaders would be women; isn’t it? We would do wonders because the sky is the limit. Therefore, I pray to God to bless you as you continue to lead our Parliament and the people of Uganda. Thank you very much for bringing CPC to Uganda. Thank you.

6.08
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have sat here and listened in to many of my colleagues. Almost every Member has expressed appreciation of your leadership style. My daughter, hon. Karungi, like some other colleagues, said that she was happy that you are securing this Parliament. However, some of us started with you in the years of the Constituent Assembly (CA) and the National Resistance Council (NRC) up to today. I have sat here as one of those who can testify that indeed God had something in mind the day your parents gave birth to you. I would like to thank God and your parents.

I would like to thank Members of the Tenth Parliament. I had a chance, together with Madam Speaker, to serve under the Movement system. We are now here and she is steering this House under a multiparty system. I have been thinking - the reason I insisted on saying something was for institution memory - the parties under their alliance have failed to identify leadership and NRM is not spared too. The Word of God in the Bible says, “They have eyes but they do not see; they have ears but they do not hear.” I have patiently sat here waiting to see the time that you, Madam Speaker, one day will take up management of this county, and I am being very sincere. I know how you have walked the terrains and we appreciate your leadership style. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

If the Hansard were to collect all the appreciation, how many Ugandans, especially those in leadership, will be ready to or will have emulated your leadership style? You are very calm, incorruptible and unselfish. You do all it takes to work, not to be appreciated but to see that this country moves a notch up.

I am so touched, especially because you are a Speaker who cuts across party lines and a unifying factor where others have failed. You have managed to unify the different political ideologies by steering this Parliament as a representative of the people. Everyone out there talks about you. It is not only in this country but also on the African continent. 

When you get up during the United Nations Conventions, everybody says, “Wow!”, and during the Pan African Speakers’ Conference. You have mentored and you are a role model not only to the women but the entire leadership on the African Continent; we are happy about that.

Lastly, we should be praying that God gives you good health. If the Christians wait to see when Jesu comes back, I will resist and wait here to see you achieve what I wish you to achieve - uniting this country. I believe that dreamers are achievers and achievers are dreamers. Uniting the country - I am saying it, looking towards it and working hard for it, and I will stay here to ensure that that time comes.  

When I was nominated to be Gender Ambassador to the Pan African Parliament (PAP) during your presence, I felt that my curriculum vitae had reached the highest. However, when I returned, I said that I still had a mission to accomplish, and that is to see you as my President, and the time is not far. Let us just pray for your good health. 

For all the things you have done, it is God who knows your destiny. It is He who is protecting you. You have kept the name of the girl-child high. Nowhere will they find that you have dented their name. Thank you. We look forward and we hope you continue knowing that you have the majje behind you - the army. There are those you have mentored and have joined you. I am happy to note that we, and even the Opposition, agree with you when it comes to individualism. Therefore, when it comes for the time of the next President, we shall be at individualism.

Madam Speaker, I wish you good health and all the best. Everyone counts on you and I wish to say that you have made both Uganda and Ugandans proud. They pray for you.

6.16
Ms naome kibaaju (NRM, Sheema County North, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support your effort towards making Uganda and the women of Uganda shine, and for bringing this conference to this country.

For the last nine months, I have sat in this back seat and observed you. I have seen how you conduct this House and I have nothing but admiration for you. I see some of us moving up and down but you sit in that seat to balance this House and conduct the most difficult people, but you still maintain your composure. I thank you. I join others in recognising that without you, this conference could not have come to Uganda. 

Having said that, I would like to also add to what my colleagues said about our cleanliness. For fear of repeating myself, I will also emphasise cleanliness on the road going to the conference venue at Munyonyo. That is the area where people sell commodities in front of their shops. They bring charcoal and a lot of banana peelings, gonja and cassava. 

I would like to appeal – I do not know whether we can go through the local governments to see to it that these trading centres are cleaned up before the conference. I touch a very sensitive subject here - the issue of boda bodas. I do not know whether they will also be heading to Munyonyo while taking people. You know how they behave. I hope that will not happen during this conference. 

The other issue is about us, the Members of Parliament. I have been asking my colleagues what our role will be during this conference. I have been told that some of us will be delegates but I do not know what others will be. As a new entrant to this House, I would love to know and also participate in the conference. I had a match in my constituency but I cancelled it because of the conference. They have been asking what I will be doing. I do not know, but I hope to participate fully in this conference.

Lastly, I would like to talk about something else, which has escaped my mind, but I would like to thank you once again. I would like to recall the words of the preacher this morning; I think it was Bishop Mulema who said that God saved you for a purpose. There is a purpose for you. We shall pray for you.

What I had forgotten was to ask you to take it easy sometimes. I know you do too much work. We want you alive. We want you to be here for us because you have demonstrated your capabilities. We thank you.

6.19
Ms janepher mbabazi (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was supposed to be seconding this motion but I was away for the same assignment, to prepare for the people we are discussing.

Madam Speaker, I first of all congratulate you for this achievement and for your good leadership. The thrust of my secondment of this motion is on the dividends that will accrue to Uganda as a country from hosting the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference. The 64th CPC will bring together over 1,000 guests from across the 53 countries of the Commonwealth. This will position us in a competitive advantage as compared to our neighbouring countries.

Uganda, the Pearl of Africa, will be presented with a priceless opportunity of networking, interactions and immense information and knowledge exchange. Members and staff of Parliament will have an opportunity to share best practices, not only limited to their day-to-day work but on a broad range of thematic areas that the conference will tackle like youth employment, the plight of people with disability, transparency, accountability and good governance in general.

The thousands of guests that the 64th CPC will usher into Uganda will be witnesses of the Pearl of Africa and its natural endowment, notably the lovely equatorial climate, her natural diversity, scenic beauty and wonderful water bodies such as Lake Victoria and River Nile, and the beautiful people of Uganda. This will go a long way in rebuking the sometimes negative publicity that Africa as a continent is disparaged with.

The 64th CPC, drawing delegates from the 53 member states of the Commonwealth, spanning five continents, will present a melting pot of diversity. Coupled with our own diversity as Uganda, it will be an opportunity to appreciate diversity and spur co-existence. At a time when some parts of Africa are grappling with xenophobia, this co-existence will provide much needed positivity for unity across the Commonwealth.

Madam Speaker, hosting the 64th CPC will come with immense economic dividends. Each of these over 1,000 visitors will spend and this will translate into foreign exchange inflows. In addition, they will have an opportunity to buy locally made commodities, hence according an additional market to our local produce. The hospitality sector will also benefit from increased hotel bookings, referrals for tourism and a one-stop marketing opportunity. 

Some of the delegates will surely return to Uganda on tourism excursions. The ultimate hosting of the 64th CPC will enable concentration of international focus on the Pearl of Africa and with it Uganda’s standing in the international community of nations will be grossly enhanced. 

When history is finally written, the 64th CPC will stand out as a successful gathering of Commonwealth parliamentarians and one whose dividends will trickle down to various segments of the Ugandan society. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

6.24
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in congratulating you for realising this achievement that has taken Uganda years to realise, since 1967.

Madam Speaker, every colleague has pointed out your able and focused leadership and your love for this country. I have just some small information: the positions that we have in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) Africa Region are 100 per cent because of you. It is only Uganda that has the position of the Vice-Chairperson, Women, Africa and the Vice-Treasurer who is still the acting treasurer, holding two positions –(Interjection)– the other one is international. The General was reminding me about your position. That is an international position and above our level.

Madam Speaker, we were supposed to go to Ghana for the Legislators’ Conference. However, because the Members of Parliament of Uganda did not attend, it became a bore. They communicated to the Clerk that they missed the MPs from Uganda, so they did not enjoy the conference. Whenever we go for international conferences, people expect a lot from the Ugandan MPs. The first question they will ask you is, “How is Madam Kadaga?” 

Hon. Hanifa Kawooya talked about the high-powered political forum that is always held in New York. When we were at that forum last year, they knew that Uganda was hosting CPC and everybody said that next year they will be in Uganda and they asked how Madam Kadaga was. During these African conferences that we have been going for, the excitement that people have to come to Uganda is high; Uganda is seen as the second home of CPA - apart from United Kingdom.

When you talk about Uganda, they look at Uganda as the second home of CPA and their expectations are very high. That is why colleagues were urging all of us to make sure we exhibit what they expect from us. Everybody is expecting either heaven in Uganda or something similar. Madam Speaker, we are very sure and confident that we are going to host our visitors and give them the treat that they always long to see.

Somebody talked about Uganda’s history. When they talk about River Nile, guerrillas and the Pearl of Africa, everybody wishes to come to Africa and step on the soils of the Pearl of Africa. Madam Speaker, we are very happy and grateful to God because He has enabled you see all these conferences materialise. One preacher in the morning said that God was just with us for this conference. If He had not been with us, possibly we would not host it.

Madam Speaker, we are very happy that at the time when you have been the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, you have delivered to the expectations of Ugandans. Everybody has praised you and made statements - a lot has been said and we cannot look for better words to say what we feel towards you and what we feel for what you have put before us and Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, that is why one of the colleagues, instead of calling you “Madam Speaker”, she said “Madam Uganda” and rightly so, because you have held the Ugandan flag high. You are Madam Uganda. We only pray that you continue serving us, delivering whatever is right for Uganda, for the MPs and for the good of all of us, to make sure we deliver Uganda to where God wishes Uganda to be. Thank you.

6.29
BRIG. FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker or Madam Uganda as they have said. I also rise to add my thanks to the movers and the seconders of this motion, which is indeed timely.

I want to thank God, Madam Speaker. As different people have referred to the Bible, I will also make reference to it. The Bible says that it is not by our might, it is not by our strength, it is not by our wisdom, it is not by our best plans or our chariots that we get victory. Therefore, Madam Speaker, all that has been said about you is not by your strength, plan or wisdom but by God’s grace. That is what I want to thank God for.

Madam Speaker, I also want to add my voice to the people that have appreciated you. Personally, I will not say I have worked long with you. However, for the little time that I have spent with you, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for being candid and truthful when you are uttering issues that concern Ugandans, Africans and the people, especially the values we cherish around the world - Uganda in particular.   

Madam Speaker, you have done this on several occasions but I will talk about one occasion I witnessed recently, while we were in Zanzibar. It is your response to South Africans on the issue of xenophobia that we have recently witnessed. Most of the Members that were attending the conference feared to actually address the South Africans on what they were doing. It is only the Speaker from Uganda who stood up and addressed the issue the way it was, not buttering it but stating what exactly it was. She even went further and told the South Africans about their behaviour. She mentioned how they treat us when we go to apply for South African visas. 

That is the Madam Speaker we are talking about. She will stand up and say it as it is. I am sure this is one of the reasons that have earned her a lot of respect. She will say the things the way they are to the admiration of the rest. She will set the pace and be an example to the rest of her colleagues. 

I think Members of Parliament have seen a lot of buses and resources because of this conference. This conference started with us as Members of Parliament, so we have earned some extra resources - I have seen a lot of buses – and we would like to thank you for that, Madam Speaker. 

Also, in a different way, on behalf of myself, the Members, security forces, the Commander in Chief, my Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) and my leadership in the UPDF, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sure, and all of you will agree with me, that without their commitment – I know they are doing what they are supposed to do, but they do it with an extra effort and commitment to serve this country and to make sure that the whole country is safe. (Applause)

I know the conditions and I am sure all of you are aware of the conditions under which security forces operate, especially the UPDF when it is in Garamba and Somalia. It is in the interest of the country and all of us to be secure and safe. Therefore, this conference you are talking about perhaps would not have been hosted here if we were not 100 per cent sure that we would be able to guarantee their security and safety. 

Madam Speaker, I also pray for a day when someone will come up and move a motion to appreciate these unsung heroes of Uganda. All the Members have confirmed that the importance of this conference cannot be over emphasised. It is a forum where countries are reminded to put their houses in order. We are talking about issues of good governance, democracy, rule of law, ICT, youth unemployment, terrorism, cyber-attacks and climate change. 

Madam Speaker, out of these issues, I know recommendations come out which have always guided the different nations. Therefore, having all these countries gathered here and talking about all these issues is no mean achievement for you, Madam Speaker, for the Government of Uganda and for us, Parliament, which is hosting this conference. 

In good faith, I would like to refer to the point one Member gave. She said that when we were growing up - and I think this happened to all of us - visitors would come and you would pray because if you were going to get some kiboko, you know that it would be put off for a few hours. It would also take us, the parents, to tell the children to behave when the visitors were around so that they do not go away with a bad picture. Therefore, this is a call to all of us; as we pray that nothing happens, it should not be one sided. Let it be incumbent on all of us to talk to each other and our constituents to behave ourselves so that we do not attract those bad incidents, which we may all not want to witness. 

What should we remain with after this conference has ended? Should it just come and go? Madam Speaker, I request, if the Government allows or if conditions allow, that we have an ICT centre dedicated to the youth where they can access free Wi-Fi. We are talking about ICT use against the expensive nature of data usage, which is hindering most of our youth from using social media or internet because of data. 

Therefore, I request that, as a commemoration of this, the Government puts up an ICT centre where the youth can go with free data and Wi-Fi, share information and address issues of youth unemployment. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have some other business on the Order Paper and 37 Members have contributed, so let us have the last three.

6.38
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am happy that this conference is taking place in Uganda because I will now attend it for the first time. I want to be very clear here. With all this momentum, I am happy that Uganda is hosting it. All this is attributed to your leadership, Madam Speaker.

We all know the benefits of this conference. When you talk about trade, you cannot develop without partnering and working with other people. Looking at the association of 54 countries that are going to be represented here, it means we shall be able to attract a range of investors in one way or another, who will invest in this country. 

I am sure there will be increased productivity and job creation. That is why I would like to ask the ministers in charge of trade and tourism to take advantage of this conference. The conference is creating an opportunity for this country. As we all know, there is great unemployment in this country. At the same time, you know that in terms of ICT consumption, we are still low. 

I am sure since this conference theme is about adoption and engagement, we shall be able to engage the various meetings and have some of these things addressed. At the end of the day, when the delegates go back, as a country we will be able to benefit from their expertise. There are so many experts who will be coming to this country. There will be so many Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs), leaders of different calibres who are going to be in this country. I am sure that those people are going to help us.

The other thing that I would like to be specific about is that this country is the only tourism destination that I am aware of, because everything that we want is in this country. If we develop our tourism sector properly, I am sure we will be able to attract many visitors.

Madam Speaker, somebody said earlier on that talking about public relations for a country is very difficult; in 2005, Uganda paid CNN Shs 2 billion through the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, for a period of six months only. However, with this opportunity, it will not cost us much, like it did in 2005. (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I take advantage of sitting in the front bench today and I would like to give my colleague information. 

As you talk about the opportunities in investment, many of our colleagues are going to get involved in the preparations and there will be a lot of networking. As individuals, what we need most is that networking. Let us take advantage of that networking opportunity and we shall fly. That is the information that I wanted to give you. (Laughter)

MR ABALA: I would like to thank my brother from Kumi Municipality for that information. He is a man who enjoys flying, unlike me who enjoys walking. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, we are going to have different ranges of delegates. I am very sure that issues to do with freedom, stability, democracy and accountability will be emphasised in this conference. That is why I am appealing to my colleagues and the entire country to support the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference, which is going to be more of a benefit than a liability in this country. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 

6.43
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to make it clear and put it on record that your performance is excellent. However, the challenge that we have is that we do not walk the talk. When the sole candidature issue was being introduced, for example, even when we knew that the Rt Hon. Speaker was very good, some of our Members are the very ones who run to sign on the sole candidature forms. I ask myself, “why?” (Applause) We know that we have the best and we should run to where we know that we have the best. Why shouldn’t we walk the talk? 

On a number of occasions, I have asked this question on this Floor. The Rt Hon. Kadaga is a good leader, whether on the side of the Opposition or NRM. However, the challenge that we have is that people do not want to leave space for others. They want to constantly be there and they do not want to give way. In 1995, for example, Uganda made one of the best laws - the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda - where at least two fundamental things were appreciated across the country: term limit and age limit. However, before these could be implemented, they were removed. Now, how will we get the best for ourselves? I am trying to build a genesis showing where we have come from – (Interruption)

MR BURUNDO: Madam Speaker, since we started this discussion in the afternoon, we have been trying very much to see that we rehearse how best we are going to receive our visitors. I am surprised that as we continue rehearsing how best we are going to receive our visitors - (Interjection) - I am going to the point of order; hon. Nambeshe, please, do not point at me. Madam Speaker, please protect me.

THE SPEAKER: Allow the honourable member to speak.

MR BURUNDO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for a senior honourable member to derail us from the motion we are discussing and begin discussing age limit issues, which are not part of what we are discussing?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to appeal to all the Members to focus on the motion so that we do not get excited.  

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to reflect on what Uganda was in 1967. By 1967, Uganda was at some level in terms of the assets that Government had. I would like to focus on Uganda Hotels. 

Many of our colleagues have talked about tourism and visitors coming. As a country, Uganda would be proudly hosting these visitors in our own hotels but as I speak now, the money will go somewhere else. Whenever activities like this would happen maybe in Kasese, they would use Margherita Hotel because it was a Government entity. I would like to inform you that up to now, Margherita Hotel is one of the best hotels. If the hotels had not been sold, we would be at another level and we would host these visitors in our own hotels. We would be very happy because it would bring income to the Government.

Madam Speaker, I have been here and I have seen –(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At the time the Government decided to privatise all these hotels, Ugandans had become very corrupt. These hotels were not managed very well. Therefore, the Government decided to put the responsibility in the hands of Ugandans who could manage to look after them very well. That time, the hotels were not as many and as good as they are now. 

Is the honourable member in order to mislead us by telling us lies when we are very aware that the hotels today are being managed by our people and they are also benefiting, and the money that time was being eaten by the civil servants? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, CPC has identified several hotels in the country and many of them are operated by Ugandans. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The basis of my argument is that you find that every week, we are processing a loan on this Floor. The reason for processing those is we want Government to have the necessary resources to run activities. If this money would come directly to Government, it would possibly lessen the number of times we borrow to finance Government activities. 

Finally, I would like to put it –(interruption)

MS BBUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that Government is borrowing money but most of it is for infrastructure development. The Government of Uganda, in as far as the running costs are concerned, is self-reliant. It finances 100 per cent of the recurrent budget and 20 per cent of the development budget. Is hon. Nzoghu in order to make the statement he has made? 

THE SPEAKER: I think the honourable member implied that if the money was invested by the state, we would get better benefits. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I think the one who created you knows why he created you. (Laughter)

Finally, I would like to appeal to your office and seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker, as a representative of the people from Kasese. The people of Kasese have a very serious connection and friendship with Britain because one of the persons – hon. Muruli Mukasa knows this very well - who nurtured the institution of Obusinga Bwa Rwenzururu was Tom Stacey, who happens to be a Briton. 

In that regard, the people of Kasese are asking that you direct – You can also use your power as you did when you sent the parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and gave them the necessary facilitation. The people of Kasese appreciated the work that was done by that committee because they got the truth on the ground about what had transpired in 2016, although, unfortunately, the report has never been presented on the Floor of this House. More than 200 people of Kasese, including His Majesty, are still incarcerated. It is now more than two years. 

Therefore, the people of Kasese would like to seek your indulgence through their representatives. It would be fair and in the interest of democracy and good governance to have a process that is clear, transparent and open for the people of Kasese to receive justice, especially those ones who are in prison. That is the critical prayer from the people of Kasese. I know your capacity and what you can do. We are convinced as the people of Rwenzori that you can help us in this crisis. Thank you. 

6.55
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the movers and seconders of this motion for bringing it at this particular time when we are at the tail end of the preparations to host this very important conference, which is very historic. 

For those of us who are in the Tenth Parliament and are going to participate in this conference, in many ways we are grateful that it is happening at a time when we are Members of Parliament. Many times, this conference has been taking place elsewhere and it is not easy for Parliament to facilitate all the Members to go and participate. Now, we have an opportunity to be part of this history. 

We would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for the leadership that you have offered this Parliament to host this conference. It is not the first time. In the Ninth Parliament, you led this country and Parliament in hosting the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) conference and it has remained in history - the benefits are still visible. 

Madam Speaker, the CPC comes back here after 52 years. The last time it was in Uganda, I was not yet born, but I am happy to note that the infrastructural benefits that the 1967 conference brought are still visible. Today, as Parliament, we have state-of-the-art vehicles, buses, which I happened to inspect and also sit in before they arrived here. These are some of the things that we will pride in as Parliament. Previously, Government has been hiring facilities to host conferences of this nature. However, today, this conference is going to leave behind a number of vehicles that will be used to host visitors and will be used by this Parliament to reach various parts of the country in executing their duties and lessening the burden and fatigue of doing work. 

A conference like this is very important to the country in as far as evaluating where we stand is concerned. This is because when you look at the issues that will be discussed at this conference, you will notice that we have live examples in terms of democracy and good governance. We have our own shortfalls but it is an opportunity for us to reflect on the health of democracy and governance in this country. 

Yes, we have good things that have happened, but we also have bad ones that we need to think about. I am sure there are member countries among the 53 from whom we can learn good lessons. Therefore, it is important for those of us in Government to look at those areas where we have fallen short and make sure we lay a good foundation for the future. 

As a representative of people of Ayivu County from Arua and West Nile, the issue of refugees is on the agenda and we would like you to ensure that it is amplified. I mention the issue of refugees on two fronts. One is about people running away from countries which are becoming hostile to their own citizens; therefore, there is need for us to call for dialogue and peaceful coexistence across the globe. 

When our neighbours, South Sudan, got their independence, we saw the entire country doing business with South Sudan. When you go to Arua, you can see the benefits of the short spell of peace after South Sudan attained independence. Therefore, it would be good for us to have a peaceful neighbour in South Sudan with which we can do business and flourish as citizens and member states of the East African Community.

Madam Speaker, the burden of refugees is being borne by West Nile alone. If you go to West Nile and see the refugee hosting communities, you will see that the environment has been depleted, yet we see very little being done by member states. As the Commonwealth, this is something that should be well debated so that we can also be reciprocated in terms of restoring the environment. The burden of hosting refugees is huge and we must share the burden that hosting refugees poses to this country.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, tourism is one of the least exploited potentials in this country. We have an opportunity for the world torch to focus on Uganda. This one week is enough for us to do marketing. I, therefore, call upon all the media houses in this country to focus on showing to the world the potential that this country has in as far as tourism is concerned. Reports have indicated that Uganda is one of the happiest countries. Secondly, Uganda is one of the countries that are very hospitable. These are opportunities that we need to take up to showcase what we have so that Uganda becomes a world destination in as far as tourism is concerned. 

We have travelled to various parts of some of these member states and we have done what they call “sightseeing” – seeing statues and streets - but here we have live creations of nature. You can go to the west, north or the east and see this nature. We have the source of the longest river in the world. Therefore, we have enormous opportunities that we can showcase during this period of the CPC.

I appeal to each and every citizen of this country to use this opportunity to showcase Uganda by ensuring that we show the happiness and hospitality that people have been talking about. We have few challenges here and there with boda bodas and safety on the road but this is the time for every citizen to play a role in ensuring that our visitors have a comfortable stay and return home safely. 

I thank you once again, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate you and this Parliament upon hosting the 64th CPC. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, over 37 Members have contributed to this motion. We need to move to the other items on the Order Paper. I would like to put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do adopt the motion as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to give some clarifications on some issues. One, Members were asking how the Members of Parliament will participate. All Members are invited to the opening ceremony on the 26th of September. Secondly, all Members are invited to the official dinner hosted by the Speaker at the South Wing Car Park here. There will also be a farewell dinner at the end of the meeting. 

The women Members of Parliament will be invited to the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians (CWP) meeting, chaired by hon. Syda Bbumba. Four other Members will participate as delegates because each Parliament is entitled to send four but we shall have five because I am the president. For countries with provincial branches and states such as Nigeria and South Africa, the country sends four delegates while the state sends two delegates. We cannot swap them because we all need to have equal numbers. What I have done is to appoint many observers who can speak but cannot vote. Therefore, a number of Members are going in as observers and those who have been nominated will get their letters.

Concerning the garbage, I had a discussion with Engineer Kitaka, the Acting Executive Director of Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) on Monday and he undertook to do something to clean up the city and relocate the boda bodas, especially those near the venue. I just need to check whether he has actually done it – Has he started? Okay. I wish he could continue so that we eradicate those sore points 

In Ethiopia, when they have a big conference, you never see the beggars but they allow them to come back after the conference. They discuss with them and say, “You know, we have got guests; first go away.” They agree and then these people move away and come back after the meeting. That is how they do it in Ethiopia.

On tree planting, I would like to thank the Members. These are very important things. We had not exactly thought about it but I think we need to find space where we shall have a forest for the delegates or at least the heads of delegations. If you go to Seychelles, I have a tree there with my name on it. It was planted about seven years ago. I went back recently and found that it had grown and my name is still there. We could also do that and find a place for maybe the heads of delegation to plant trees, and that will be a lasting memory of their being in this country. However, I do not dismiss the proposal by Members that there should be something more distinct to show that we hosted the CPC in this country.

Hon. Agaba talked about cycads. There is a cycad here; as you walk down to the main gate, if you look to the right, there is a plant which is enclosed in black pipes. That is a cycad tree planted by the Queen during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM). A sample of that is here and we can also market the ones of Kitagwenda, which I have been told are now a world wonder. 

On taking these people out of the city, we had discussed with them and asked that some of them come early before the conference so that they tour, or they stay a little bit longer after the conference so that they can go to the other parts of the country. We are really doing our best.

Hon. Nabulindo was saying that they did not get information about the possibility of marketing. I have been on radio programmes many times. Hon. Amoru has also been there and many honourable members have been speaking. We have created markets. We shall have a market here at Serena and one market at Munyonyo where our people can market their things. Over 160 people have already applied and they are coming here to sell their things. That is for them so that they also earn.

A Member asked where we are going for excursions. We are going to the Equator, Maya, Namugongo, Kagulu, Source of the Nile and all those other places. We are encouraging people there to come with their things so that they can sell. That will be an opportunity for them to also get money directly. I am really disturbed that the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is not here. 

Honourable members, it is only when you are organising a conference that you realise what we do not have. During the IPU conference, we realised no company had enough cars. There is no fleet of similar cars in this town. We had to go to Nairobi to hire from the National Youth Service of Kenya so that they could look uniform. No one in this country has a fleet of that nature. 

As we have been organizing this conference, we have discovered the issue of sanitation. Honourable members, there is no sanitation provision in places like the Equator and the Source of the Nile. I actually thought the minister would take advantage and say “Let us move in”. The situation is terrible. We are really scratching our heads. We are going to have to hire mobile toilets yet this is something we can invest in. It is just a simple thing which we are not doing. 
  
Honourable members, there are enough toilets at - Are you talking about the shades? The shades are to address the big numbers. The team has been there for a dry-run. Have you gone for the dry-run? Update us, hon. Aogon. 
 
MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, we have just returned from Entebbe. Like you said, this conference has brought a lot of advantages to us. It has helped us wake up from our sleep.

Even at the airport - she is talking about the entrance - there is a small shade where you exit the Very Important Persons (VIP) lounge and then go to board. It was a small shade but they have now expanded it. Those are some of the improvements. Many things have happened. When you enter the airport, at the first security point you can see that something is happening in Uganda, and I think we are moving.

At the Equator, the issues of toilets came up. We need to have better toilets. This conference has exposed what has been hidden. There is improvement at Kagulu Hills. In Jinja, they have worked on the road from the municipal up to the Source of the Nile, to make sure that we are ready. 

Madam Speaker, these things start from home and come to the national level. I have seen people improve their homes when they are about to receive visitors. When you have a marriage ceremony -  

THE SPEAKER: When they are about to have kwanjula, that is when they paint.

MR AOGON: Yes, that is when they paint. There is even the issue of the street children. Yesterday, we had a meeting and we were talking about security lights, which have been off and vandalised. Kampala Capital City Authority has committed to work on them, even on the issue of opening the drainages for water. 

I think CPC has brought a lot and it is such a blessing. I am really very lucky to be in the Tenth Parliament when this has happened. Madam Speaker, the Uganda Cranes qualified when I had just come to Parliament. I, therefore, think this has been one of the luckiest parliaments because many things are happening. Let us pray for the day and be there.

Honourable members, transport will be available, so you will not need to drive to Munyonyo. The transport committee will provide transport from Parliament to the conference centre in Munyonyo. It is a blessing.

THE SPEAKER: Can someone report on accreditation? Have those who are going to work been accredited?

MR AOGON: The accreditation is taking place at Conference Hall A. Honourable members, you can only access the conference venue if you are accredited. Please, do not go and try to fight the security people. Go with your national identity card for the accreditation. Once you go there, they will check the list to confirm whether you are part of the people who are supposed to be there so that you can be accredited. Make sure you do not forget that tag. 

There is nothing like “I am a Member of Parliament, check in the list”. It will not work because security will be very tight. All the 54 states and all the Speakers will be there and so, it will be very difficult. Just remember to be complaint.

THE SPEAKER: That is not for the opening ceremony. It is for those who will be on duty.

MR AOGON: Yes, it is for those who will be continuing to go there. I think everyone is already aware that –(Interruption)

MS AMERO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue with the accreditation is that some subcommittees have not handed in the names of Members there. 

Madam Speaker, you also proposed that you are going to identify some of the Members to be observers. I think you need to make a list and send it to the accreditation team. Otherwise, if they go down there without a list being submitted, they will not be accredited. We have had that experience and many Members are disgusted because they have kept on going down there but they are being bounced. They are actually rotating to look for where to go.

THE SPEAKER: For those who are on duty, the list is with the Clerk. If they have not submitted it, they should do so. 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I have been talking to some Members. I remember some time back, we were talking about our airport. When you go there, the posts which are there are for MTN. I hope they will remember to work on that and put our gorillas, the Source of the Nile and other beautiful places. They should not forget to do that. Otherwise, MTN has advertised enough. That will help us know where the delegates would wish to go. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. We are going to have one more meeting to tie up loose ends. If there is anything, let us know whatever is not moving well.

Honourable members, when we have a day like the official opening, we normally dress in our traditional attire. Even other countries are going to come in their traditional attire. That is when you will find people with skirts, which are made of mats and flowers in their heads. I would like to urge the ladies to dress in our Gomesi for the official opening. The men can dress in the skin because it is part of our culture.

We have also arranged for some of our traditional people to be there at the site so that these foreigners can take photographs with them and they earn some money. We have got some Karimojong, Langi, Banyankole, among others. I do not know whether we have got someone from West Nile. They are going to be there so that people can take special pictures with the Ugandan unique person. They will have to pay for it.

Honourable members, thank you very much. Are we in a position to go to the next item or should we handle it tomorrow? Honourable minister, it may look small but the issue of the national identity cards is hot. Although it was asked by one Member, other Members may want to comment on it because it is a very hot issue. Honourable members, let us get the answer without debate. 

RESPONSE TO THE ISSUE RAISED ON THE FATE OF TEACHERS MISSING OUT ON SALARY DUE TO LACK OF NATIONAL IDENTITY CARDS (IDS)

7.18
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam  Speaker, the House recalls that on Wednesday, 24 July 2019, Parliament directed the Ministry of Public Service to report to the House in regard to the fate of teachers who had continued missing out on salary payments due to lack of national IDs .

Madam Speaker, whereas the Ministry of Public Service has the mandate of ensuring proper payroll management, it is the Ministry of Internal Affairs that is responsible for issuance of national identity cards. Section 54 of the Registration of Persons Act establishes a compulsory requirement for all citizens of Uganda resident in or outside Uganda to register with the National Identification Registration Authority (NIRA). 

Section 66 of the same Act, on the mandatory use of national identity cards, states that a ministry, department or agency of Government providing a public service shall require a person accessing the service to provide a national identification number or national identification card or alien’s identification number or alien’s identification card. Employment is one of the services set out for mandatory use of national identity cards.

Madam Speaker, the Office of the Auditor-General undertook a comprehensive audit of the Government payroll in 2014. The audit exercise involved validating public officers on the Government payroll, using biometric data. A total of 294,390 public officers at that time, representing 98 per cent of the record on Government payroll, were validated.

Arising out of that exercise, the Auditor-General made the following recommendations, among others: 

(i) 	Government of Uganda should ensure that all payroll records are matched to the national biometric database as a policy.

(ii) 	The national database should be reconciled with the Ministry of Public Service validated biometric database to ensure the integrity of the Government of Uganda employee records.

(iii) 	There should be a comprehensive clean-up of the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS) data to support the achievement of a clean payroll.

(iv) 	The Ministry of Public Service should put in place adequate biometric data collection services to complete the validation exercise.

(v) 	All future employees should be verified and validated.

Madam Speaker, in that regard, the Ministry of Public Service matched and continues to match the particulars of the public officers on the Government payroll with the national identification register, the national identification database, in pursuance of the directive of the Auditor-General. The matching of the payroll records against the national identification register requires every public officer to have registered and acquired a national identity card.

I would like to inform the House that despite the challenges mentioned, it continues to be a requirement for public servants to obtain national identification numbers in order to access the Government payroll. The teachers, like any other citizens, should have registered and obtained national identification cards because possession of a national identity card is a legal requirement for those officers to access employment. It is prudent that they should register and obtain them.

On this particular issue, the area that needs intervention is to put in place a mechanism for expediting the processing of national identification cards.

Madam Speaker, during the sitting of Wednesday, 24th of July, you guided that the Ministry of Internal Affairs should consider organising an interactive meeting with Members of Parliament to exhaustively discuss the issue of national IDs. It is clear, therefore, that when this is done and the teachers obtain their IDs, then all factors remaining constant, they will access the payroll and continue therefore to enjoy their salaries as is due to them. Thank you very much. I wish to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I have just been reminded that we had wanted the Ministry of Internal Affairs to organise this meeting so that we can have a serious talk and ask the necessary questions because our voters keep coming to us on that issue. Can we ask the Clerk to work with the minister so that we can have an interactive meeting on the ID issue in October after the recess for members?

Honourable members, I do not see the other ministers. I would like to thank you for the work today. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock in the afternoon. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.24 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 September 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

