

Wednesday, 27 September 2017

Parliament met at 3.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. In the VIP gallery we have hon. Alice Alaso, former MP for Serere; hon. Fred Ebil, former MP for Kole; hon. Ibi Ekwau, former MP for Kaberamaido; hon. Irene Ovonji, former EALA MP; hon. Paul Mwiru, former MP for Jinja East; and hon. Denis Namara, EALA representative. You are welcome. 

Honourable members, the Minister of State for Education, hon. Rosemary Seninde, has organised ecumenical prayers on Thursday at Kataka Grounds in Nkumba, Wakiso, at 2.00p.m. This is to pray for the 28 women who were killed in a ruthless manner, as you are aware, in Nansana Municipality and Katabi Town. You are invited to go and join her in those prayers.

Hon. Herbert Ariko, Member of Parliament for Soroti Municipality, and the Christians of Soroti Diocese invite Members to a grand fundraising on Saturday, 30 September 2017 to support the construction of St Peter’s Cathedral in Soroti. The President will be the guest of honour. 

Honourable members, you may recall that this House has not been able to conduct business properly since the 21st of September. This is when Members were not willing to listen to their colleagues who had different opinions and the Deputy Speaker was forced to adjourn the House without conducting any serious business. 

However, before I continue with that, I have received some credible information that hon. Kibuule, MP for Mukono County North, endangered the safety of Members by bringing a firearm into the Chamber of this Parliament. This is contrary to rule 74 of our Rules of Procedure. I have checked the footage; hon. Kibuule did not go through security checks but he came from the side of the Office of the President into the North Wing and finally into the Chamber. Therefore, I will be suspending him. (Applause) 

At the sitting of yesterday, the unruly conduct of last week was repeated. The Speaker could not be heard in silence. Members were standing, climbing on chairs and tables, and they were dressed in a manner that violates rule 73 of our Rules of Procedure. I made several calls to the Members to sit down and be orderly, but this was not adhered to. Some Members crossed from one side to the other in a menacing manner, contrary to rule 74 of our Rules of Procedure. The Speaker could not address the House in silence as many Members were menacingly standing near the Speaker’s Chair.

As I told you yesterday, this Parliament is a place to speak and exchange views, including listening to those you do not agree with. We cannot all have the same views; that is why one of the cardinal tenets of parliamentary etiquette, and indeed as provided for in our Rules of Procedure, is that we should always listen to each other. The actions by many of you, whom I am going to name - I noted them yesterday and I should have named them yesterday but due to the noise, I could not. However, today I will name you. 

My responsibility is as follows: 
Under rule 7(2) of our Rules of Procedure, the Speaker shall preserve order and decorum in the House and shall decide questions of order and practice. 

Rules 77 and 79(2) give the Speaker powers to order any Member whose conduct is grossly disorderly to withdraw immediately from the House. Under rule 80, I am permitted to name the Member who has been misbehaving. Under rule 80(2), I have the power to suspend the Member from the service of the House. 

Under rule 8, the Speaker has authority to decide on the issues not expressly provided for. I quote this rule because ordinarily I would have done this yesterday but it was not possible, as I have already explained to you, and it was witnessed by everybody including the whole nation. However, I was writing your names as you were shouting. 

Therefore, in accordance with rule 80(2), I name and suspend the following Members of Parliament from the service of this House for the next three sittings - The effect of the suspension is that you immediately withdraw from the Chambers. The suspension means that you will not attend committees and you will not enter the precincts of this Parliament. I name the following Members:

    1. Hon. Ronald Kibuule, Mukono County North; 
    2. Hon. Allan Ssewanyana, Makindye Division West, 
    3. Hon. Monicah Amoding, Women Representative, Kumi; 
    4. Hon. Sam Lyomoki, Workers Representative; 
    5. Hon. Moses Kasibante, Rubaga Division North; 
    6. Hon. Betty Nambooze, Mukono Municipality; 
    7. Hon. Ssentamu Kyagulanyi, Kyadondo County East; 
    8. Hon. Francis Zaake, Mityana Municipality; 
    9. Hon. Ibrahim Kasozi, Makindye Division East; 
    10. Hon. William Nzohgu, Busongora County North;  
    11. Hon. Gilbert Olanya, Kilak County South; 
    12. Hon. Jonathan Odur, Erute County South; 
    13. Hon. Muhammad Nsereko, Kampala Central Division; 
    14. Hon. Angelline Osegge, Woman Representative, Soroti; 
    15. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, Ndorwa County East; 
    16. Hon. Odonga Otto, Aruu County; 
    17. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, Budadiri County West; 
    18. Hon. Munyagwa Mubarak, Kawempe Division South; 
    19. Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe, Manjiya County; 
    20. Hon. Mbwatekamwa Gaffa, Kasambya County; 
    21. Hon. Roland Mugume, Rukungiri Municipality; 
    22. Hon. Joseph Ssewungu, Kalungu County West; 
    23. Hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, Buyaga County West; 
    24. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, Butambala County; and 
    25. Hon. Medard Sseggona, Busiro County East. 

I invite you to exit the Chamber. Exit the Chamber. Can I invite the sergeants to remove the Members who have been named. Exit the Chamber, honourable members. I will suspend the House for 30 minutes and when I return, you should be away. We shall resume in 30 minutes and you must be out of this House. 

(The House was suspended at 3.16 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.30 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the sitting will resume. However, before we do that, I have received complaints from the muslim community that there is an abuse of their caps here in the House being worn by people who are not Muslims. They are saying that if you are not a Muslim, you are offending the Muslims. (Applause)

Secondly, honourable members, this morning there was an attempt to bring several fezzes into the Chamber. Therefore, there was a scuffle between the security and the Members who were trying to bring in these fezzes. They were intercepted and they are here. Let me ask the Clerk to lay them there.

Some damage has occurred in the Chamber. I will ask the rules committee to look at the footage and identify the Members who caused the damage. They will be taken to the disciplinary committee and they will be obliged to pay for the damage out of their salary. (Applause) As for hon. Kibuule, I will also instruct the rules committee to investigate that situation and give us a report. Let us proceed with item No. 3.

4.32
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to address the House at a time when tempers are so high, at a time when the sanctity of Parliament -

THE SPEAKER: What are you talking about? What address is this?

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I cannot just pretend that life is as usual. I cannot pretend that it is business as usual. What has just happened to the Members in this Chamber, Madam Speaker, is something we should not just ignore. Members were brutally moved out of the Chamber by the SFC - (Interjections) – Yes! Madam Speaker, you made a ruling -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, please take your seat. Honourable members, you are familiar with our Rules of Procedure; they say that if you are asked to leave, you must leave and if you do not leave, you are removed. That is why they were removed. 

Hon. Akol, take your seat. Take your seats, honourable members. Honourable members, I will also suspend you. If there is any further disturbance, I will suspend more people. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DEATH OF A YOUTH IN MARACHA WEST CONSTITUTENCY WHILE IN POLICE CUSTODY

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sebaggala, take your seat. Can I invite the Minister of Internal Affairs to address item No.3. 

(Members of the Opposition exit the Chamber.)

4.35
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You directed yesterday, but hon. Jeje Odongo is still in Djibouti while hon. Obiga Kania is in Bwindi on an assignment by the President. I endeavoured to reach out to them so that they can present the report as you directed. However, I am sorry that both ministers are not at station. I will endeavour that at least on Tuesday we bring that statement.

THE SPEAKER: Are you not sure about tomorrow? You may not find them tomorrow?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Hon. Jeje Odongo will not be back by tomorrow, and because I have not received a commitment from hon. Obiga Kania, I did not want to stand here and mislead this House before contacting him, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The report is deferred to Tuesday next week.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL ENTITLED, “THE CONSTITUTIONAL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before the motion is moved, I would like to reiterate that what is happening here is only seeking leave. There is no amendment being done today. It is a question of seeking leave to bring a Bill. When the Bill is printed, gazetted, brought here for first reading and sent to the committee, that is when the process will start. For now, this is just seeking leave.

4.36
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion under rules 47, 110 and 111 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament seeking leave of this House to introduce a private Members’ Bill under Article 94(4)(b) of our Constitution for a Bill entitled, “The Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2017.”

“WHEREAS Article 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 110 of our Rules of Procedure recognise the right of a Member to move a private Member’s Bill;

AND WHEREAS Parliament is mandated under Article 259 and Article 262 of the Constitution to amend the provisions of the Constitution by way of addition, variation or repeal;

AWARE THAT Article 1(4) of the Constitution is emphatic on the people of Uganda expressing their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they shall be governed, through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives;

RECALLING THAT on 31 March 2016, the Supreme Court, in a unanimous decision in presidential election petition No.1 of 2016, made recommendations for the amendment of the constitutional provisions governing elections in Uganda that:

a) 	under Article 104(2) and (3) of the Constitution, the 10-day period within which to file a petition in case of presidential elections and the 30 days within which the court has to make a decision is inadequate and should be reviewed.

b) 	Article 104(6) of the Constitution should be amended to increase the number of days within which the Electoral Commission is required to hold a fresh election where a presidential election is annulled; and

c) 	the late enactment of relevant electoral legislation has a negative effect on the conduct of elections and any election-related law reform must be undertaken within two years of the establishment of a new Parliament;

FURTHER AWARE that that this very Parliament was sworn in on 18 May 2016, and therefore following the decision of court, these electoral reforms must be completed by 18 May 2018;

NOTING WITH CONCERN that to date Government has not presented to Parliament any amendment in conformity with the Supreme Court decisions;

CONCERNED FURTHER that the eligibility requirements for a person to be elected as President or district chairperson, being part of the necessary electoral reforms, must be reviewed as well to comply with Article 1 of the Constitution, which gives powers to the people that they have the absolute right to determine how they should be governed, and articles 21 and 32 which prohibit any form of discrimination on the basis of age and other factors;

FIRMLY CONVINCED that there is need to review the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to address the above gaps to implement the Supreme Court decisions as well as any other related matters;

NOW THEREFORE, this motion is moved requesting:
  
1. 	That this Parliament accepts and grants me leave so that I introduce a Bill for an Act entitled, “The Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2017”, a draft of which is attached hereto;

2. 	Do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to request that you receive this motion and permit me leave to introduce the private Members’ Bill. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by several Members. Justify it but do not go into the merits.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, it is a year past the day we were sworn in as the Tenth Parliament and our Executive has done nothing to effect the court decision which I pointed out in the motion. I therefore find it imperative as a Member of Parliament, under Article 94(4) of the Constitution, to bring this Bill with a view to meet the timeliness and timelines set by the Supreme Court. 

I find the proposed amendments justified for the following reasons:
In terms of time for filing and determination of the petition, Madam Speaker, I would like to associate with the observation of the court that the time provided for the petitioners to file their petitions and for court to determine the petition, being 10 days for the petitioner and 30 days within which court must analyse the evidence and make a decision as provided under Article 104(2) and (3), is highly inadequate. Therefore, I find it absolutely necessary and justified to amend the law with a view to increasing the time for filing and determining the petition. Consequent on this, if we increase the time for filing and determining the petitions, this will necessitate that we adjust the time for elections backwards, accordingly. 

Madam Speaker, in terms of time for holding fresh elections, I find it justified, looking at the current provision in the Constitution which says that in case court annuls a presidential election, a fresh election must be conducted within 20 days. This is highly inadequate. Even for us, Members of Parliament, in case court orders for a fresh election, we are given 60 days.  In the neighbourhood, it has just happened; court annulled a presidential election and they ordered for a re-run within 60 days. Therefore, in my view, I find that the current provision of only 20 days for a fresh election of the president is not justifiable and hence the need for an amendment.

In terms of qualifications of the president and district chairpersons, the current law provides for an upper and lower age limit for a person standing for election as president and district chairperson. It is my view that the qualifications of candidates fall directly and are part and parcel of the necessary electoral reforms as recommended by the court. This is because without the candidates, you do not have the elections.

Madam Speaker, I propose that we look at these provisions that the president and the district chairpersons are given a time limit and we shall certainly point out why we need to provide the necessary amendments. However, for today, I beg to request, honourable colleagues, to observe that Article 1 of the Constitution provides that Ugandan citizens have the right to choose the people and the manner in which they should be governed, and that the will of the people, under Article 1 (4), is expressed through free and fair elections.

It is my considered opinion that to tell people to choose their leaders only within a certain choice bracket is highly discriminatory. Therefore, this should be amended in line with Articles 21 and 32, which order for equality of citizens. Article 32 specifically, obliges us to take affirmative action to redress marginalisation and discrimination based on age, gender, disability and other reasons created by history and traditional customs. 

Therefore, I find it absolutely justified to move an amendment of these provisions to ensure that these archaic restrictions within the Constitution are removed and we give full power to the population to select their leaders as given by the constitutional mandate in Article 1.

Madam Speaker, I am convinced beyond any doubt that in doing so, we are actually exercising the role and responsibility of Members of Parliament as provided under Article 259 and Article 262 of the Constitution. 

Therefore, I beg, to move and request honourable colleagues to grant me leave to proceed and introduce a private Member’s Bill to effect the necessary amendments. I beg to move. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Applause)
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are seats here. Come and sit comfortably. 

4.49
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Madam Speaker, can I use the other microphone?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether it is working well. Do you want to use it? Speak from there.

MR BALYEKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to second the motion presented by my colleague, hon. Raphael Magyezi. According to Article 1 of the Constitution, power belongs to the people, who will choose how they want to be governed through regular, free and fair elections. People have the right to choose the leader they want without necessarily looking at age. It will be improper to deny someone a right because of age. Uganda has the capacity and freedom to choose the person they wish to choose. In accordance with the rules that govern our elections, it is very important that people are given the choice of their preference. Age should not be a factor that hinders the freedom and rights of any Ugandan.

Madam Speaker, that Article is very discriminatory. If you are above 75, it prohibits you from being voted as President whereas Members of Parliament and district chairpersons do not have this kind of restriction. It is necessary that this imbalance is redressed as provided for by the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, constitutionally, there are people who are defined as marginalised. This was also highlighted in the Constitution; we have the disabled, the youth and the women. However, the Constitution clearly provides in Article 32 that there will be affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups. Today, as we speak in this Parliament, we have a couple of women and it is because we no longer look at women in a marginalised way. The same applies to the youth and the disabled. From LCI up to Chairperson LCV and at national level, we have leaders who were not discriminated. However, for the elders, we have totally written them off. 

Madam Speaker, it is improper for us to look at the elderly and discriminate against them. This is clearly against the Constitution, which provides that all marginalised groups of people should be given a chance through affirmative action. We do not even have an upper chamber in this country, where we would put the elderly, and yet all of us are bound to become aged. No one is getting younger; we are all getting older. It does not mean that we are becoming irrelevant to the country. It is high time we looked at this Article and put things right, with due respect to those who wrote the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, the Constitution is not cast in stone. We have a right to determine the appropriate legislation of our time, review the laws and make corrections where necessary. Uganda is operating under a multiparty dispensation. The political parties have the mandate to choose their leaders. We cannot decide that the political parties should choose selectively. If a political party feels that an 85-year-old man or woman is able to lead them and win an election, why not? It is improper for us to think that parties should be restricted from choosing their leaders. I believe if I am 75 years and above at one time, I can be president for more than two terms, as long as I am still reasonable and doctors think that I can think upright.

Madam Speaker, Uganda is a very good example of countries which have respected democracy. Look at a country like Israel, it never gets rid of its leaders. They let the leaders at whatever age to compete for power. Even in our cultural societies, we keep consulting our elders because they have vast experience and knowledge. That is why some people say, “Obukadde magezi”. It does not mean that we only need to look at people who are very young.

Madam Speaker, someone has been a state attorney or private attorney and has practiced as such, he then becomes the Solicitor-General, Minister of State for Justice, Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and then the Chief Justice of Uganda and yet he cannot contest for the presidency. We cannot deny people like Justice Bart Katureebe, the Chief Justice of Uganda, from contesting for presidency. In addition to that, there are also other countries with presidents who are more than 75 years old.

THE SPEAKER: You know I said you should not go into the substance of the Bill. That justification is for when there is a Bill, if they allow you. 

MR BALYEKU: I agree with what you are saying but like the Leader of the Opposition who has just gone out had to make her point clear, I also thought I should put make clear. 

I would like to summarise by seconding the motion and with that, I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kafuuzi, where are you?

4.54
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Madam Speaker, according to Francis Chan, an American Pastor, our greatest fear should not be of failure but rather succeeding at things that do not matter. I stand before you to support and second the motion before us today because I know, believe and I am convinced that it matters for us all as a young nation, a growing democracy and peace-loving Ugandans.

In the making of our Constitution, it was emphasised under the democratic principles that the State shall be based on democratic principles which empower and encourage active participation of all citizens at all levels in their governance. In the same vein, Article 21 of the Constitution prohibits discrimination and guarantees equality of all Ugandans under the law.

Madam Speaker, according to Morris and Read in a book entitled, “Uganda: The Development of its Laws and Constitution”, a good Constitution should neither be rigid nor flexible. A rigid Constitution will not possess the qualities of adaptability or adjustability. A good Constitution must provide a method of change so that it can be changed and adopted without a revolution. According to Article 259(1) of our Constitution, Parliament is empowered to amend the Constitution by addition, variation or repeal of any of its provisions in accordance with the procedures set forth. 

Madam Speaker, Article 94 of the Constitution provides us rights as members of this House to move private Member’s Bills. Going by Article 183 of the Constitution, a person who is 35 years and above is allowed to stand for LCV chairperson and yet a person who is 18 years and above and has the other legal qualifications is not allowed to stand for LCV chairperson. I find that to be contradicting the provisions of Article 21 of the Constitution and the democratic principles that require us to be all-inclusive. 

In the same vein, Article 102 of the Constitution inter alia states that any Ugandan who qualifies to be a Member of Parliament can be president except that he should be 35 years old and not more than 75 years. I find it disturbing that the same Constitution allows an 80-year-old person to vote but does not allow a 75-year-old person to participate in being elected. That too I consider a contravention of our democratic principles and a departure from the provisions of Article 21 of the Constitution.

Furthermore, we are enjoined to legislate into law the Supreme Court’s findings in the case of Amama Mbabazi v. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and others in Supreme Court Presidential Petition No. 1 of 2016. Among others, the Supreme Court provided that Article 104 (2) and (3) relating to the time of filing a presidential petition of ten days be amended to grant more time from 10 to 30 days and the period of determining a presidential petition be increased from 30 days to 60.

The Supreme Court also provided that Article 104(7), which sets 20 days within which to hold a rerun or a by-election in the event that an election has been nullified, should be expanded or increased from 20 days to either 60 or 90 days. Members, I encourage you to borrow a leaf from our neighbours in Kenya and begin to imagine what would happen to our poor and tiny economy if the Supreme Court were to do what the Kenyans did, knowing that the Supreme Court has the capacity to nullify not only the presidential election but all other elections that will have been held on the same day including our elections.

While I have heard some members of the public and even some Members of Parliament saying that these amendments should be taken to a referendum or a constitutional review commission -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, just stick to the request. Do not go into those details.

MR KAFUUZI: Based on those premises, Madam Speaker, I believe it is incumbent upon us as Members of Parliament and it is well within our powers and authority to carry forth with the proposed amendments. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.01
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, I stand before this august House to second and support the motion to seek leave tabled by our colleague, Raphael Magyezi.

Madam Speaker, Article 94(4)(b) gives a Member a right to move a private Member’s Bill. It is against this background that I strongly rally behind my brother, hon. Raphael Magyezi, in moving this private Member’s Bill to amend the Constitution to be accommodate and bridge the gaps that currently exist in our Constitution.

Madam Speaker, Article 59 (1) and (2) give a voting right to all Ugandans aged 18 years and above and also a duty to register for public elections or referenda. The same right, therefore, that is given to Ugandans of age 18 years and above should be given to those above 75 years to offer themselves for elections. 

Madam Speaker, we are governed by the principles of democracy. Our first and second objectives and principles of democracy state that the State shall be based on democratic principles, which empower and encourage the active participation of all citizens at all levels in their own governance. This means there is no breach in regard to what hon. Magyezi has tabled, because everybody will be given an opportunity to choose how they should be governed.

World over, there are principles of democracy and it is not written anywhere that there should be an upper age limit. Age is not a yardstick to leadership qualification in democratic settings of countries like Uganda. If we are to go into the regional integration that we all yearn for, a balanced and accommodative law has to be put forward to help fit us into this regional integration. Therefore, Article 102(b) of our Constitution contradicts democratic principles.

The democratic principles gave rise to Article 1(1) of the 1995 Constitution, which gives power to the people to govern through their will and express their will on who should govern them and how they should be governed through regular, free and fair elections. We are not saying anybody is not going to be governed through his own will. We do not mind whoever Ugandans choose but we want an accommodative and balanced Constitution.

In conclusion, as a seconder of this motion, I am convinced to the best of my knowledge that the motion is within the ambit of the provisions of the Constitution. Therefore, I second the motion tabled before you in this august House seeking leave of Parliament to amend various Articles in the Constitution as stated in the motion. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We shall only have limited debate. 

5.06
MR ISAAC MUSUMBA (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This House has attentively listened to the mover and seconders of the motion and other Members who have made contributions. The essence of the debate here is to give opportunity to the mover of the motion to have authority or permission to bring the Bill to us for further and better discussions and debate.

Therefore, I would like to move that you put the question for the House to vote on whether to give or not to give the mover the opportunity to present the Bill to us. I beg that you put the question to that effect. 

5.08
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me a chance to talk about this motion. It is true that amending the Constitution is our right when we have seen a challenge in it. However, the spirit in which this motion has been brought to Parliament does not capture the mood of the country. As we speak, the country is on tension because of a proposed motion and I am worried that if this House continues to allow his motion giving the Member leave, it is going to cause problems to the country.

I am asking myself why we at this stage should be so bothered about bringing age as an issue - (Interruption) 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Isaac Musumba moved a motion and before we disposed of it, I thought somebody was rising to either put it down or to talk about it but he is talking to the contrary. Can we first dispose of the motion before we can allow Members who want to talk to continue?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the arguments you are advancing go into the merits of the Bill yet it is not yet time to discuss that Bill. (Applause)

Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do authorise the publication of the Bill to be brought for first reading.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you proceed with the processing of that Bill, I would like to remind you about a few things - the sovereignty of the people under Article 1 of the Constitution; let me just restate them:
 
(1) 	All power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution.

(2) 	Without limiting the effect of clause (1) of this Article, all authority in the state emanates from the people of Uganda; and the people shall be governed through their will and consent.

(3) 	All power and authority of Government and its organs is derived from this Constitution, which in turn derives its authority from the people who consent to be governed in accordance with this Constitution. 

(4) 	The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them…” 

The question on who shall govern them was settled in February 2016. Now, what you have to seek is “how”. Therefore, the people are central to this issue. It is not an issue that we can decide exclusively without the population. I would like that to be very clear.

Hon. Alioni, what is the problem? 

MR ALIONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What are you doing? I said you are not on the Order paper because you gave me notice today. Sit down. You are not on the Order Paper. Let us go on to the next item.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL ENTITLED, “THE CONSTITUTIONAL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017”

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lyomoki. Is the seconder of Dr Lyomoki’s motion here? Is hon. Nsamba Oshabe here? Okay, since the mover of item No.5 and the seconder are not here, let us go to item No.6.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO URGENTLY CONSTITUTE A CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMISSION

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oshabe Nsamba is the mover. Is he not here? Okay, honourable members, thank you very much for the work today. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 5.14 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 September at 2.00 p.m.) 
