Wednesday, 12 September 2012 

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanya, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, honourable members, and welcome to this sitting. Yesterday, I promised I would make a communication in relation to item No.4 on commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of Uganda’s Independence; that particular item on honouring of distinguished personalities in recognition of their contribution to Uganda’s legislative history.

A committee chaired by Deputy Clerk Legislative Services was set up by the board of management to identify personalities to be honoured based on the following criteria:

One, former leaders in the categories of speakers and deputy speakers of the first to the eighth Parliament, whether living or deceased; in the case of deceased people representatives would be established to come and take this recognition.

Two, former leaders of the Opposition beginning from the first to eighth Parliament, the same condition applies, whether they are living or deceased;

Third, former leaders of Government business in the same period first to the eighth Parliament, whether living or deceased;

Fourth, former members of the Legislative Council (LEGCO), whether they are living or not alive. 

Fifth, former clerks to Parliament, beginning from the first to the eighth Parliament, whether they are living or demised.

On the work done so far; that committee has been working and it would be important to inform the House that those who are deceased will actually be honoured post-humously.

Forty six names have been established and the search is still on. In order to ensure that no one is left out, we request you honourable members to look out for any member who falls in these categories within your areas of representation.

The clerk is in the process of fixing addresses including village, district and telephone contact of each of the identified personalities so that they can easily be contacted.

The Commission has made funding available to cater for the awardees transport, accommodation and upkeep while in Parliament for two days.  Do I need to read the names of the people so far identified, and see if there are people you know that fall in this category then you can contact the Clerk to Parliament and submit their names? 

Sir John Bowes Griffin first Speaker - they are not sure whether he is alive; The Rt. Hon. Narendra Patel, Speaker, Second Parliament; The Rt Hon. Edward Rugumayo, Chairman of the National Consultative Council, which was the third Parliament; The Rt. Hon. Francis Butagira, he is our Ambassador to Germany now, and I do not know whether he has changed; H.E. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the Chairman NRC, Fifth  Parliament; Rt. Hon. James Wapakhabulo, Speaker of the Sixth Parliament; Rt. Hon. Francis Ayume, Speaker of the Seventh Parliament; Rt. Hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Speaker of the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments; Hon. S.W. Kulubya, Deputy Speaker, First Parliament; Hon. J.C. Adyebo Vice-Chairman, NRC; Joseph K. Ekemu, Deputy Vice-Chairman,  NRC; Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, Deputy Speaker, Eighth Parliament; Al Haji Moses Kigongo Vice-Chairman, NRC; Betty Okwir, Deputy Speaker, Sixth Parliament; Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Deputy Speaker, Seventh Parliament; Phillip Pullicino, Clerk to the National Assembly; Ignatius Barungi, Second Clerk to the National Assembly; Edward Ochwo,  third and fifth Clerk to the National Assembly; Omwony Ojwok, Secretary NCC and fourth Clerk; and A.M. Tandakwire, Clerk to the Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Parliaments.

Leaders of Government Business: Dr. A.M. Obote, Hon. C.J. Obwangor, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi; and Leaders of Opposition on this side include: Ben Kiwanuka, Hon. Basil Bataringaya, F.J.I. Kangwamu, Hon. Paulo Kawanga Ssemwogerere, and Professor Morris Ogenga Latigo.

Then members of the LEGCO that have been identified so far include: Boniface Byanyima, Joyce Mpanga, Francis Lubega, Adoko Nekyon, Ali Hasya, Osinde Bwangor, Stanislus K. Okurut, Mathias Ngobi, Stanislus Isiagi, Bandali Jaffer, Eli Bisamunyu, A.A. Ojera, Frances Akello, Mayanja Nkangi, Sam Odaka, Sara Ntiru, K. Karekyezi and Angelo Banya. Those are the names that have been identified so far. 

So, honourable members, if you have names falling within these categories, please bring it to the attention of the Clerk, particularly the chair, and it will end up with the committee chair. This is the communication in relation to this particular item. So, you had proposed that a substantive motion be moved in the House; that can still be processed, but at an appropriate time will be coming when the list is complete.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

1. THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2011/2012 

2. THE BUDGETARY PROPSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPEDENTURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2012/2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that there were two things that had held these proceedings. First, was the handling and finalisation of the supplementary appropriation which we gladly did yesterday; and second, was some harmonisation on matters that were not properly reconciled that had been referred to the budget committee.

The budget committee has been meeting and is it ready and they have harmonised with Government on these issues so that we can proceed to deal with the issue of supply. 

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister you want to say something?
 
2. 33
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, the Executive did receive communication from the Chairman of the Budget Committee on what they were proposing. We have looked at the proposals and we think they may have some implications on Government activity. So, I have talked to him and requested that we find time to go over these together in greater detail, so that we can harmonise our positions on each one of them.

I, therefore, rise to request your indulgence, Mr Speaker and honourable members, to give us that little time, maybe today, to go back together with the Committee on Budget, to go through the details of the proposals and hopefully work out a harmonious position. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, with supply, we need to have harmony, otherwise it would be very difficult and it would even take longer than necessary to do supply if there is no initial agreement. Chairman Budget Committee, can you confirm this?

2.35
THE CHAIRMAN, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I confirm that we agreed to go ahead and harmonise. We have done our job as budget committee and we are ready, but we cannot be ready when they are not ready; so harmony is necessary. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, we will be able to handle this tomorrow at 2 O’clock? 

MR LWANGA: It will depend on the harmonisation, but if they are ready with their figures, we should be able to supply.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the directive of the Speaker that this matter should be handled tomorrow 2 O’clock without fail; somehow, somewhere we have to find a way of moving forward on this. So, that means that item No.4 cannot be handled. We go to item No.5, are honourable members prepared to start on item No.5? General debate on the principles of the Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Bill, 2012. Are we prepared to start now? Any contributions?

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are we ready to proceed with this debate?

2.37
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative Kitugum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, the item on the agenda is a very important and pertinent item concerning oil.  I am, therefore, seeking your guidance; since it is a very important issue to be discussed in this country, and very many people are really looking out to see how we proceed on this issue of the Bill on oil and gas. 

Most of the Members of this House have gone for the by-elections which are taking place in Usuk and Butambala. This is also part and parcel of our stay here. My prayer and guidance is that we be given more time to debate the details of this Bill so that the outcome is by all of us - together.

I am just seeking your guidance on this and my prayer is that more time should be given. I am not saying that Members should not start now, but that was my prayer before we proceed on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the opinion of the Speaker, important matters are only handled through debates, not differing debates. If the matter is really important, then we should debate it; if it is not important then we defer it for as many times as we would like. 

If the matter is not important, it does not have a bearing on the country and it does not matter how long we take to discuss it. But if it is so important, my idea would be that we actually discuss it and give enough time for the discussion. If we had started this debate yesterday, today we would be continuing and by the time we are going into next week, the debate would be reaching a climax and we would be able to take a decision. So, the reason of it being so important, so we cannot discuss it, I think it may not be very helpful for the House.

If Members are ready to make contributions on this debate, the Floor is open. I guided that each Member would be taking four minutes. Is that too short? Five minutes for each Member.

2.41
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I am not getting up to consume part of my five minutes. We had a lot of capacity building on these oil and gas issues; even on Saturday, we were in Munyonyo being helped by NGOs and we have very detailed advice from the different fields. 

I am just seeing this item on the Order Paper, we were not given notice because we have huge files we would want to carry inside here to have meaningful debate that can impact on the minister.

In the circumstance, I do not know whether you can suspend for 20 minutes and we pick the documents that we have. We have been waiting for the issue of oil. Actually, today, Government has ambushed us. We thought you were running away from bringing the oil law, but today it is now here and the burden has shifted to us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the report of the committee was presented last week and not this week. Yesterday, we heard that there is a minority report from the hon. Ken Lukyamuzi presented yesterday.

This matter has been on the Order Paper for a while now, that is why I am talking about persistent postponement of debate may not be helpful.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a highly specialised area, and the ministers seated here are very knowledgeable about these issues such that if we risked to start debate onthe subject matter without proper documents on the Table, we will not be helping the process.

As of now, I am very incompetent to debate anything in relation to the Oil Bill because the dossier - the non-governmental actors and Parliament built our capacity on - we seemingly do not have it here. 

So, I do not know what we can do in the circumstances because the way I see it, the ministers are more armed than those of us who are supposed to check them. They are more prepared to handle the debate than those of us who are supposed to genuinely check them on behalf of the Ugandans. However, if it is in your opinion that we proceed, then we shall risk in that area, claiming partial ignorance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I need Members who would like to debate and the time is five minutes. If there are no Members ready to debate, then we will see how to proceed.

2.44
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to seek more guidance from you. I believe this is the appropriate time for you, our Speaker, to guide us. Why? Because once upon a time, we met here as MPs and strongly demanded for these Bills; the demand for these Bills on petroleum exploration was very strong. When the Bills were introduced in this Parliament for the first reading, all of us celebrated; it was a great and nice moment. Yesterday, it was supposed to be the second reading and general debate, but Members were not ready; some Members said that they were not ready. You postponed the debate to today. 

Mr Speaker, I should remind you that this is not the first time we proceed with considerations of Bills without debate at second reading. It would appear that Members are satisfied with the report from the committee. (Applause) 

Otherwise, we shall be cheating the taxpayer if we keep on coming up with business and we discuss nothing at all. So, in my opinion, I propose that you as Speaker take it that Members understand the contents of the report from the committee and they have no objection at all. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me state the question again. The motion is that the Petroleum Exploration Development and Production Bill, 2012 be read the second time. That is the motion.

We heard from the minister last week. We heard from the chairperson of the committee of this House last week. We heard from the Member who had sought the indulgence of the House to be given an opportunity to present his minority report yesterday. So, this Bill has been in this House for second reading for four sittings now, which the Members had requested for, including three non working days of Parliament. That makes a total of one full week of this matter.  I am going to ask that the debate is open. Contributions will be five minutes for each Member.

2.48
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO  (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to beg for your indulgence since there are not many Members who would like to contribute, that I be given more time. Thank you very much. 

This law is long overdue. I have read the report and even the minority report and I would like to comment as follows: 

I start with the environment, on page 10. 

I had the opportunity to visit the site about three years ago. At that time they told us that they could not dispose of - it is even stated here in the report - the by-products from the exploration. It is now more than three years and the same statement is being re-echoed. 

How long should it take NEMA? I know we are going to make a law, but if the law is made and the institutions that are supposed to implement them do not take care to handle these things, it may not auger well. 

The report did not propose - and I have not even seen it in the amendment - about the effects on the people who will be directly affected; those that are in the Albertine Graben, who will be directly affected by oil exploration, exploitation and even development. 

I would wish that the committee reconsiders and proposes concretely, how to deal with the direct effects on the people who occupy that area. 

Mr Speaker, on local content and participation, the committee proposes that it should not end on revenue, but people should benefit from the training. There is an oil institute in Kigumba and I want to commend Prof. Kwesiga on what he is doing, but he is so limited. I don’t know whether there is a provision in the Bill on how to support such institutions so that our people are trained, not only for the local market, but to work anywhere where there is oil. 

Our products from the Kigumba Petroleum Institute are on demand, and recently, Total was trying to identify someone whom they can deploy outside the country. But this is because they are properly trained. Can this be expanded and even provided for?

The committee is proposing private participation in the national oil company. What kind of participation is this? I would hate a situation where the Shells, the Totals and others will come and take over our own national oil company. I know they are proposing 50 percent, but 40 percent should really be to the locals, as in Ugandans and not necessarily the outsiders. 

I will briefly talk about the land rights. Where there is demand and opportunities, definitely the price will go up. But a caveat has been put on our land in the Albertine Graben; that we should use the old rates and that there should be no increase in the price of that land. I don’t think it is correct. 

In other countries where oil has been discovered, I didn’t see it reflected in the report. There are special land compensation rates for land owners where oil is explored and exploited. I just hope and wish that this could also be put in this law so that our people are not left destitute. If you go by the current law, our people won’t even be able to relocate and find useful land to build houses for themselves. 

Mr Speaker, as we look forward to exploiting our oil, I think we should get prepared. I will give an example. There is an area which had been agitating for a diocese for over 25 years. When the diocese eventually came, there was no manpower. They had to borrow a bishop from another diocese to be consecrated in that diocese. 

The President has been saying that oil revenue will be used for infrastructure development. What kind of infrastructure are we looking at? And how are we prepared? Or are we waiting to receive the revenue and then we start speaking. 

I would propose that there should be something in each region of this country to show that Uganda discovered oil and is benefiting from oil. For example, we need a bridge across River Nile to connect Bunyoro to West Nile. We need to light up Uganda - Karuma is having problems. Can we build a huge dam to cater for the demand? Can we build state-of-the-art hospitals across the country? 

Women are struggling to find some money in this Budget but we are being told there is no money. Can this go for some of these - not the current expenditures and certainly they should be identified and not be swallowed up in the budget. And by the way, there has been a proposal to build an oil city, which has been –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, one minute, please.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you so much. What I was saying is that the oil city had been proposed to be built in Hoima, but up to now, there is no plan yet the area had been identified for physical planning. I had an opportunity to go to Norway, Stavanger City, which is an oil city that is properly planned with all the facilities. Mr Speaker, some of these things might sound general, but if they are provided for in the law, they can be easily implemented. I thank you.

2.55
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for presenting this report. I also thank the minister for being ahead of schedule.

First of all, the manner in which the report was written - especially because it concerns such an important law - it would have been prudent for the committee to highlight all areas in its executive summary that are of concern to this country and Members of Parliament. 

When you gloss through the report, you realise that the committee chose to talk about economic implications of petroleum, environmental management, local content, institutional land rights and compensation; and the National Oil Company. They selected about ten areas – health and safety; land use and physical planning. - However, it would have been proper for the committee to clearly explain to this House, because not everyone is as knowledgeable in this area as members of this committee.  For example, on issues like royalties, other than it being in the general Bill, and yet it is a technical aspect, we needed the committee to make a fair comment on issues that pertain to royalties and the management of the oil fund – extensively - so that –(Interjections)– in the Finance Bill. Okay.

Having said that, I have two concerns to raise, which I got from the workshop that was organised over the weekend by ACCORD. One is on the land rights. The MPs from the oil areas have been complaining about people who have been grabbing land in the area. By the way, this is a country where some people are more privy to certain information than others. So, when they got that information, the land in the oil belt was bought five, six or seven years ago even before the discovery of oil. I can give an example. We have a case of a Member in this House whose name I wouldn’t like to mention to avoid the creation of a controversy. This Member had privy to the information as to where the Northern Bypass would pass. At that time, that Member was still working in a Government office. So, the Member and other staff  went 10 years ahead of schedule and acquired land in the exact areas where the road would pass. They subsequently built houses there. When the compensation came, they walked away with about Shs 800 million. But that was because they were privy to Government information. That is how –(Interjections)– I hear some minister saying that is good investment. 

However, if you have access to official Government information and you use it to get personal dividends by, for example, buying land and constructing houses where the Northern Bypass will be constructed, that is not patriotism.

In relation to the oil, by the time we amended the Constitution at the close of the last Parliament, MPs from the oil region were already complaining that there were people grabbing and buying land at Shs 30,000 - 40,000 an acre. They had already known that exploration of oil would begin in four, five, six or seven years to come. 

My question to the chairman of the committee is: Have the land rights of the indigenous people in that oil area - the Banyoro - , been protected from these land grabbers? Where have you placed the complaints that the area MPs have been persistently raising?

Two, and this goes to the minister. According to the Constitution of Uganda, land belongs to the individual. Land that does not belong to anyone is owned by the district land board in that area. In the circumstances, why are we giving royalties to district local governments yet that land belongs to individuals? Are these not the same individuals who acquired land six or seven years ago in that area from the poor people? 

So, how do we compromise the provision that, for example, my land in Pader belongs to me? And if oil is discovered in there, you say that if there is compensation, the royalties should go to the district local government; how about I, the owner of that land? Doesn’t that amount to a default amendment of the Constitution?

Then on the issue of the oil fund –  I have been advised that it features in another Bill, but since we are not so thorough, let me raise it now. When the minister of Works and Transport was abolishing Road Licence, we were persuaded that we would now not pay the road license, but we would instead pay an additional charge in form of fuel taxes –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, just one minute.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much. Mr Speaker, the information we have is that Uganda Revenue Authority has now collected about Shs 800 billion from the additional levy on fuel. Out of that they have given only Shs 220 billion to UNRA and Ministry of Works and Transport. In other words, we were deceived to allow the increased tax on fuel to have the roads repaired; instead the money being collected from that fuel tax is being used to fund other Government activities.

So, my question is: Under this current regime of oil, is URA ready to collect money and put it in the oil fund and not to retain that money the way they duped us with the road licence? Actually, one of these days we might mobilise Ugandans to demand that URA re-introduces the Road Licence Tax because we are not seeing any improvements in the road infrastructure that was supposed to come with the fuel tax in replacement of it. So, can the minister assure me that the oil revenues will go to the oil fund and that the funds will be used according to those guidelines? Can the minister also assure me that the money won’t be mixed with URA money and that in the Consolidated Fund? Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

3.02
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryadongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for presenting this report, and I have a few comments. I will start with the issue of compensation, which appears on page 15. I would like to inform this House that the people of Bunyoro, especially the poor, are not very happy because the only wealth that they have is land. So, they won’t be very happy if they are compensated with very little money. 

So, I want to pray that this Bill spells out very clearly, the compensation rate, because they valued it according to their location and that makes the money very little.

It is also my humble prayer that the women be involved when it comes to issues of compensation.

Mr Speaker, in the Bunyoro Region also, the indigenous Banyoro are not happy because some people already have titles of very big chunks of land yet the indigenous people don’t have any and cannot tell how those people acquired those titles. In that regard, it is also my prayer that the people who hold those titles be investigated and some action should be taken. (Applause)

The people of Bunyoro region are also worried about their infrastructure, especially the roads, because at the moment there are very many heavy trucks that move on roads in the Albertine Region and so, they feel that with time they are going to spoil their roads. A case in point is that of Kinyara Sugar Works where heavy trucks have spoiled the roads to an extent that even the locals cannot ride their bicycles on the roads and yet they are of no direct benefit to them. So, they feel that they are going to suffer and they would like those issues to be clearly spelt out to them. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of bringing the local communities on board is also important, especially the women. Women are largely involved in agriculture and instead of ferrying items like carrots and green pepper from Kampala, they can be grown in the region and sold to these companies instead of ‘foreign’ companies dominating the supply of such items and yet it would have been a direct way of engaging the women in the region so that they can benefit from the sector. But at the moment they feel that it is more of a male dominated industry. 

On the issue of the environment, a lot has been said, which is worrying the people. When you visit the region, they have a lot of solid and liquid waste which have turned toxic. So, the people feel that if such toxic material is not controlled, it is likely to cause a lot of harm to the region by rendering the land infertile. Therefore, the issues to do with the environment should be clearly spelt out. We should not only mind about the wildlife - the elephants and what have you - but also the soils should be taken into consideration. 

As an outcry of the Banyoro, you witnessed the King of Bunyoro himself coming here, to Parliament, which is a rare thing, to demand for at least some shares for the kingdom. Therefore, Mr Speaker, it is my prayer that this Bill takes into consideration and makes clear as to how the kingdom, local governments and the government are going to share the oil revenue. That will make the people of Bunyoro a bit happy because at the moment they seem to be worried though we keep telling them to be patient as matters are being handled. (Member timed out.)

3.07
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern around the oil exploration is on the vulnerable people. I have attended a number of workshops on the Oil Bill; we have attended some with the honourable Minister for Energy and I still have concerns around the vulnerable people within the exploration area. 

I would in particular look at the old age, the people who are not educated enough to defend themselves, the disabled and the widows.  I would have appreciated if the Bill had something that catered for these vulnerable groups, because even if they are paid money, I am sure they may not be able to find themselves somewhere to live. They have their livelihoods within this area and those with children will have to move and look for livelihood, schools and above all, they have their food security on that land. 

I would like the Ministry to come up with a concrete process of how they will handle the vulnerable groups. Already, there is a complaint of low levels of compensation and it is through this that people get exploited; the privileged people end up taking these people’s benefits. 

We will know for sure, Mr Speaker, if the issue of handling our oil exploration is done well by the standard of living of the mostly vulnerable people from that area then. If they are rendered homeless on the streets, or if their young ones are seen loitering on the streets, it will reflect very badly on the nation.

Mr Speaker, the honourable minister and the government will hopefully look into how we shall cater for our vulnerable people in this land where we would like to explore petroleum. Thank you very much. 

3.10
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity, which we have all been waiting for. And I would like to thank the committee and hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi who made a minority report that has some very useful comments that we will definitely consider while amending and considering the Bill during the third reading. 

Mr Speaker, when you read the report of the committee particularly on page 12, in respect of environmental issues, you will find that actually, as a country, we don’t seem to be prepared to handle environmental related matters when production of this oil begins. 

In particular, when you read that page, the committee refers to a possible amendment of certain Acts establishing law enforcement agencies, particularly NEMA. Unfortunately, the committee does not give us the aspects of the Acts that need to be amended to bring them in line with this proposed law. And I would wish the minister concerned and the chairman of the committee would go further and help to guide the country on which Acts and sections need to be amended so that we all move in tandem to avoid an environmental disaster. 

When you read the committee report on the local content, in my view, the locals who should be interpreted to mean Ugandans, all of us inclusive, will only benefit through skills development. It is good we now have the Petroleum Institute of Kigumba; I know the limitations it is going through but we must commend Government and Prof. Kwesiga who is heading it for trying to do a good job amidst scarce resources. 

However, questions still linger as to who qualifies to join this institute. How are students recruited? We know as a fact that some Ugandans have gone to acquire skills in oil exploration in foreign countries. And we know some have benefited from State resources. But who gets to know that the State is going to sponsor specific people to get these skills. Can we have transparency in as far as skills development for all Ugandans is concerned, so that all Ugandans across the regions benefit when production begins. 

Mr Speaker, my other concern is on the land rights, on page 14 of the report. It is a known fact that in some of the land acquisitions by Government, lands are acquired before compensation, and as a matter of fact, I think in respect of the Hoima-Kaiso-Tonya Road, the affected persons are already in court. 

We are talking of an area, which is largely under a tenure system called the customary land tenure. It is also a known fact that this is an area that has a big number of different tribes and customs tend to vary from tribe to tribe.

The question to the ministry is, how are you going to determine the actual bonafide customary land owners in these areas for purposes of compensation?

Two, how are you going to value customary land rights? We know that most of the valuations by Government tend to look at development only and ignore the interests of the people, especially the affectionate attachment to their land. If, in determining the compensations for these people’s land rights they end up getting compensations that will give them money to only buy boda bodas and drink waragi and other sorts of beer, in a few years you will find a huge population that is landless -(Member timed out.)

3.15
MRS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I stand in support of the Bill, but I would like to make a few observations. When I look at the minority report by hon. Lukyamuzi and then the report of the committee, all of them talk about local participation and for this matter the royalties. My colleague from Bunyoro really expressed the need for the royalties to be given to the kingdom.

My only worry is that there is a percentage that is supposed to be given to the local community there, but how are other areas of Uganda going to benefit? This oil is good and maybe it is going to bring in a lot of money and help us solve a number of problems like malnutrition in Namutumba.

However, as we look at royalties, we also have other mineral resources, and I am interested -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for giving way. The information I wanted to give is, out of the 25 active oil wells, 18 are in Western Uganda. So, if we were to divide royalties, it means 18 out of the 25 district would be in Western Uganda.

So, the information I am giving is, probably the minister would have to tell this House more clearly than me, whether it is just a coincidence that 18 out of the 25 wells are in that location because the contrary information we have is that - In Amuru there is oil. If they discovered that oil is flowing in this direction then they come and sink the point for opening in Buliisa. That is the information I wanted to give.

MRS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, hon. Otto for the information. Actually, I also wanted to proceed and ask the honourable minister to inform us and Ugandans that those districts or areas that do not have oil, have other mineral resources. Like we have read in the press and have heard people talking, that there is gold in Lwanika, Kitodha, Kaliro, Kagoma, Mwiri, Namutumba, Baitambogwe and other places in Uganda like Karamoja.

If Government was able to get data on the oil, what is happening to those places that have got mineral resources yet we do not have data? For example, if we wanted somebody to come and invest in gold, that person will ask for the rock concentration, depth and width of the vein. But when they come and say we want to mine gold in Namutumba and I tell them, okay there is gold, they will ask me all those questions and I will have no answer.

Therefore, honourable minister, as we pass this Oil Bill, let Government also concentrate on those other mineral resources so that we also start demanding for royalties.

Electricity in Jinja is in Busoga and Buganda, but I don’t know who is sharing the royalties there. Is it Jinja District alone? The river is in Busoga but Namutumba is grassing; we are not benefitting at all and we do not have anything. We are not sharing, so when shall we ever share these royalties? Discover the gold so that we also get royalties. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.21
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I really want to thank the chairman of the committee and to thank hon. Ken Lukyamuzi “the man” for his minority report.

In debating the Petroleum Exploration and Development Production Bill, it is very important for us to link it up to the vision we have of this country, in order to put a sense of urgency in what we are doing to get the oil out of the ground.

The vision of the country is to transform the economy from being peasantry and of a subsistence nature to being a modern and prosperous one; to move from being a third world to becoming a first world country - actually to become a middle income country by 2017.

This is the urgency. If this country is going to be moved from where it is right now with a per capita income of about US$ 506 per person to near US$ 1000 per person, oil is a very central sector right now that has emerged in our economy. The centrality of this oil in our transformation is helped if we pay attention to what the committee has drawn out in their report. We should do everything because I sometimes sense there is a filibustering on the part of Members to slow down the process of approving this law so that oil can be exploited.

Let me mention the following: The issue of oil – the nature of the sector itself – in economics they call it an “enclave”; it is like an island. Unless it is handled properly, its linkage to the rest of the economy is very limited. 

And consequently, in our law, there are three areas that should engage our attention. The first is transparency in law, because you can imagine that you can extract this oil and export it without any linkage to agriculture, education, health or infrastructure. 

You can also import items from abroad without any linkage to our economy. Therefore, when this oil is being extracted, the way it is being extracted should be very transparent. And that is what this law is proposing and indeed what the committee chairman has mentioned.

Secondly, the issue of linkage – to link what is produced. The issue of equity of participation is very central; that what is being produced from the ground, its proceeds have an impact. Government is right to say that this money is going to develop infrastructure because ultimately when oil is finished, it is the infrastructure you will have developed; the education programmes you would have developed; and health programmes you would have developed that will be sustainable. And that leads me to the issue of environmental protection.

Mr Speaker, environmental concerns as you may well appreciate, I have been Minister of Tourism and Wildlife and most of this oil discovery is in protected areas. It is very important that when oil is exploited our environment is protected. You can have both oil and environmental conservation by putting emphasis on appropriate technologies in exploiting this oil.
 
Just like you can exploit oil along the Scotland coastline without disturbing the marine environment, we can also do the same here with appropriate technology without destroying our wildlife and conservation concerns. So, I assure Members that Government is completely committed to ensure that this oil is exploited without compromising the environmental concerns or endowment of our country. 

Finally, I think we have a problem of managing expectations –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Prof. Kamuntu, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of clarification. The honourable Minister of Wildlife and Tourism, and a former UPC minister, has stated that Government is aware about the environmental degradation we are bound to face as a result of oil production. If Government is really aware of that calamity, how come that a few days remaining before we present the Refinery Bill Report, no environmental impact assessment has been conducted to direct matters on oil refinery? What are you talking about?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, what I am talking about –(Laughter)– is that you have addressed me wrongly. First, I am no longer the Minister of Tourism and Wildlife as you may know. And secondly, being a former UPC member is as well as being a former DP member, former CP member and becoming FDC member. Where you have come from is very important, but what is more important is where you are going. So, where are you going now? (Laughter) We are on oil; we are debating –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will add you one more minute.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Just as a clarification, we are debating a new sector which has emerged in our economy and requires careful management for us to benefit as a country, and to use this oil to accelerate the transformation process we have. Managing expectations is crucial and I think the previous Member raised the issue: Those areas where oil has been discovered should take the view of the rest of the country. If this oil had been discovered elsewhere, what would be your attitude? (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order pursuant to Article 39 of the Constitution of Uganda, which I expect the honourable minister to be conversant with. I raised a pertinent question and said: “How come we are about to present a report on the Oil Refinery Bill when up to now we do not have an environmental impact assessment on oil refinery?” 

The point of order I am raising is very relevant because the minister has failed to understand. (Laughter) So, is the honourable minister in order to meander? The Article reads: “Every Ugandan has a right to a clean and healthy environment.” If you refine oil without producing an environmental impact assessment, you could subject Uganda to toxicity related to the oil refinery. Is he in order to speak without being mindful of that important provision of the Constitution? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is the understanding of the Speaker that an environmental impact assessment is project-based: Once you have a project, for it to take place, you have to do an environmental impact assessment. In which case, a firm, a company or a government entity that intends to put up an oil refinery in a particular location must, as of necessity, do an environmental impact assessment and present a report. And in the Bill, it is part of the requirement - that you first satisfy that before you are granted this. The honourable minister has not violated any constitutional provision, Rules of Procedure and is, therefore, perfectly in order. Please proceed and finish. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, hon. Lukyamuzi knows very well that your guidance is proper, but I only want to add for you to be on the alert. Hon. Lukyamuzi has been a Member of Parliament for more than 10 years and over the years he has developed tactics of filibustering and obstructing debate – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, you have rightly advised and guided the House on the matter raised by the two of us – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which order you have already accepted.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Yes. Is the Minister in order to continue meandering over a point you have already –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rules do not allow any Member of this House to comment on the Speaker’s ruling. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: This is only going to prove my point, Mr Speaker, that hon. Lukyamuzi has developed tactics of filibustering and obstructing any opposing views from being heard and I am pleased that you have guided him properly. 

But in conclusion, the point I wanted to make, of managing expectations and the areas where oil is discovered, is for us to know that oil is an asset like any other asset. Like electricity is generated and water is piped from rivers and it goes to areas where it does not originate. The same reasoning should apply to those areas where oil has been discovered; to know that oil is not in its own entity, there are also inter-linkages.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you honourable members, let me just announce that in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of St Catherine Day and Boarding Primary School represented in this House by hon. Fredrick Ruhindi,  Member of Parliament for Nakawa Division and also hon. Naggayi Nabila Sempala, Woman Member of Parliament for Kampala. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. 

3.34
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you Chairman of my former committee, the Committee on Natural Resources, for bringing a much awaited report. I would like from the onset, to remind the Leader of Government Business of my earlier request four months ago that as we discuss the Bill, as we make the law, it would be proper for an inter-ministerial, integrated, comprehensive roadmap to be brought to Parliament. Short of that we are legislating, and the investor has timelines, yet other sectors are suffering. 

The other sectors supposed to support the industries lack financing. As we speak, there has been no action on the four-year old declared special planning area because there has been no money. They are waiting for money from a World Bank Project and yet the first money we got from the Capital Gain Tax is ring-fenced for Karuma, which is having corruption problems. 

How can we have a sector so important and we do not want to fund it? How can we do that? How can you subject us the communities - my people, the poor - to the loss of their customary land? I am always talking about systematic demarcation of land but where is the comprehensive land planning? The excitement is now all around the refinery. Why not talk about the whole Albertine Region? The oil is not coming from Kabale. The oil is coming from Nwoya, Buliisa and Ntoroko. Yet there is no programme there; even the road - the road is not going where the oil is coming from. The excitement is Kaiso-Tonya Road for a refinery. How do you ask for a refinery before you think of where the oil is coming from? 

Total is moving from Nwoya through Karuma, Kiryandongo, Masindi to come to Buliisa when Nwoya to Buliisa is not even a kilometre away; we just need a bridge across. But we are spending a lot of money on recoverable costs to move 250 kilometres instead of just having a cross. Even a metal bridge would work. (Applause) We do not have an access road. The Energy people have done their part, but the other ministries have not done their work. Works has no money. They just get excited with the Kaiso-Tonya Road but we people in Buliisa are suffering. 

People on the lake still have no areas. The energy people know. Those scientists who worked so hard know that place has no road. You are just remembering our place because there is oil. So, why don’t you put money affront for infrastructure development? That money is lacking. That is why last time I said that you are milking a heifer which you are not feeding. Can you find money for this sector to develop? 

And Mr Speaker, I really want Parliament to have a position on this. Can all the ministries bring here a report? Three years ago, there was a technical, political and inter-ministerial team which went down. The report has never come out, and there is no budget to it. 

So, the intention is good; even the good ideas that the Minister of Water and Environment is talking about should be documented. The ideas in Prof. Kamuntu’s head are good, but they are not documented anywhere in form of a plan. NPA has not produced anything. Ministry of Education has not produced anything. Energy has done a very good communication strategy, but there is no money for it. Local content has a good intention, but there is no money for it. We are not going to build local content in terms of supplies, in terms of suppliers, in terms of skills, by osmosis. It must be funded, it must be deliberate; and it must be conscious and that is why I am supposed to be optimistic, but I find it difficult to be optimistic at this point in time. 

Let me request the Minister of Tourism - it should have been again Prof. Kamuntu - we are looking at the Albertine Region as the best destination of tourism. Uganda was voted the best tourist destination for this year. But you have not come out to tell us how you intend to make this place a tourist destination even after oil. There is no plan. There is no deliberate effort and the access road I am talking about would really help us. (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One minute more.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much. Mr Speaker and colleagues, I want to inform you; the tourism destination we are talking of - the Albertine Area - is globally the richest ecologically biodiversity area. The road we are taking of could connect from Kisoro-Kanungu, through Rwenzori to Bundibugyo, down to Buliisa would increase the fortunes of this country in tourism and this is the long-term investment in a non-oil sector that we are supposed to be talking about. It is mentioned in the policy but in practice I have not seen it. 

So, please help this country. I can even engage some of these excitements of the refinery location. Do not be surprised if tomorrow the consortium tells you the study was not enough. Because with us is an early production scheme of 2008. The findings are now more in Nwoya and in Buliisa; and we are still operating with old data. It is unfortunate that the planning ministry is silent; NPA has                                                little involvement; Ministry of Energy is being overstretched; and yet these are people we should be rewarding. They have done their part. Can we allow other ministries to come in and do their part and we stop overstretching the Ministry of Energy? Minister Muloni is innocent. Her people have done their part; let us bring on board other ministries, give them money, and we stop ring-fencing money for Karuma when people are fighting through corrupt means for a project that is -(Member timed out.)

3.42
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I represent Nwoya County, and in Nwoya County we have more than nine oil wells, and I am a neighbour to Buliisa. I just have four areas to comment on.

One, I remember when we made presentations before the committee, one of the issues that came up clearly was how the ministry and Government is placing local names to these oil wells. At local level we are already having problems with neighbours and local communities over names being given to these oil wells. Some of these names are foreign to the local environment; some of them are not known to the local population; and I remember we made a request to the minister to consider the local people’s interests to place names according to the geographical location of these oil wells.

Secondly, on the issue of economic implications of oil, I know, right now we might be preparing the country for the production of oil by the year 2014/2015, but Mr Speaker, the aspect of tourism and agriculture should not be left out. I know that if we promote tourism well and preferably rebuild our route on Lake Albert, Victoria Nile and River Nile to Khartoum-Juba, we could be having a lot of tourism coming through that area. 

Thirdly - Agriculture; we are preparing our people for oil, but I know not everybody will be absorbed in that sector. We equally need to have a comprehensive plan on how we can promote agriculture and especially commercial agriculture in areas that can be accommodative to such a plan. 

At our local level, we are already fighting land grabbers. I wonder when Government can come and rescue us. Leaders are being taken to court by land grabbers, the situation is becoming nasty and all this is because of speculation and business-minded individuals who feel they can make fortunes within the area where oil has been discovered. We pray Government should rescue us and restrain these land grabbers.

The second last comment is on environment. I remember we made presentations before the committee that already in area called Pabit parish in Purongo sub-county in Nwoya District, some companies have already started dumping waste without the knowledge of NEMA, and without consultation with the community, and this is already affecting the livelihoods of our people. 

The committee has not commented on that and neither in their report have I read anything to do with our concern. As we wait to pass this Bill, what should we do about oil waste that has already been dumped in our areas? 

In line with that, we have got a report that Total as a company is preparing to start ferrying crude oil from Nwoya through Masindi to Buliisa by road, and we wonder how safe our road and our people will be when they start ferrying this oil waste. It is in line with what my brother from Buliisa has raised. 

My last concern, Mr Speaker, is on local content. There are so many companies that have already been given contracts by the oil companies, and they are employing our local people, but the terms and conditions of this employment are very appalling. Our people have not been given room to negotiate for their wage. They are being paid less; they are working more hours per day; they have no insurance scheme; they have no protective gear - these issues are given to foreign employees, but the local people are not being protected. We thought the committee would come up with something in that regard -(Interruption)

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. In fact, Mr Speaker, the Member talked about giving the indigenous people opportunity and how they are being exploited. This Bill should, therefore, come out clearly to state how the indigenous people can  also participate in the oil business rather than just being given jobs, which jobs are not favourable to them; even the conditions are not favourable. The Bill should clearly come out -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information?

MS MUTYABULE: Yes, information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To the honourable member holding the Floor? (Laughter)

MS MUTYABULE: To the honourable member, that in addition – please, let us request the ministry to come up with something for the indigenous people to participate in the oil sector.

MR ATIKU: Thank you honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give my colleague, honourable minister, in waiting is that -(Interjection)- yes, designate; honourable colleague, you should be informed that there are plans by Ministry of Energy to actually lay pipes underground to siphon oil from the other regions for refining in the Buliisa area, and that is being purportedly planned to avoid the fears that you are talking about, but for us in West Nile we are looking at it as a way of denying the people from Amuru and other areas who have got oil deposits of the other benefits that accrue to oil. Thank you.

MR TODWONG: Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I know that the oil in Nwoya is found within the national park, and we have animals in this park; and already, the heavy activities of the oil companies is assumed to be driving away the animals in the park towards the community and we have reported this many times to the Wildlife Authority; we have even brought a petition before this Parliament. Just last week, more than three to four villages were affected - we still wait and ask for answers from this august house.
I know we are ready to start reaping from oil, but I still want to re-echo the need and concerns of people who are residents in these areas where we have discovered oil. Much as you look at the general good of Uganda, we need to pay special attention to the local needs in line with our local cry and voices. Thank you.

3.50
MS JESSICA ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and Members. I want to thank the committee for the report. However, I have the following for clarification.

First, on the issue of skills training where people have been identified; I will need more clarification beyond the criteria for the selection of the students for the skills training. That is, I want to know when they were selected, and since we have problems in relation to employment and these people have been sent in the names of the oil sector, I want to know whether there is surety that when they complete the training they will automatically be employed.

Secondly, I want more clarification on the issue of stabilisation of our economy in relation to what we shall be expecting from the oil. Based on my experience in the destabilisation of our economy, you will find that factors that affect prices of fuel in this country, impact negatively on the stabilisation of our economy. So, how have you planned to apportion the monies that we shall get from the oil in stabilising the prices of oil vis-a-vis other factors in our economy. 

Then, on the issue of land, it is very difficult to differentiate land with oil, and in this country we have got challenges in relation to land; border conflicts are there, and when we look at the flow of oil, it may be cutting across districts. So, how have you prioritised the handling of issues of land and border conflicts so that when we receive issues about production of oil, there will be no more obstacles in the management of production of oil.

I also want to talk about the negative impact  on the environment, which will last forever. And because of this negative impact on the environment, those who are engaged in agriculture will need to find alternative ways of being productive. 

So, I want to know whether we have alternative plans on how to ensure people remain productive when their soils and the entire environment becomes unsuitable for other economic activities.

Lastly, on the creation of the bodies and authorities that we are talking about in the Bill; one of the challenges that we are facing is duplication of activities.

The ministries, such as energy and environment, which have been operational, may come on board. So, how are we going to ensure that the bodies - the authorities - we are bound to create shall remain independent and will not duplicate activities in order to ensure value for money? Thank you, very much.

3.54
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At the same time, I wish to thank the chairperson for presenting this report. My area of concern is the transparency and accountability of this report. The issue we are discussing, which is petroleum, is highly sensitive to this country. The nation is watching and I believe we have got the mandate to come up with laws which are going to be relevant, and to make sure we advocate for transparency and accountability.

As I was just going through the report, I noticed that the minister has got enormous responsibilities. One, he has the legal mandate to appoint the board of the Petroleum Authority. Again, he has the mandate to appoint the board of the National Oil Company. For purposes of accountability and transparency, I thought it would be a good idea if the Petroleum Authority is left as an independent body together with the National Oil Company. For example, the Uganda Human Rights Commission is appointed by the President and vetted by Parliament. It is my humble prayer that the House allows these bodies to be established by a statute of Parliament and be vetted by Parliament at the same time.

Secondly, I wish to talk about the composition and the land rights. Looking at the history of this country, especially in my area in Buwekula; when it comes to land disputes - especially when they were constructing the road from Mityana to Mubende - we noticed that when it comes to compensation, the government takes long. As a matter of fact, land is a fundamental prerequisite for household income and development. I feel, it will be highly problematic if people in Bunyoro, especially the Graben region, experience problems of compensation. So, it is my humble prayer that in case they are going to execute this exercise, they engage the local leaders and communities for purposes of avoiding disputes in future.

It looks as if in this report when it comes to infrastructural design, we are only thinking about Bunyoro region. But we have got some neighbouring districts like Mubende, which are also fundamental to the infrastructural operation of the region. So, it is my humble prayer that we are also engaged or are made part of the work plan.

I would like to also talk about the health and safety initiatives. Again, when you try to assess the oil producing countries, oil is a fundamental element which impacts the environment. As one of my colleagues has mentioned, the neighbouring areas are agricultural. In fact, hon. Lukyamuzi mentioned the environmental assessment report. I believe and think that is right because in some of these areas, we do not want to deal with effects of the issue. 

I think it is better we concentrate on the causes because we can use other countries which are producing oil as references. For example, I have been to the UK in Cornwall. As I talk, it is very difficult to eat an apple in those areas. I believe that an environmental assessment report should be made to avoid some of these issues. I thank you. 

3.59
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this very important Bill. 

It is a blessing to have this oil; but it will also become a curse if we do not handle it very well because we have witnessed many countries which have flourished because of oil, like Norway; and some countries which have suffered like Nigeria. So, where are we taking Ugandans? The Norwegian way or the Nigerian way? We have to be very careful.

One problem I have seen is the power vested in the minister. As my colleague mentioned earlier, the minister is controlling everything. He is the one making the regulations; he is the one approving the licensing and if he says no, the authority has no power. We need to remove these powers from the minister and give them to the authority so that the authority is more independent and does its work very well.

Then on the issue of reporting; the authority should not report to the minister, it should report to Parliament. The minister’s work is only to read for us a report and we debate it so that we know what is going on, rather than reporting quietly to the minister. 

The second one regards the land. These people where the oil is going to be extracted are going to be compensated, yes. They will have a lot of money. What are they going to do with that money? From experience, they may misuse this money, and they will be left without land and become helpless. I suggest that instead of giving them cash, Government must identify land so that they can be settled.

The environmental degradation caused by this petroleum is going to be very serious. We have gases which are going to be in the air; we’ll have liquids which will be running into the water. So, we must have proper environmental laws to ensure that these gases and liquids are properly managed. 

We are aware that when these liquids go into the waters like in Lake Albert and River Nile, it will affect other countries like Egypt and Sudan. So, it is also very important to consult about environmental laws so that we can also include - in our environment laws. I am aware that in Uganda, we have got very good laws, but the problem is implementation. If we do not implement the environmental laws in these areas, instead, our people will perish. It is important that we implement these laws. 

There is a clause on confidentiality in investment. If you say there is some information which should be let out and we do not know, you will find that they may put in place things which are not beneficial to us. Since we have our Access to Information Act, it is important that no information is kept secret. Everything must be given to the Ugandans to know what is being done right from the time of exploration, production, up to the distribution of this oil and also the revenue, so that we benefit from it. Otherwise, if we do not follow proper rules and regulations, this oil will be a curse instead of a blessing. Thank you very much.      

4.03
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want Parliament to know that oil is not only in Bunyoro. The perception has been that oil is only in Bunyoro but I want us to know that it is not only in Bunyoro.

It has also come to our knowledge that giving out land titles was stopped in the Albertine Graben. I want to know from the Minister of State for Lands whether the Albertine Graben stops in Bunyoro and does not stretch to Nwoya District. As far as I know, Nwoya District, where oil wells were found, falls within the Albertine Graben but land titles are being given out even as recently as January this year. People have been getting titles in that area. That has also facilitated land grabbing within the area. Let the minister help us so that we can also help our communities to keep their land.

I would also like the laws of this country to protect Uganda from the impact of oil exploration. When you look through this Bill, it talks about the employees but does not talk about the safety of the communities. As far as I know, all these wells are within communities with people living within those areas. So, in case of any oil spill or adverse effects arising from oil let the local communities also be compensated.

Also, the penalties given to these companies should be deterrent enough, not only paying small monies like Shs 10 million. These companies should pay and not get away with it. We should ensure that penalties are stringent to make these companies adhere to the standards that are internationally required.

I also want to talk about corporate social responsibility. The companies working in these areas should not segregate. When you look at the areas of Bunyoro, Buliisa and Nwoya District, my district, Nwoya, has never received anything as part of corporate social responsibility, not even a road; nothing! They are concentrating on the national park. They should distinguish Uganda Wildlife Authority from the communities surrounding the areas. 

I also want this House to know that much as these companies say that corporate social responsibility is not a must, this money is actually deducted from the revenues that are supposed to go to government. So we demand that the communities also get their fair share. 

Parliament should also look into these laws and make sure that the companies that are working alongside the oil companies are checked. As far as we know, some of the employees of these companies are forming their own companies and becoming suppliers of those companies and then hiking the expenses. At the end of the day, that money will be deducted from the revenue that will go to the Government coffers. 

I want to give an example. On the surface of it, these people are being given small money. In Nwoya District, for example, we have youth who are running away to work in the oil wells. They are being paid Shs 5,000 per day and they are being made to sleep in a hotel within the camp and to pay for accommodation and even pay for the food. In the end, they run away from the work that is being given to them. 

When you read the report, you find that the expenses being incurred in the production of oil are borne by the Government. In the end, it will be more than what the country can really pay for and our country will not benefit from the oil. We should check the activities of these oil companies and their sister companies that are supplying the oil companies. 

On the petroleum fund, I would wish to see that we use the oil revenue in a way that benefits Uganda. In Nwoya District, particularly, I would want to see communities living around the park benefit. As I talk now, the livelihood of the communities around the park is being disrupted. For the next 20 or so years when the oil exploration will be going on, my people will not be able to produce their own food because all the wildlife is running into the community. So, can there be a provision where the communities whose livelihood is disrupted are compensated or given alternative livelihood, so that they can also prosper like the rest of Ugandans? It is better than jumping around that we have the oil when they cannot even receive the end results.

I would also wish to see my country take into consideration the health of women as far as the oil fund is concerned. There are some deaths that we can reduce; besides maternal deaths there are also child deaths that are preventable. Immunising children against pneumonia should be a priority. If we do all that, then all Ugandans will celebrate and we will move ahead as a country and eliminate preventable deaths. 

I would also want to add to what my colleague from Koboko has said on the powers of the minister. (Member timed out.)

4.11
MS BEATRICE MPAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee. The issue I would like to comment about is on transparency and accountability. Remember, since the Eighth Parliament this Parliament has been demanding for accountability and transparency on oil. However, up to now even we, the MPs, do not know how far the oil related issues have reached. You find that communities are not happy because they do not know what is happening in these oil companies and what the state of the government is in regard to its people. 

In order to ensure that everybody is part of this good resource, this government has to inform the communities, at least quarterly, and even us Members of Parliament on the issues relating to oil. So I urge the Ministry of Energy to give this Parliament a full report on all the activities concerning oil up to date. 

The other issue I would like to raise is on compensation. Now we are making laws, which is good, but what is going to happen to those people who have been given less money? In areas where oil was discovered, for example, people were denied a chance to utilise their land and the companies are telling them that they are not going to compensate them, that it is government to compensate them. Our government is very slow in whatever they do, so the communities are losing a lot of money. To begin with, they cannot produce their food on the expected area of land. 

On top of that, when these oil companies are compensating our communities, the rates are very low. These low rates are because of the outdated law which our country has. My request is that when this law comes into effect, we should also consider those communities that are affected by oil and have been paid less money, which cannot even pay school fees for their children.

On the issue of local content, I will give you an example of a lodge in Kaiso Tonya which is being constructed. Most of the people employed there are foreigners while the local community has been denied jobs, and even the casual jobs have been taken by these people. 

Another issue is on the environmental impact of the exploration, which has caused a lot of problems in our communities. You find that there are some oil wells which are within the lake and some of the fish species have disappeared because of this oil. So, as a Government, we need to make sure that we move faster than the companies. What we saw on ground is that the company is moving ahead of the government. We are very slow in our movement and planning, and I always ask myself where we are going. 

Right now, we are having disasters just because of poor planning by Government. The same disaster is going to happen in this oil area because of poor planning. Even if we have the laws, they are not being implemented; for example, some of these environmental laws are there but they are not being implemented, and tomorrow the Government will come up and begin arresting people and yet we saw it from the beginning. We, therefore, need to revise our means of working so that we make sure that this oil is not a curse. 

Honourable Members of Parliament, I want to assure you that this oil is already being considered a curse in my area in Buliisa. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One more minute.

MS MPAIRWE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Another issue is on settlement. This government needs a settlement policy. Even when they are compensating our community on these temporary plots, people will be affected by the oil. 

The government needs to have a policy and make sure that they find land for all those people who are ready to leave that affected area. This land should have a comprehensive plan with well-built houses and all the facilities; our communities will be able to shift and leave that area. We are already seeing what is happening in Nigeria and some other areas where their governments did not plan well for the community. I thank you.

4.18
MS VICTORIA BUSINGYE-RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My first observation is on the environmental damage. Whereas I agree that a law that is strictly binding will be in place after a serious impact assessment is done when the project advances, I still think this is the time to think and frame tangible sanctions for unscrupulous dealers because we cannot foretell the inside of these companies. Designing them early enough and not waiting until the project takes off will safeguard the people of Uganda. These sanctions should also be commensurate to the crimes such that we do not take chances.

When it comes to the environment versus economic dependency of our regions in Uganda, I know that it is natural to be positive on one hand but damaging on the other. We should plan alternative activities that our people can perform and earn a living from because now agriculture in some specific areas is going to be dangerous. So, plans can go hand in hand, in consultation with experts in NAADS, to prepare the alternatives for the concerned areas.

The members were saying that the minister’s powers should be trimmed but they never gave reasons. However, I think that the powers of the minister are executive, authorised and passed by this very Parliament where members are now saying that they should be trimmed. I do not know why, but they should come out clearly and tell us why; is it trim and reduce the power of signing cheques, contracts and all that? We need to be clear before we divert Parliament into thinking that the minister is useless. Is this ministry different from others?   

Finally, I concur with the members who observed that generalisation in the shares should be reconsidered. Sincerely, in the areas where this oil is coming from, there are commensurate hazards that even we who may long to benefit - and of course, we are going to benefit as a country – shall be exposed to, but some of the districts do not share equal hazards. So it is my prayer that we are considerate, we give justice and define equitable shares especially to the districts where oil is directly mined from. I thank you.       

4.22
MS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. The oil that has been discovered in Uganda must not become a source of conflict for communities that have been living together amicably. I would like this to go on record, and Government should take note of the question that I am raising - why must the name of a place change because oil has been discovered there? Why was the name of that place like that before the discovery of oil? Why didn’t anybody ever want that name changed until oil was discovered? 

I would like Government to note that much as we say that oil is got in such and such a district, we must take note that in a particular district, we have very many communities and tribes. The minority tribes must not be trodden upon by the majority in that area. If the oil has been discovered in the land of even the minority tribes, their interests must be taken into account. I would like Government to take note of that. Names should not just be changed anyhow. The history of the name must be dug into so that we know why the place was called that and why we want the name changed now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have an example, honourable member? 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I am a Mugungu, born in Kisansya Village, but my village name has been erased and is now called Kasenene. Whereas my primary school certificate reads Kisansya, I now have to look for a new village called Kasenene. Mention my village name first! At least we can accept if you call it Kabalega –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The information is given. (Laughter)

MS ACAYO: I thank you. Secondly, I am calling upon Government not to underestimate the concerns about the environmental impact. My people of Jonam in Nebbi District use River Nile and Lake Albert as their lifeblood. In Jonam, there is no alternative water source. They do not have trees, wells or swamps. River Nile is the only source of water. In an event of an oil spill, the Jonam would be an endangered species. 

Time and again, we have been getting a number of assurances from Government and yet in the end, they are never implemented. So, we would like Government to take note of our concerns about the environment because these are real issues coming from the people. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does Jonam have a particular meaning which you can translate for us?

MS ACAYO: It means people of the water. (Laughter)

4.25
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Transparency and accountability remain fundamentals for good governance. We can achieve these provided we are transparent, and that is also enshrined in our laws. 

The situation that we find in countries like Kazakhstan, Venezuela and Nigeria, where fights, wars and disharmony of society have become the order of the day, is largely due to lack of transparency and accountability in the oil sector in those countries. If we handle this oil in a very transparent manner, it can be a very wonderful blessing for this country and it can create a situation that we have always prayed for - to see this country flourish, youth employed, our mothers and sisters give birth properly, and teachers, medical workers and policemen earn well. That will not happen if there is lack of transparency and accountability. 

My prayer is that as we enact this law or laws, we take very seriously the aspect of confidentiality. It hurts me that as a representative of the people, youth in particular, and as a Member of Parliament, for one to access the production sharing agreements there must be a policeman, according to the rules before us. You can also only access it for some time and you are not allowed to make notes. You wonder whether we are representing Ugandans or foreigners. I want to believe that we are representatives of the people and none of us here or even Ugandans generally, are refugees in this country or are supposed to be spectators in a playfield. 

For us to ensure that we have proper accountability and proper utilisation of the oil funds, we must make sure that we very keenly put the right positions forward to see that there is no way information is denied to the public. What we must know is that even as leaders in Government, whether the Executive or Legislature, even as technocrats, we are basically - especially for politicians - custodians of people’s assets. We are custodians of people’s assets for some time - five years; at times it is renewed and at times it is not renewed. We are only trustees, like the member put it. So, I find this business of being so secretive to Ugandans who are having difficulty in accessing information on the oil sector very disheartening. 

The other issue, Mr Speaker, is what is commonly called “national oil companies”. I hope that this time round we shall agree to pass a law for national oil companies and not just mention it in passing. That is another area that has become an axis for catastrophes in those other countries. The national oil companies become even bigger than the government itself. So, I hope this time round - I have gone through the Bills and they just mention the national oil companies in passing. My prayer is that we must have a clear law on how to manage the national oil companies. Otherwise, we shall get a very big problem as we begin producing and utilising the oil resources. 

My prayer remains that let us be transparent in the management of oil but also be very watchful as Members of Parliament that we legislate and ensure that we do not leave loopholes where Ugandans can fail to access information on their own resources. (Member timed out.)

4.30
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA	(NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its report and also thank hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi for his minority report. It is true the committee carried out wide consultations but somewhere somehow most of the issues that were raised through their consultation were not captured in their report. I would like to urge members to look seriously at the minority report; this is where most of our issues have been captured. 

The committee’s report has highlighted the issue of transparency and accountability, and most of our members have actually hinted on this component. Honourable members, you are well aware that transparency and accountability are indicators of good governance. In the absence of the same, good governance becomes a dream. 

Government has always said that it is transparent and that it is conducting the business of oil in an open manner. However, there is a global body, Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, which handles matters to do with extractive resources but Uganda is not a member. I was informed that there was a resolution of Parliament that Uganda should become a member of this global body but up to now, Uganda has not become a member of this body. So, if the government is keen in becoming transparent in oil matters, why is it becoming very difficult for it to become a member of this body? It is in this body that you are required to publish what you pay out and also publish what you receive. Likewise, all the stakeholders in this oil sector will be expected to do the same. 

When we visited the oil wells, Tullow said it is a member of this global body but Uganda is not a member. So, we call upon Government that if it is very serious in being transparent and accountable to its citizens, then it should be able to become a member in this global body.

Secondly, in the committee report, they have highlighted the issue of health and safety. The issue of health and safety has been talked about in the report but you will recall, Mr Speaker, recently when we were discussing the budget, we said matters of occupational safety and health are the mandate of the Ministry of Gender under its department of occupational health and safety. However, we found out that this department is underfunded. This is a very serious sector that is coming up and so needs a lot of attention in view of the people who will be involved in working in this industry. So, if this department, which is supposed to monitor and evaluate what is taking place in this sector, is not being funded and is lacking resources and equipment, how will it be able to execute its mandate? It is up to us, Members of Parliament, to ensure this sector is availed funds. We should also be able to highlight in our report that the sector needs to be availed funds to execute its mandate.

Finally, I also would like to express my concerns in regard to the environment. This is a very important issue as we manage the spill-over that will be coming out of the resources of the oil. Thank you very much.

4.35
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At this moment, I would like to thank God for giving us the gift of oil. He has blessed us well although I think we are turning this blessing into a curse.

One time as we moved to Buliisa, we branched off to Kigumba College of Commerce and we found two schools operating in one. The first one is the original Kigumba Co-operative College and the second one is for oil. There were clear indications that oil is becoming a curse. We got to realise that the oil college was operating completely differently from the co-operative college. The oil college is well renovated with students eating so well. They also have computers and have television sets. While the other ones were operating in a shack which was no different from a UPE school in Sironko District. Compare it with a UPE school in Sironko District and maybe Kampala Parents School in Kampala. That is why I am appealing to Government not to let this oil discovery be a curse. Actually, since it is a gift, let it be distributed to all Ugandans. 

I also have issues about how those students are admitted. It seemed to us that the admission is only done in form of handpicking people from certain areas. As we interacted with them, we realised that there was only one student from Buganda and one from Lira. I will not say where the rest said they come from, Mr Speaker – (Interjections) – No comment. Anyway, we got to realise that the people from the oil region are more or less lamenting other than rejoicing. Actually, very soon they will begin - like they have already started – to have their names changed and so on. 

As we headed to Buliisa, we realised that these companies are only interested in exploring oil; there is nothing that is relevant for the society. The roads are bad, the health sector – oh, my God! - the schools, and when you look at the villagers you just notice that they are so miserable as if there is nothing happening in their area. (Laughter) Yes! As we passed through that place, people would just gaze at the cars as if they were seeing them for the first time. Why don’t you employ these people, even as casual labourers, so that they get to know what is taking place in their area? Actually, when somebody goes to buy their land, they cannot tell the price and they just sell it off; they do not know that the land is so valuable.

Lastly, as we enact this law, let us be so general because we do not know, this oil might be in every place in Uganda. Tomorrow you might realise that some of it has been discovered on Mt Elgon. (Laughter) So, as we enact this law, please let us be generous. We should ensure it serves all Ugandans equally. I thank you.

4.38
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Mr Speaker, first of all, I want to thank the committee for presenting this report. I also would like to pray to God – the minister and the chairperson of the committee come from my region – that we also get oil in some of the districts in our region. (Laughter) It will help us to talk with authority.

I have about four issues to comment on. One is about the land rights and compensation. Last month, I visited West Nile and on the way, my car developed a problem while at Karuma. While there, I got to see what happens in regard to land. The middlemen, where the dam is going to be constructed – in fact I shared this with the Woman MP for Kiryandongo - have already grabbed land from the indigenous owners. How do they do it? They intimidate them that they will not be compensated. So, my question to the minister is: how have you handled the rights of people in those places where oil has been discovered? 

Now that we are going to take 30 years, what will the value of land be at that time? How will they be able to benefit in 30 years’ time? Are royalties going to be given to the land owners or they will only go to the kingdoms? That is one critical question that I request you to help me understand.

Secondly, I would like to talk about the participation of the business community. I am aware that all the companies are now foreign; how have you prepared our local companies to compete with these foreign companies? I am saying this because as of now, there are scholarships that companies are giving out but the way they do it is at their discretion based on who they know. So, what is the government’s policy in regard to competing with those foreign companies?

The third thing I want to comment on relates to what the other honourable member talked about, transparency and accountability. The money will come but how will this money benefit a person in Omodo in Katakwi District? I am aware that owners of land where oil has been discovered are vying for some big percentage to go to them. So, how will people like us benefit from it? What precautions have you put in place for us to benefit from it?

Let me also say something further on the issue of scholarships. Mr Chairman, I do not know whether we already have a list of people who have been awarded scholarships from these oil companies. If so, when are you going to avail the list to us? This issue has come here several times. Many times people have said that these scholarships are given only to those who know; for example, my colleague has just mentioned that one region seems to be benefiting more than others. This is a serious issue! So, a list of scholarship beneficiaries should be laid on the Table to help us talk from an informed position. We should not just talk for the sake of it. If even those said to be benefiting are not accessing the money, then where are these people from? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.42
DR KENNETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank God for giving us the wisdom to discover the commercial viability of the oil we have in Uganda. Contrary to the thinking that oil is a curse, oil is actually a blessing. It is only in those countries where the oil economy has been mismanaged in all forms, like corruption or sometimes because of negative foreign interests, that people think that oil is a curse.

Mr Speaker, I want to particularly commend the committee for doing a good job. However, allow me make a comment on the issue of environmental impact and health. You have rightly put it that an environmental impact assessment is project based and we may have to wait for this. However, there is already research being done as far as crude oil, its components and its effects on the environment are concerned. We did not have anything to do with this. Crude oil has got so many components and many of these are so harmful to both man and other forms of life. I would wish that we start looking at some of the key areas where the environment can be contaminated. 

Remember that humans get affected by the products of oil, like one colleague put it, through water sources. The products of oil can get into any living thing, be it human, animal or plant life, through inhalation, contact with the skin and indeed through ingestion. I would like us to consider safety and the safety processes of water for those who live around the areas where oil will be produced. There must be safety measures put in place especially for those within close proximity of the oil exploration areas. This must be made very clear to the inhabitants in these places. An example of this is benzene; a high concentration of benzene in the air – it is cancerogenic - can cause cancers. So, people around those areas should be made to know this. We do not have to wait for this environmental impact assessment; some of these are really known factors. 

There is need to increase the schools in these areas. The schools around these places should be within strict areas and settlements. The people working in these areas, like suppliers or casual labourers, should also be protected from contact with some of the products which are known to be dangerous to human beings.

The effects of exploration and production on the diversity in these areas, which have been very good tourist attractions; I wish that the committee begins to look at how the different sectors of Government are planning to work on these areas and particularly the roads. I am very passionate about tourism because it is an area in which some of us have ventured and been able to earn a living. There are so many trucks in these areas which have affected the movement of animals and tourists as well. There is a lot of dust, and you can imagine tourists sharing the same roads with trucks carrying crude oil along very dusty roads, which at times get very muddy and trucks get stuck. So, I would wish that these roads within the game parks are made very easily passable and convenient to the other sectors, so that they also benefit from this region. It will also be important for us to know how much we shall lose in tourism in these areas. 

Finally, like it has been said, we must put affirmative measures especially in sectors that risk losing out when we finally have oil – what others have called the “Dutch disease”. We need very strategic planning in the areas of agriculture so that we do not lose out and yet oil is not a renewable resource at the end of it all. Thank you very much. 

4.48
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also want to thank the committee, and on a special note thank the government, for opening up and beginning to see how to work against corruption. One of the major objects of this Bill is that the law should encourage openness and transparency while working against corruption, which has eaten this country up. Since that is how the government is talking now and is even ready to enact a law, we should begin developing hope in this country. I would, therefore, like to thank Government for that. 

This oil has raised a lot of mixed reactions; it has brought in place unnecessary expectations and hope because as a country, we are now thinking that in less than five years we shall be a developed country. That is the hope that all Ugandans have. I would like to assure you that this oil is a finite resource - it will come and go - but because of it, we should look at other resources that we have. We should consider agriculture, trade, tourism; all these production sectors must be considered seriously. Therefore, when we are doing explorations and the like, we must see to it that these natural resources, which will be there indefinitely, are protected. (Applause)  

We should not use the oil to destroy our environment because after 30 years, the oil will not be there but we shall still need to use our eyes both day and night, we shall still want to use our game parks to earn money. Government must take that precaution to see to it that those natural resources are protected and not destroyed by oil. 

From this oil, we are expecting a lot of infrastructure development. I am, therefore, proposing that in the areas of exploration, where the oil is being drilled, we need to put aside a percentage especially for roads. Let us get money and put it in the road fund so that we can work on the roads where the exploration is taking place and then we shall consider other areas later. 

History has shown that Bunyoro region, which was called a “lost county”, was given that name for a purpose; now this is their hope to catch up with other areas of the country in terms of development. God has given them this opportunity. (Applause) So, we must consider them and see how to bring them on board in as far as development is concerned. For me who comes from the North, I talk about PRDP, NUSAF, etc. 

I am also proposing that for the time being, it might be better if Government stopped people from buying land in the exploration area. This is because as citizens, we are very suspicious. People are now rushing to this exploration area to buy land because they want to be compensated very heavily when Government is doing so. This is a way of planning to take the money, which we shall be getting from that area to develop the whole country. Therefore, my proposal is that for the time being, there must be no selling of land in the oil exploration areas. 

I also want to say something about the royalties. I know there are other laws coming in place and one of them deals with the royalties we are expecting to pay to the local governments. However, we must be very cautious because our Constitution demands that royalties are paid to the landowners. So, we need to know who these landowners are. (Member timed out.)

4.53
MR JOHN AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the august House for the debate that they are having on this motion. I also want to thank the committee for pointing out some few areas although they were silent on many points, which we were expecting them to come out with.

I want to start with the Bill itself. The Bill is the Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Bill 2012, but when you focus on what people are debating, it is centred on oil and the people, land and the people, development and the people. That tells us that in the law that we are trying to enact through this Bill, we should be very conscious about the people, their interests, expectations and development.

This takes me to the composition of the board. In the Bill, they have proposed that the board will be appointed by the minister and approved by the Cabinet, and they are going to have full authority to manage this oil. If we allow it to stay like that, that means that this law, which we are going to present and enact in the future, is going to be in the hands of the minister and the Cabinet. 

If I am to call upon the country to state what our biggest problem is now as Ugandans, the biggest problem will be corruption. So, where is the corruption? The fingers are being pointed at a few individuals who consider themselves capitalists, and they are vampires who normally want to get an opportunity to hook people’s resources. 

Now the people feel trapped in a way by their representatives, the Parliament. It is my appeal that if we are going to consider the composition of the board, we borrow some few examples from Ghana. We were in Jinja and a delegation from Ghana came and they shared with us how they are managing their oil or petroleum exploration and development. They said that they know their country is being governed by multi-party democracy, and they have given an opportunity to whoever has the structure in the government to run natural resources so that nobody can stand and start a blame game. Instead, they are hooked into the management of the natural resources. A case in point was the oil. They said they gave the opportunity in their constitution and in their laws to other people from other parties to have a say in it.

Here we are in this Parliament; we have representation from all shades of opinion and parties. I would think that we should have a law that will last for many years and one that can reduce conflict, because the law is going to remain. So, we should be very careful when we are instituting the board of management. We should give that authority and power to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

I also want to talk about the issue of the land and the people, which is in the Bill that we are debating. The people on whose land the oil has been discovered have been using that land for some time and that is why they are resisting. They have been getting their livelihood from there. We should include in our Bill capacity building and giving rights to the people where the oil has been found. So, if we were supposed to build a restaurant or hospital or anything that you can call part of development, priority should be given to the people of that very place. If we can put this in our laws, then they will get their rights. 

I was a bit disappointed some time back when I read in the papers that some people came here, including His Royal Highness of Bunyoro and the Ker Kwaro of Acholi, bringing their petitions in regard to the oil. In a way, the media were trying to portray that they were not given their full rights to present their case. Given the fact that the land and revenue or everything that comes from the oil will have to transform our society, if we empower those societies we know that every income or revenue that is going to come from the oil is to develop this country. 

This country that we are talking of developing is the people. If we could place all those benefits into our policies and laws, then transforming our society is going to be easy. However, if we say that we leave it the way it is, just like we have many good policies in this country but they are not being implemented, then whenever some few get an opportunity they will just rush with it. Why is it that these rich men are moving to grab land? After finding out, they start migrating towards where there is oil yet migration stopped very many years ago. 

Why, at this moment, do they want us to subdue and allow other people to take long in poverty? If we give all that power to the local people, definitely we are going to govern our country in peace, and have development and prosperity for long, rather than giving some few areas to some few people who will keep widening the gap between the rich and the poor and in the end Uganda will remain a poor country. (Member timed out.)

5.02
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I appreciate the work that the committee has done. I am happy that now the dust is settling. Sometime back, talking about oil was like a taboo or a very special thing, but now that people have learnt, studied and profiled the oil and petroleum Bill, it seems we are all cooling down and debating in a sane manner.

Mr Speaker, the best gift that we could give the people of Buliisa and the entire region is to re-orient their thinking and prepare them for this new resource about which the whole country is excited. The people at the centre of the discovery will only realise what hit them when oil is about to get finished if we do not prepare them mentally. 

First of all, not everybody is going to benefit directly from this oil. The roads might be built, the skyscrapers may even be built around that area, but that will not remove the poverty from the people until they get re-oriented and get a niche. Some may focus on tourism, for example, which is endless. Others may concentrate on the waters; they have overfished in that part of the lake and so they must plan to bring in more fish and restock that lake. So, this resource must be used in a wholesome manner without focusing on only oil but other sectors that may develop the wanainchi. 

We are already complaining that people are not employed. This is a specialised and highly commercialised industry. In fact, the mindset of the explorers is far different from that of the indigenous people. Even when you educate them up to the university, their thinking remains the same. The person in Buliisa wants to be educated, sit at a desk and earn money. The others are skilled workers – the work is in their brains and not sitting in offices. So we need to re-orient and make the people in Buliisa understand what exactly they can do to empower themselves to benefit from this industry.

I am glad this area has been declared a planning area, but we must look at the traditional way of behaviour of the people of Buliisa. I have just asked hon. Mukitale what his people traditionally do and he told me they go fishing, hunting for fruits in the forest – (Interjections) – they are hunters. So, these people might not want to develop themselves away from their culture. Much as there are vehicles moving around, some may choose to stay in their food-gathering and hunting behaviour. So we must empower them in that field - (Interjections) - Yes, not everybody is going to join the oil industry; they may want to stay gathering and it can be a tourist attraction. 

We go to cities sometimes and we find people doing their cultural activities. We see the Scottish wearing their skirts and yet they are amidst skyscrapers. So, we must also empower those people to do what they like doing best. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery we have hon. Elly Karuhanga, former Member of Parliament for Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura District, and current President of Tullow Oil Uganda. (Applause) He has come to observe the proceedings of Parliament this afternoon. Please join me in welcoming him.

5.07
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The first question on my mind is the issue of unresolved questions. I do not know whether the Bill we are debating touches on unresolved questions like the land use policy in Uganda. Some people are complaining about land grabbing in that region just because the issue of land in Uganda has not been resolved. The land management and land use policy is not yet in place in Uganda. So, I do not think what we will come out with as law will be in position to stand alone without addressing the unresolved questions.

Secondly, there is the issue of sustainable development. Oil is a finite resource and we have lived for a very long time with some infinite resources like national parks and others but we have not been very excited like we are now about oil. I think since we are excited, we need to plan and see to it that once oil is exhausted, we shall have benefited. We need to look at resources which are renewable so that we can benefit from the oil resources.

Mr Speaker, the other question is on accountability. Many people have pointed out the fear of having the “oil curse”. In Uganda, our colleagues and many others are said to be corrupt; I do not know how the Bill has addressed this issue. What percentage of the resources has been put aside to instil patriotism into the citizens? We need to address these issues so that we stop suspecting each other. There is need to set aside some resources to address nationalism so that whoever is in the industry is not suspected. 

Lastly, there is the issue of excitement. I want to emphasise that we have lived with very good resources which are renewable like national parks. We should therefore not be more excited about this one, which has got an end. I think even the people from the region where oil has been discovered should not be that excited because the oil is for all Ugandans; it is within the boundaries of Uganda. Like we have enjoyed the resources from the national parks together, resources from Lake Victoria together, let us also enjoy this one together. Thank you.

5.11
DR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Soon we shall enter the phase of development and production of oil and gas. I would like to call our attention, especially we the legislators, to the issue of supply and delivery of oil and gas to meet the needs of Ugandans. We have seen precedents in some African countries whereby when they started the production of oil, the citizens ended up with petrol stations without petrol, diesel or gas. This is a very sad situation, which we have seen in Africa. I would like to call upon each of us to pay attention and put in place very stringent regulations and laws to ensure our needs are first met. 

I am fully aware that the petroleum industry is going to be controlled largely by the foreign companies. Of course, we know that they have large shares and if we do not pay attention, they are going to have an upper hand in the supply and delivery of oil and gas to the nation. As a result, they might forget about us and think only of bigger profits abroad. We all know that any company is interested in maximising profits. So as Ugandans, we should think about ourselves.

Secondly, I would like to comment on the exploration. I have been made to understand that there was an aerial survey all over Uganda and the aim was to identify where petroleum or other minerals could be found. I would like to ask the ministers concerned if they could make the results of that aerial survey and exploration available to the members of this House. So far, we have only information regarding the Albertine Graben but in other areas we have no idea at all whether prospects of oil exist. We only hear rumours that there might be petroleum deposits in Karamoja or elsewhere; I do not know. Could the minister concerned or anybody concerned supply us with that information?

If that information is available, are we also going to be more proactive to make sure that in the exploration of this oil, we are going to behave like other developed countries where we also gazette the areas of exploration and we reserve some areas for the strategic? I would like the relevant minister to give us this information. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

5.15
MR KENNETH BBOSA KIYINGI: (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this wonderful opportunity. I am not an oil expert and neither are the people of Mawokota South. So when it comes to oil, I am only interested in actually getting to know how best I, as a Ugandan, or my people, can benefit from this oil resource. 

I would like to thank the committee for the report and assure the House that I support this Bill. The only question that I have is: why do many people come out and say that oil is a curse especially here in Africa? When you to go to America, oil is a blessing; when you go to China, oil is a blessing. I think it is a mentality that has been put in us Africans so that we can run away from the good resource that we have. I believe that the Ministry of Energy still has a task to educate the masses in as far as oil matters are concerned. We all need to appreciate the oil resource. Even the local person, deep down there in the village, needs to be well versed with what oil is so that we are be able to benefit from the resource.

When it comes to exploration, actually in the Bill itself we need to consider a couple of things. What do Ugandans expect from the oil resource? What are the products that might come out from the resource? What is the contribution of every Ugandan when it comes to the oil? In this regard, I would like to ask the Ministry of Energy to continue educating the masses. I was glad when Members of Parliament were called upon to be educated on oil matters, but that should not be the end of the struggle; the struggle should continue even to the people deep down in the villages so that we can all embrace this task.

As I conclude, allow me to thank honourable colleagues for accepting to take up this challenge. I know it was a struggle in the beginning but it is a positive one, through your leadership, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.

5.18
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairman for this report. I am concerned about the benefits which accrue from the oil resource, for example, employment. The Bill does not tackle this, or I think it was talked about in passing. We heard that many of these people who are employed in the drilling come from outside Uganda, including, drivers and operators of machines like bulldozers. I just want to know whether the minister has any regulation on employment of the local people. 

Mr Speaker, currently in our universities, there are people who are already taking courses on oil. I do not know whether the minister has taken interest to know the course content of these subjects that they are offering at universities and other institutions, so that at the very beginning we know that our people will be able to compete with others for these jobs which have been created by the discovery of this oil resource.

The other thing is about the mapping of natural resources. I heard about this in passing but I am not very sure, and even the members here may not be very sure, that we have a natural resource map. We do not also know whether this must be kept secret. Sometimes it is one of the sources of abuse because some people who quietly get to know about the existence of natural resources are the very few who get licences, and therefore this limits competition and transparency in getting licences. (Interruption) 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I thought this information was important. The Seventh and the Eighth Parliaments gave money to Ministry of Energy - I think the first ever biggest investment by Government in that sector - for studies and aerial surveys under the sustainable mineral development project. It was US$ 75 million in total. That was the last big funding. Even for the Eighth Parliament to give them a top-up of US$ 5 million was a battle! So, the honourable colleague is very right; if this country can invest in flying over the whole Uganda, including Karamoja which was not flown over, to see which mineral is in which area, then the investors would come when Uganda is aware of what it has. 

The reason why we are getting small investors and speculators is because we do not know what we have and those few who know the information use it in speculation. I think it is important for Parliament to get reports from the Ministry of Energy so that we not only get capital gains but we also invest in knowing what we have. That is the way we shall help this country to move on. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much for that information. Lastly, I thank the chairperson of the committee for this report. On page 31, they talked about opening up of new areas for petroleum activities. I think this needs to be clarified; which new areas? You need to explain to us which new areas you are talking about. Are they already open or these are areas which have already been explored? Thank you very much.

5.24
MS RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. My major concern is on transparency, like the report has highlighted. It is imperative for us to be transparent as far as all the business transacted in this sector is concerned. 

I will, specifically, bring my concern to the Minister for Energy regarding the issue of opportunities now available. The ministry is aware of countries that are willing to give training and scholarships to people. I used to think that a Member of Parliament can have access to any information when they want it. However, when you look at issues like scholarships, for example, since I entered this House whenever they bring up this issue of scholarships, whether it is State House or whatever, people who come from the west are taken in a bandwagon. They say that these scholarships are benefitting this side, but when you go district by district I cannot access information on people from Kabale who are accessing scholarships. I cannot get information on who is being trained in what. 

I want to really put it clear that there is need for the Ministry of Energy to avail us information because in the constituencies, people think we have information. Everybody is looking at the energy sector now. All those who are jobless, and those who have managed to get Bachelors degrees want to know which opportunities are there for scholarships regarding Masters.
 
There are people in this country that have got these opportunities but what do we tell our people who ask us about these opportunities? Where do they find them? What qualifications should they have so that they can also benefit from these? When we are being crucified for our regions benefitting, we can also stand and say, “Well, maybe there is a point.” This is very crucial, madam minister, because it is something that is tainting our names and yet we do not see much from some of these opportunities that they talk about. I also think, of course, it is crucial in the long term for some of these courses to be brought back down here so that instead of sponsoring certain people abroad, very many can benefit from these kinds of training when they are localised and brought into the country.

On the issue of transparency still, we need to learn lessons from countries like Norway, Ghana and Australia and many others which bring this information regarding the oil sector, the PSAs and everything, in the open on the Internet. Sometimes you find we will blame you for nothing; we think there is something you are hiding and yet it is not there. So, let us try to benchmark some of these people that have successfully brought this information on the Internet and know how they do their things. What is it that they think is important that maybe people should not know? But bring most of the information in the open so that people can stop blaming you, sometimes for corruption when you are not even corrupt. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I have listened very carefully to the debate on this matter from the minister, the chairman of the committee and from about 32 members that have contributed. It looks like the discussion is on the whole sector but we have two Bills in this relation. The honourable member for Kabale summed it up very well that we need to analyse all the business transacted in the sector, meaning the business of exploration, development, production, refining, gas processing, conversion, transportation and storage; we should discuss all these things comprehensively. However, we have a separate Bill on refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation and storage, which might take equal time of this debate –(Interjections) - the revenue one is under a different law. 

I am proposing - so that we do not segment our debate - that tomorrow when we resume, we listen to the presentation on the second Bill also from the committee, so that the discussions are comprehensive. After that, we can take decisions in a differed way - we take a decision on the first Bill and thereafter, we take a decision on the second Bill. The committee is ready - it is item 6 on the order paper for today. Would that be a proper way? Instead of going back and then we start the discussions on the same things again, we might have a more comprehensive discussion on these things.

5.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that is a very good way of guiding us because the general debate on the second Bill, which is the midstream Bill, will more-or-less be the same. They may only differ in terms of clauses, when we go clause by clause. So, I think that would actually be the best way to go. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think if we handle it concurrently, it would facilitate a more comprehensive debate on these two Bills 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, that is very good guidance. I am wondering if it were possible, after the presentation of the midstream report, for the Ministry of Finance to just give us the principles of the Public Finance Act. 

The reason I am saying this is because, as you have rightly stated, members are already delving into issues of the downstream Bill. Ministry of Energy moved faster than Ministry of Finance, which brought the Bill very late and the committee is not ready. However, can members benefit from some information so that when we are debating the upstream and midstream Bills we know what is coming downstream? Short of that, you may find that at a later stage, we shall question what we have passed. I think even the natural resources committee has benefitted from some information in the other Bill, so I thought the whole House could benefit from that. Thank you.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, we have had interactions with colleagues from the finance committee. I think what we are going to decide on these two Bills will actually fill into the other Bill. So, I think we are on the right track, even if they do not actually give it to us. They are actually waiting for whatever we are going to pass here or decide on these two Bills to form the basis of the debate of the other one. So, I think it is okay and we are on the right track.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, tomorrow when the House resumes, we will start by receiving a statement from the minister on the motion for second reading of the second Bill, listen to the chairperson of the committee and then we have a comprehensive debate. We will see how far we will go with it and if we are ready to take a decision to go to committee stage, we will take it at the appropriate time. 

The hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi has notified the Speaker that he has a minority report on the second Bill. We will allow him to use the same procedure; after the presentation of the committee’s main report, he will be given an opportunity to present the minority report. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.34 p.m. and adjourned until, Thursday 13 September 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
