


Wednesday, 5 September 2018

Parliament met at 2.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. You have seen what is on the Order Paper. If you look at item number eight, the chairperson of the committee is leading committee members in a field trip this evening and she has requested that this matter be brought forward so that we can handle it and see how to deal with it.

Honourable members, I had also indicated that I will guide the House on item number three. When that moment comes, I will do what I promised to do. Thank you.

2.04
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of urgent national importance relating to cattle raiding, which is being headed by the police and UPDF in my constituency.

Mr Speaker, nomadic pastoralists commonly known as Balaalo came to my constituency around 2003. Last year in October, His Excellency the President directed that the Balaalo should go back to where they belong. When this operation was done, all the Balaalo went back but the few that remained started using the police and the UPDF to raid animals because they had known all the parts and kraals in the constituency.

As I talk, on Friday 24 August 2018, the battalion commander of Bondo Army Barracks released eight UPDF soldiers that were heavily armed to go and raid cattle in Lili village, Bondo Parish, Anyiribu Sub-county in Upper Madi County. When the owners of the kraals tried to find out what was happening, these people that were heavily armed started shooting. As I talk, a one Komakech is still in Rhema hospital. 

The Balaalo claim that all long horned cattle, which are within the constituency, belong to them, which is not the case. We have a number of projects through which people were given these animals. We had a NUSAF project, Operation Wealth Creation and the Nutrition and Early Childhood Development Project. All these led to acquisition of a number of animals, which were given to the people under these projects.

Mr Speaker, the situation is that all the animals, which were given under these projects, have been taken. There are a number of occasions in which the Balaalo, with the help of the police, raided the constituency and I would like to give a brief account of what happened.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to state the urgent matter so that I can respond to it? 

MR ETUKA: Mr Speaker, the urgent matter is that Komakech, who was shot, is still in the hospital. In addition, the Balaalo have taken a total of 1,001 head of cattle belonging to 75 people in Upper Madi County.

My prayers are that the Government, particularly the Ministry of Defence, should come out and state clearly the mandate that the Balaalo have to use the police and the UPDF to terrorise villages. This is because these animals are taken with their help.

I also pray that the Government re-stocks the 1,001 head of cattle, which have been raided on various occasions. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table the following documents: 
    i. A letter to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, who is also the Commander in Chief of the UDPF. This letter condemns the letter, which was written by His Excellency to hon. Vincent Ssempijja on the 24 October 2017 on issues concerning nomadic pastoralists.

    ii. Photographs of the Balaalo that were arrested and taken to Ulepi sub-county police station and referred to Arua Central Police but no sooner had they entered the police cells than they were released.

    iii. A photograph of Droma Yahayah that was shot in one of the raids by the police. 

    iv. A CD containing the recording of the 503 brigade commander, Col. Bernard Tuhame, who committed himself told the people that the eight UPDF soldiers were arrested and that they were going to foot the hospital bills of Komakech who is still hospitalised. 

    v. A copy of a letter I wrote to the Minister of Security in which I partly included the list of the people whose animals were taken. 

    vi. Invitation letters to a number of stakeholders, which letters were received by the Office of the President to ensure that all security operatives come and we forge a way forward. I beg to lay.

Mr Speaker, I pray that the Minister for Defence comes up with a statement to tell us the mandate that the nomadic pastoralists have that allows them to raid animals. I also pray that all the animals, which have been raided, be returned to their rightful owners.

2.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we regret the incidents that happened, especially the injury of one Komakech. We have received information about that incident. 

Mr Speaker, this matter has been discussed here in the House and there has been some resolutions of Parliament regarding the movement of some people with cattle in different regions of the country.

Earlier on, Parliament and Government had resolved that indeed, these people who are moving to those areas should go back. Therefore, we have this urgent issue to attend to and we request the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and update the House tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please call the Minister of Internal Affairs to come here today and deal with this matter. I am not going to put it on the Order Paper any other day. Let this matter be handled here and now. Please call the minister.

MR BAHATI: Okay, sir.

2.12
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising an issue of urgent national concern that pertains to the award of academic documents to students who studied in National Teachers’ Colleges (NTCs); secondary school teachers for grade IV.

All these NTCs are constituent colleges of Kyambogo University and students who study in these NTCs get their awards from Kyambogo University. All students who have studied and completed their courses in these institutions including Kaliro, Muni, Mubende and others from 2013 to date have not received their academic certificates. Because they have not received these certificates, they cannot be employed, cannot apply for Government jobs or even be registered as teachers.

However, those who studied education at the same grade from Kyambogo University get their documents. It therefore seems as if Kyambogo University is deliberately denying the other constituent colleges to get the documents, probably to create space for their own students. 

It is for that reason that I would like to appeal to Government to prevail over Kyambogo University and to come here and explain to us what is taking place. This is because these students study with the hope of getting employment but they cannot apply for jobs five years down the road. Government should therefore come and explain to us what is taking place and whether Kyambogo University has resigned from being the principal institution to issue these certificates to the students. Thank you. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we will request the Minister for Education to brief the House as requested by the Member tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please call one of the ministers to come and deal with this matter today so that we do not keep clogging the Order Paper with these kinds of things.

2.15
MR RICHARD OKOTH OTIENO, (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the unprecedented destruction of rice fields by hailstorms in Nagongera Sub-county and Nagongera Town Council requiring Government bail out from the Agricultural Insurance Scheme.

Mr Speaker, last week, farmers in Nagongera suffered heavy losses when hailstorms destroyed their rice fields. Indeed, one of the farmers collapsed and died on visiting his garden.

Most of these farmers had taken commercial loans for these agricultural enterprises and because of what they went through, they are right now stranded with no means of paying back these loans they had taken.

Mr Speaker, we have established that Government has put in place an Agricultural Insurance Scheme to bail out farmers who suffer from similar losses: losses due to hailstorms, droughts, lightning, pests and diseases, among others.

We have also established that at the moment, Government has put in place Shs 5 billion annually to compensate farmers who suffer such losses and that this scheme is being coordinated by Agro Insurance Consortium. This scheme is being operated in some isolated areas of which Nagongera or Tororo are not part.

Based on the above, I have three prayers:

    1. We request the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Finance to use the Agriculture Insurance Scheme to compensate Nagongera farmers who suffered heavy losses due to the devastation caused by hailstorms so as to enable them repay the loans.
    2. We request the Government, through Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, to provide the farmers with planting materials for the next season because they do not have anything they can use to plant.
    3. We request the Government to provide a roll out plan for the Agriculture Insurance Scheme to all parts of the country other than a few selected areas where it is right now. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we have sent a message and the ministers are coming. The Minister of Agriculture and the Minister for Disaster Preparedness will be here shortly. On the part of Ministry of Finance, we have taken note on the need to extend the insurance scheme as widely as possible. I will follow up that particular issue with the Member and the community affected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATION INTO THE CONDITION OF MEMBERS AND OTHER SUSPECTS ARRESTED IN THE RUN UP TO A BY-ELECTION OF ARUA MUNICIPALITY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Yesterday, this matter came to us for processing and before it was processed, hon. Kafuuzi raised a procedural matter citing the terms of reference of this committee. 

He stated the terms which included four specific terms of reference: whether indeed the suspects in detention were in Gulu; the physical condition of the detained suspects; the charges preferred against the detainees and finally, whether the rights of the detained suspects were being respected. 

In his submission, he stated that some of these terms of reference and the report that would come from them have been overtaken by events. He added that the other bits that remain and that could have been considered are sub judice. 

I did not use my prerogative as Speaker to give a ruling there and then. I allowed the House to have a discussion on this matter so that we could share opinions on how to handle it. I said that I would guide the House on how we would proceed today. I have consulted with the Speaker and the legal team in Parliament and now I rule as follows:

Regarding the term of reference of whether indeed the suspects in detention were in Gulu, I think we all know where they are. Therefore, we would be debating that matter in vain because it would have been productive if this report had been produced within two days of that activity, in which case it would have been clear and guided us. Now we know that two of them are outside the country and some of the Members who were affected came to the House so we know where they are. We know that they have posted bail.

On the second term of reference; the physical condition of the detained persons, we know in part but we do not know what it was at that time. The question is whether what it was at that time is still important today. Should we still discuss their condition as of today? That in part is also overtaken by events. However, for record purposes, it might be something that you may want to look at.

Three, the charges preferred against the detainees. That we already know. We know that hon. Kyagulanyi was first charged in the military court and then the charges were dropped and he was charged with treason in the Chief Magistrate’s Court of Gulu. We now know that. We also know that the other honourable members were also charged and we know the charges that have been preferred on them. That aspect also does not require any debate.

The fourth term of reference: whether the rights of the detained suspects were being respected. The submission from the honourable member for Kyaka was to the extent that the issues of their rights and all those other things are sub judice. His submission was also supported by the learned Deputy Attorney-General who tried at length to illustrate to the House why those issues are sub judice. 

From the chair, I proposed the question on the issue of cause and effect; whether the two can be delinked and handled separately but that was for purposes of provoking thought. 

At the conclusion of that debate, I made a specific request that in order for me to be sufficiently guided, I needed to look at the charge sheet; to look at the statement of offence and also look at the particulars of the offence, which would give me the factual parameters, which would lead me to come to a fair conclusion as to whether the issue that is before us is sub judice or not. 

As I speak, I have not received a copy of the charge sheet. I am therefore not able to determine whether the matter is sub judice or not based on the absence of the charge sheet. 

In the circumstances, therefore, it would be better that the report be presented and we see how we progress with the debate. 

I would like to state as follows to guide how we are going to handle this matter. Issues have been raised about the composition of the committee, about a member of the committee being counsel to the people who are affected and therefore whether his position as a member of the committee could have led to some unfairness in terms of presentation of the report. 

I would like to caution that we are members of Parliament first. If we have assignments outside this House that affect things that will eventually come back to this House, we should have the courtesy to this House, as colleagues, to stand aside from whatever is going on here so that we have the independence to deal with the matter in a comprehensive way. 

However, to be a Member of Parliament and be a member of a committee that is dealing with a particular matter and also be counsel in a matter that is outside but is directly linked to the matter which that particular committee is investigating, does not augur well. It brings in these issues that were being raised yesterday; points of order and this affects the way we deal with matters.  

Therefore, honourable members, with this caution, we know that there are matters in court so I will monitor this debate closely. The minute we start spreading into matters that are before the court, I will halt the debate and continue with other business. I, therefore, invite the chair of the committee to present the report. 

Hon. Atiku, there are issues; I do not think you would want to invite debate on these matters so I would prefer that you do not present the report. The reason is simple; that you signed the report when it was not yet finished. (Laughter) Please, let us not go into that debate. Let us be serious about this matter. Let a member of the committee who does not have any issue get up and present this report and we see how to proceed. Hon. Atiku, I do not want to say anymore, please.

We will debate this matter for one hour so we need to agree on how much time each Member will take. Two or three minutes? (Interjections) Each Member will take three minutes.
2.30
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Mitooma): Mr Speaker, this is a duty I would rather not have undertaken but the chairperson asked me this morning to stand in for her because she is out of town. 

The Banyankore believe that instead of growing some black hair like other people, in some parts, some people grow red hair. The saying goes, “Ngu nkagira eitukura.” (Laughter) However, the word of God also says, “When duty calls or danger, be never wanting there.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which part of the report has this thing of hair? (Laughter) Can you refer to the page? (Laughter)

MS KAMATEEKA: That was a preamble, Mr Speaker. I stand here to present a report of the ad hoc committee on the plight of members of Parliament and other suspects who were brutally arrested and detained by security forces in the run-up to the Arua Municipality by-election. 

On 15 August 2018, the Parliament of Uganda resolved to constitute an ad hoc committee to ascertain the condition of the members of Parliament and other people with whom they were arrested on the eve of the by-election in Arua Municipality. 

There had been attempts by the minister to present a statement and the honourable members could not agree. The Rt hon. Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business informed the House that he was not aware of the whereabouts and conditions of the detained MPs but later undertook to find out and report to the House. 

While giving feedback, the Rt hon. Moses Ali denied reports that the suspects in detention had been tortured. He added that hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu was in Gulu for medical treatment and that he was found with a gun and would be arraigned before the General Court Martial in Gulu on Thursday, 16 August 2018. This raised concerns and so the House decided to constitute an ad hoc committee.

The ad hoc committee membership included:
    i) Ms Doreen Amule (Chairperson, as Chairperson of Defence and Internal Affairs);
    ii) Ms Jovah Kamateeka (Member, I am sure because of being Chairperson, Committee on Human Rights);
    iii) Mr Medard Sseggona (Member);
    iv) Mr Andrew Baryayanga (Member);
    v) Mr Benard Atiku (Member) He was not nominated in the House but later nominated by the Speaker;
    vi) Mr Allan Ssewanyana (Member).

Terms of reference

The ad hoc committee set out to ascertain: 
    1. Whether indeed the suspects in detention were in Gulu;
    2. The physical condition of the detained suspects; 
    3. The charges preferred against the detainees;
    4. Whether the rights of the detained suspects were being respected.

The committee travelled to Gulu in the morning of 16 August 2018 to attend court and interact. I will go to page 6.

Term of reference no.1: Whether indeed the suspects in detention were in Gulu 

The committee arrived in Gulu and found hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Gerald Karuhanga, hon. Kassiano Wadri, hon. Michael Mabikke and about 26 other suspects at the holding facility for suspects at the Chief Magistrates Court in Gulu awaiting appearance before court. Five of the suspects were women. However, hon. Robert Kyagulanyi and hon. Francis Zaake were not among them. 

After meeting these suspects, the committee travelled to the barracks and met with the UPDF Fourth Division Commander, Brig. Emmanuel Kanyesigye and he initially denied holding hon. Robert Kyagulanyi at his barracks but the committee was told that hon. Kyagulanyi would be appearing before the Court Martial in the afternoon.

The committee observes gross insincerity on the part of the military at the Gulu Military Barracks considering that within a few hours of denying the presence of hon. Kyagulanyi in detention at the barracks, he was arraigned in the General Court Martial sitting at the same barracks.

At the time of the committee's visit in Gulu, the whereabouts of hon. Zaake were unknown to both the police and military at the time, raising further questions about his fate especially in light of the gory images of him that circulated on social media a few days earlier. 

The committee found this strange considering that hon. Zaake had been arrested by the military together with the other suspects. The committee later learnt on Sunday, 19 August 2018, that hon. Zaake had been found dumped in the vicinity of Rubaga Hospital. Therefore, the committee did not have any knowledge of the whereabouts of hon. Zaake until the 19th August 2018. 

However, the committee later attended the court session at the Chief Magistrates Court in Gulu where the suspects were charged with the offence of treason. The charge sheet included the names of hon. Kyagulanyi and hon. Zaake as A5 and A6 respectively. In other words, the committee confirmed that the bulk of the suspects were in Gulu, except for hon. Zaake.

Term of reference No.2: The physical condition of the suspects 

An interface with and observation of the detained MPs and other suspects revealed that they had been severely battered with hon. Gerald Karuhanga, hon. Paul Mwiru and hon. Michael Mabikke complaining of chest and back pain. Hon. Gerald Karuhanga was limping as a result of an injury to his knee. 

They stated that they had been viciously brutalised during and after arrest while in police custody in Arua and during transportation between the place of arrest and detention at Arua CPS and later Bondo Military Barracks. They further informed the committee that the brutality and beating was administered by men dressed in uniforms of the Special Forces Command (SFC). 

Of the other 26 suspects jointly detained with the MPs, five were women. Two of the women could neither sit nor stand as they groaned in excruciating pain on the floor of the suspects' holding facility at the Chief Magistrate’s Court in Gulu. They could barely speak. One of the women, Asara Night, was reportedly suffering haemorrhage from her private parts. 

Their condition was symptomatic of effects of brutal force and savagery either at arrest or during detention. One of the female suspects informed the committee that her baby of barely 16 months, with whom she was arrested, had been left behind in Arua. One of the male suspects, Shaban Atiku, could neither walk nor sit and complained of extensive bodily pain arising out of severe beating while in detention.

The committee is cognisant of the provisions of Articles 24 and 44 (a) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which prohibit torture, inhumane and degrading treatment. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is reinforced by the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012 that criminalises torture in any form. Uganda is party to the UN Convention against torture and other cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment and punishment and other related matters. 

The report did not mention here that the committee returned to the barracks in the afternoon of that day but we were denied access to hon. Robert Kyagulanyi. While the committee was flatly denied access to hon. Kyagulanyi who was in detention at Gulu Military Barracks, its member, hon. Medard Sseggona, who together with hon. Asuman Basalirwa volunteered at that time to offer pro-bono legal representation to hon. Kyagulanyi, was later allowed access to him during the Court Martial proceedings. This followed an earlier episode where the committee and other members of Parliament were forcefully chased out of Gulu Military Barracks where they had earlier been allowed. This was on the orders of the division commander.

The two honourable members informed the committee that hon. Kyagulanyi was in a terrible state; unable to sit, stand or speak with visible signs of cruel and brutal treatment with his face swollen and a wound on his ear and to the back of his head. 

The two honourable members were accorded time by the General Court Martial to interact with him but there was no interaction as he could not speak. Despite his already dire situation, the committee was informed that hon. Kyagulanyi was still handcuffed in detention at Gulu and was unconscious during the proceedings of the General Court Martial.
 
During the committee’s interface with hon. Kyagulanyi in detention at Makindye on 20 August 2018, he was ignorant of the charges that had been preferred against him at the General Court Martial in Gulu on Thursday, 16 August 2018. This is testimony of his being unconscious during his first appearance at the General Court Martial.

On the term of reference as to whether the rights of the detained suspects were being respected, Article 23(3)(b) of the Constitution requires a person restricted or detained to be produced in court as soon as possible but in any case not later than 48 hours. In the case of all the 34 suspects in detention, this right was blatantly violated. The suspects were arrested on Monday, 13 August 2018 and only arraigned in court on Thursday, 16 August 2018, about 72 hours after arrest. 

Secondly, Article 23(5)(a) of the Constitution stipulates the rights of a person who is restricted or detained to have their next of kin informed as soon as practicable of the restriction or detention. 

The same Article requires access to a next of kin, lawyer and personal doctor to the person so detained. Again, this right was violated to the extent that no next of kin was allowed access to hon. Kyagulanyi and that members of Parliament, as well as his family, were being misled by both the police and the military as to the whereabouts of the detained Member of Parliament. Even when he was being arraigned before the Court Martial, his wife, relatives, friends and members of Parliament were denied access both to the suspect and to the proceedings of the General Court Martial. 

The suspect was denied right to his personal doctor even when his condition was confirmed to be worrying. Some of the suspects in detention, whom the committee was able to interact with, were in dire need of urgent medical attention; notably the two women and the one gentleman who could neither sit nor walk and were visibly in deep pain including hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Gerald Karuhanga and hon. Michael Mabikke. However, they had not been accorded access to requisite medical help, save for diagnosis by the police surgeon, moreover without medication.

Hon. Medard Sseggona and hon. Asuman Basalirwa who volunteered pro bono legal services were allowed by the military to witness the proceedings of the General Court Martial before whom hon. Kyagulanyi was arraigned. In his disquieting physical state, he was arraigned and pleaded with the General Court Martial for an opportunity to have private medical personnel urgently access him. They were reportedly assured that this would not happen immediately but rather in the future when the suspect is at the Makindye Military detention facility.

The committee notes that the deprivation of the suspects, in their deplorable state, of access to private specialised medical help of their private doctors predisposed the suspects to grave danger to their health and possible death. From the time of their brutal arrest and detention on 13 August 2018, hon. Kyagulanyi, despite his deplorable state, was only able to access his private doctor on Monday, 20 August 2018 while at Makindye.

The Golden Hour 

This was completely oblivious to the cardinal medical concept of the golden hour; a decisive timing in either saving one from death or averting devastating health consequences, especially after an injury or grievous bodily harm. The Golden Hour, also known as the Golden Time, refers to the period of time following a traumatic injury during which there is the highest likelihood that prompt medical and surgical treatment will prevent death.   

Article 23(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that a person restricted or detained shall be kept in a place authorised by law. The committee observed that hon. Kyagulanyi was detained in two military barracks: Gulu Fourth Division and Bondo. Hon. Francis Zaake’s place of detention was never brought to the attention of the committee. The rest of the members of Parliament were detained in Bondo Military Barracks, and Arua and Gulu Police Stations. 

Gulu and Bondo Military Barracks are not gazetted detention facilities. Therefore, the detention of suspects in those places violated Article 23(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Article 28(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that in the determination of a civil right and obligations or any criminal charge, a person shall be entitled to a fair, speedy and public hearing before an independent and impartial court or tribunal established by law. 

However, the proceedings of the General Court Martial, where hon. Kyagulanyi Ssentamu was arraigned, were largely closed door with only hon. Medard Sseggona and hon. Asuman Basalirwa allowed after lengthy pleading. Not even the suspect’s wife and family members were allowed to witness the proceedings.

The committee observed, therefore, that the right to a public hearing in the case of hon. Kyagulanyi was denied. Article 28(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that, “Nothing in clause (1) of this article shall prevent the court or tribunal from excluding the press or the public from all or any proceedings before it for reasons of morality, public order or national security, as may be necessary in a free and democratic society.”

The committee notes that the General Court Martial did not pronounce itself on barring the public from attending its proceedings. This decision was purely on the military at the barracks. 

Article 28(3)(b) provides that every person who is charged with a criminal offence shall, “… be informed immediately, in a language that person understands, of the nature of the offence.” However, the unconscious state in which hon. Kyagulanyi was, at the time he was arraigned before the General Court Martial in Gulu, implies that he could not and indeed did not understand the charges read out to him. This, the committee proved on 20 August 2018, during their visit to the honourable member, during which he was totally unaware of the charges read out to him on 16 August 2018.

The committee was informed that hon. Kyagulanyi’s inability to speak due to his deplorable physical state was met with a threat of being charged for contempt of the General Court Martial by the Chairperson of the General Court Martial. 

The committee observed that hon. Kyagulanyi’s right to be informed of the charges preferred against him was therefore violated. 

The term of reference regarding the charges preferred against the detainees

Hon. Kyagulanyi was arraigned before the General Court Martial sitting at the UPDF Fourth Division Barracks in Gulu on 16 August 2018 at 4.00 p.m. and charged with three counts of unlawful possession of firearms contrary to section 3 of the Firearms Act.

He never responded to the charges considering his inability to understand the proceedings. He was remanded to Makindye Military Barracks until 23 August 2018.

Hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Gerald Karuhanga, hon. Kassiano Wadri, hon. Michael Mabikke and the rest of the suspects were arraigned before the Chief Magistrates Court in Gulu, charged with treason and remanded to Gulu Central Prison until 30 August 2018. Hon. Francis Zaake had not been arraigned in court and his whereabouts were unknown at the time. 

The attendant observations and recommendations:

    1. The need to save the life of hon. Kyagulanyi Ssentamu and other suspects in dire state. 

As earlier noted, the committee was ultimately allowed access to hon. Kyagulanyi Ssentamu in detention at Makindye Military Barracks on Monday, 20 August 2018. 

His physical condition remained worrying. His left lower body was paralysed, he spoke and breathed with difficulty, often breaking to catch his breath. He sat with difficulty and could not move his body by himself. 

However, he was able to speak albeit with difficulty and narrated the circumstances of his arrest in his hotel room in Arua. 

The committee observed that hon. Robert Ssentamu Kyagulanyi requires urgent specialised medical care, preferably abroad. 

The committee therefore recommended that the Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament takes it upon herself to liaise with the President and other relevant authorities to enable hon. Robert Ssentamu Kyagulanyi to be referred outside the Makindye Military Barracks for better medical management. Any meaningful trial of hon. Kyagulanyi can only happen if his right to life and health is respected by the State.

    2. The stature and dignity of Parliament 

The treatment meted out on members of Parliament by soldiers at the UPDF Fourth Division Headquarters in the afternoon of 16 August 2018 was inappropriate and an affront on the stature and dignity of Parliament. 

While the committee had fruitful interface with the Fourth Division Commander in the morning of that day whereupon he promised members to access the detained Member of Parliament and attend the proceedings of the General Court Martial as per Parliament's directive and whereas members were allowed into the barracks upon return at 2.00 p.m. on that assurance, the manner in which members of Parliament were chased out of the barracks into the rain by over 30 soldiers under the command of one Col. Kanyoro was very inappropriate and degrading.

While the military may have a high sense of entitlement in politics, given the recent history of our country, the actions of the soldiers towards members of Parliament is testimony of the aggressive erosion of the stature and dignity of Parliament. 

The committee observes that the image of the UPDF as a people's army mandated to protect the lives, property and dignity of the people of Uganda, which won them the love and support of all Ugandans becoming the pride of the nation seems to be at stake.

The committee recommends that the UPDF respects and protects human and people’s rights in the discharge of its constitutional mandate so as to maintain its reputation as a disciplined people's army.

    3. The need for protection of the dignity of the common Ugandan 

The agrarian principle of human dignity provides that every human person regardless of creed, status, ethnicity, rank, moral standing, belief system or political persuasion is entitled to dignified treatment no matter what they do or what happens to them. 

The law and public institutions exist to protect such dignities. The entire chapter four of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is about protection and promotion of fundamental and other human rights and freedoms.

The committee observes that the unleashing of brutality by the military and other agents of the State onto Ugandans, as exemplified in the run up to the Arua Municipality by-elections, is an affront on the rights and dignity of mankind. 

Article 20 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda recognises that fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual are inherent and not granted by the State and that the rights and freedoms of the individual and groups enshrined in Chapter four of the Constitution includes respect for human dignity and protection from inhuman treatment, life, health and a fair hearing shall be respected, upheld and promoted by all organs and agencies of Government and by all persons.

The committee observes that the brutalisation and maiming of suspects and journalists is not only a worrying sign of a slip back in the rule of law but also dents the faith of citizens in the Government and erodes the sense of nationhood and casts the country in bad light in the international community.

The committee recommends that those individuals and State institutions that were complicit in the derogation of human rights and dignity should be punished. Justice must not only be done but must be seen to be done.

    4. The role of the military in law enforcement 

Article 209 of the 1995 Constitution stipulates the functions of the defence forces as follows:
a) 	“To preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda;
b) 	To cooperate with the civilian authority in emergency situations and in cases of natural disasters;
c) 	To foster harmony and understanding between the defence forces and civilians and;
d) 	To engage in productive activities for the development of Uganda.” 

The committee notes that in the case under consideration by the committee, the military may have assumed a role that is not theirs, as matters of the preservation of 1aw and order are a preserve of the police as provided for under Article 212 of the Constitution of Uganda.

The very act of security personnel beating up civilians contravened Article 24 of the Constitution on the respect of human dignity and protection from inhuman treatment and Article 221 of the same Constitution, which provides that, “It shall be the duty of the Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces and any other armed force established in Uganda, the Uganda Police Force and any other police force, the Uganda Prisons Service, all intelligence services and the National Security Council to observe and respect human rights and freedoms in the performance of their functions.”

The committee did not find any evidence that the situation in Arua was beyond the ability and capacity of the Uganda Police Force and therefore finds the recourse to brutal force by the military against civilians not only disproportionate but also inhumane.

The military and other errant State functionaries that are complicit in violating the law and eroding human rights and dignity should account for their actions.

Conclusion

The committee is of the considered view that Parliament and Government does whatever is possible to ensure the evacuation of hon. Kyagulanyi Ssentamu from Makindye Military Barracks that clearly does not have the requisite capacity to afford the severely tortured and incapacitated hon. Kyagulanyi the required medical expertise to reverse the damage occasioned upon his body by Ugandan State security officials.

In addition, other suspects that remained in detention yet nursing horrendous body injuries namely, hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Gerald Karuhanga, hon. Michael Mabikke, Ms Night Asara and Mr Shaban Atiku should be immediately accorded an opportunity to receive appropriate specialised medical attention. 

Health and life are preconditions for a fair trial and should therefore be prioritised. 

For the transgressions by State security forces on human rights and dignity, as witnessed by the killing of a one Yasin Kawuma in Arua on 13 August 2018, the grievous bodily harm occasioned unto members of Parliament and other suspects as well as other individuals, the committee recommends expeditious justice and accountability if the rule of law is to be respected and the pattern of state orchestrated violence is tamed.  I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson, for presenting this report. Honourable members, this is the report of the ad hoc committee. We shall have a debate and each Member will be taking three minutes. At this point, if the two leaders of this House would like to make a comment right now, I would entertain comments from the Rt hon. Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition. This debate will take an hour.

3.03
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kamateeka for having the courage to perform the role of the chairperson of this committee and therefore making Parliament able to get the report that she has read.

Mr Speaker, I am glad that we are debating this report after the temperature and emotions have cooled down. It is true, as my sister said, that in some cases, they are still high but I am talking in comparative terms.

Let me also say that we regret the loss of life that is associated with incidents that started in Arua and reached a number of other areas. Some compatriots have lost their lives and others have been injured. This is a situation that we, the people of Uganda, should always go out of our way to make sure that such a situation does not come because it is a very costly exercise in terms of human life, inconvenient injuries, business and normal transaction of life. 

The main point I would like to make about this report is that it was written in the heat of the occurrences that were taking place. As a result, you see a lot of biased positions in it, some of them definitely unsubstantiated. Consequently, that pierces holes in this important report and therefore, when colleagues are discussing it, these shortcomings must be taken into account.

The next point I would like to point out is that although we formed a team to go, the team was not united nor was it coherent; it did not converge on many issues. That is why the report has had to be read by hon. Kamateeka –(Interruption)– Mr Speaker, if only hon. Ssekikubo could be brought to order, I would complete my contribution. 

The next point I would like to make is that this report has significant weaknesses because the events occurred in Arua. In order to trace the real story, we needed the committee to visit the initial site of the problem, trace the story as it evolved, see the situation in Arua and then eventually come to Gulu and other places. It would then come with a coherent conclusion after all the actors had been looked at and asked questions. Then we would have a complete picture. 

Let me also add that I have not seen a report about a conversation or talk with the commander who was in charge in the situation in Arua. Therefore, there is a big gap in this report. I have not seen a report of this committee talking with His Excellency President Museveni who was the first victim of being pelted with stones. For a report to come and give us a picture of what happened without the critical witnesses being brought on board, in my view, does not give us a full picture. 

The report also talks of the military getting involved when the police could have handled the situation. The security system in this country is clear that whenever there is a challenge, any security organ is at liberty to call on another to be able to reinforce it so that, that security challenge can be effectively handled. 

Therefore, given the security situation in Arua and the events that followed, including Kampala, it was right that the general security infrastructure: police, intelligence and Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) came in quickly to handle the situation. I am glad they came in quickly and stopped the violence that was beginning to come up. 

If this did not happen, we could have had more problems. In fact, I would like to definitely commend, without any doubt, the precision, effectiveness and prompt action of our security organs who were able to contain the situation and prevent chaos that could have come out of the problems.

The last couple of comments I would like to make is on the treatment of our brothers who were involved – (Interjections)– Mr Speaker, I am very well informed and well clarified – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we have a debate please?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, let me reiterate that in conclusion, the Government of the NRM firmly believes and practices the rule of law and we will adhere to that. That is why the NRM is in power.

Number two, I am glad that this has been a test of the organs of the State. We have seen the Judiciary perform its work, and performed it well; we have seen security organs perform their work and they have done it very well – and by the way, we are seeing Parliament also rising to the occasion.

In a nutshell, it is a big credit because the institutions of Government; the Judiciary, the Legislature and the Executive are working well, in spite of all the challenges that are facing us.

Government will leave no stone unturned in investigating and dealing in detail with all sorts of elements and other problems that accompany this situation. Government will make sure that at the end of the day, the victims are properly handled and the people that committed the crimes are properly dealt with. 
The critical point here is enforcement of the rule of law. And because of the problems that I have mentioned in the report, and because of the fact that there is no concrete evidence being produced on a number of issues being raised in the report, I personally propose that, this august House rejects this report.

3.13
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the ad hoc committee for the work that they did. They were given terms of reference and they actually stuck to them. That is why they could not reach Arua. So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please take note of that. 

Let me also start on a note of quoting the Bible. When you go to Psalms, Chapter 15, it talks about truthfulness. Even if something has a cost that you have to incur, you still have to be truthful.

I would like to thank hon. Kamateeka for standing on the truth. Probably, this is a time that we also need to see that the Committee of Human Rights is best managed by the Opposition and not Government. Well, it will have to be reviewed.

I would also like to say that, on 17 August 2018, I was in Makindye Military Barracks. This is where hon. Kyagulanyi was detained. My team and I were chased away like dogs, including media houses. We did not matter to them at all. That very day, we went and found hon. Zaake in Rubaga Hospital. If one was humane at all, they would not hold back tears.

He had real marks of torture - I think those people were not meant to live. People that are humane enough can understand the plight of those two people; hon. Zaake and hon. Kyagulanyi. 
As for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to stand here and say that this report should be rejected, I really pity you. What a shame. I just would like to say that, I went to Gulu prison on 19 August 2018 and saw hon. Paul Mwiru and hon. Gerald Karuhanga. At least hon. Wadri and hon. Mabikke were fairly okay.

When I went to the women’s side and saw Councillor Night Asara; she cried for 15 minutes before she could speak to us – (Interjections) - you will have your time for the debate. Sadly, there were torture marks on her body. Her right hand, which she had used for protecting her head was not alright. The leg was not alright as well. 

She also had blood oozing out of her private parts. You, honourable members of Parliament, when we are debating this, let us debate with sincerity. Just as this committee was chased away from Gulu Military Barracks, so were we chased away from Makindye Military Barracks. 

It is unfortunate that whenever His Excellency, the President goes to support his candidates, there are usually problems. I was in Arua Municipality for nomination and people were excited and running along the roads in groups and there was no problem. Why was there a problem when the President went there? 

Let us all think about it. It is the President’s Special Forces Command that brought problems. Probably, I would also say that because hon. Wadri was actually on the upper side of winning the election, they wanted to disorganise it. Councillor Sarah, also testified that she was also tortured by the DPC of Gulu Police Station. This is very unfortunate –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MS BETTY AOL: Mr Speaker, I would like to say that the report of the committee – even minus Arua, is commendable, but if Arua was included, it could have even become better. It is completely correct and I also would like to say that, this Parliament should again re-examine/review the Committee on Human Rights.

Human rights abuse is the order of the day in this country. Moreover, it is done by Government and condoned by the President of Uganda, as well. Why should we do this? I also would like to say that, for those that think that the two Members of Parliament, plus the others that were incarcerated were just comedians, it is very unfortunate – I saw this myself. Well, we say that, to God be the glory.

We are all alive here. As long as we are alive, we should have human hearts. If our hearts are stone-hearted, then tomorrow you do not know where you are going to meet with your colleagues. We are here not as enemies. We are here as opponents, but there is need to protect each other and all of us as members of Parliament, when one is suffering, all of us must feel with them. 

However, I am so surprised that even the chairperson of the ad hoc committee refused to sign the report. If the Chairperson did not agree with the report, she could have come out with her minority report as an individual. 

I would like to thank you very much. I have spoken and if I have hurt you, it is for the truth and nothing else but the truth. 

For the Muslims, go and consult your Holy Quran and the Christians should go read their Bible. All of us should be truthful with our friends. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a procedural point from Gen. Tumwine, has it been overtaken by events?

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rose to respond - 
[Hon. Odonga Otto rose_]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: General, you rose on a point of procedure.

GEN. TUMWINE: The procedure sir, which I rose on, was overtaken by events.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it was overtaken by events then we just leave it.

GEN. TUMWINE: I am now rising on a point of order. Mr Speaker, we are here in a Parliament where debate is supposed to be heard in order. A report has been read in this House. The background, content, membership and outcome of the report raises issues -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you rose on the point of order. Please. 

GEN. TUMWINE: I am giving a preamble to my order. The point of order I am raising is that when you –(Interjections)– I have the Floor, Mr Speaker, protect me. [Hon. Osegge, rose]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please raise the point of order.

GEN. TUMWINE: How can I raise it when I am not able? Can she sit down? I have been in this Parliament; I know the procedure of this House. 

The point of order I am raising is that in this House, we are supposed to debate with discipline so that we can hear each other. Is it in order for some Members - hon. Ssekikubo as being the first to use his dirty hands on me, hon. Odonga Otto to rise and disrupt Parliament without proper discipline, honourable members to rise when somebody has raised a point of order without allowing the Speaker to rule - like the Leader of Opposition was doing? Is this Parliament in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in whatever we do, we need to maintain the dignity of this House. (Applause) We can disagree but you can disagree in some agreeable way that if the disagreement now becomes a source of concern itself, the way the disagreement is articulated becomes a problem, then it is a problem. 

We should respect each other because sometimes the opinion you hold about yourself may be very high but don’t give a lot of difficulty to people who try to respect you to continue respecting you. We do not want to suffer respecting people. We want to respect people because they deserve respect.

Honourable members, because I was listening, I had allowed the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to speak first and allowed the Leader of the Opposition to follow with her speech. I over overruled all procedural matters that were being raised. 

Gen. Tumwine rose on a point of procedure, same with hon. Osegge and she is there and I was going to allow her after Gen. Tumwine so that we do not disrupt the flow of ideas from the leaders who were addressing the House.

When hon. Angelline Osegge rose on a point of procedure, I told her to wait to let them finish. I had not witnessed a dangerous procedural situation that would disrupt the flow of this House - that is why I paused those points of procedure. 

I try to guide this House to the best of my abilities and if my abilities are not satisfactory to you, I cannot apologise to you because it might be that your level of expectation is beyond human - you expect the Lord Almighty God or Allah to be the one presiding here but I am not and if there are those short comings, please take me as a human being even if I do not deserve your respect, which I do not seek for and I do not need but at least, let us accord this House some respect. 

The conduct of some of you - one time there was a judge that every time was on issues of contempt; when you say something, he sends you in for contempt. But then, a senior judge one day came to him and said that great judges do not have contempt just like great Speakers do not have contempt; they ignore - (Applause) - because some of the things, you do not even have to dignify them with a response but ignore them because that is what they deserve.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had earlier on risen on a point of procedure. My issue was, to me, it appeared the Prime Minister was setting his own questions and terms of reference. 

Mr Speaker, if this was an exam, he would have failed flat because he did not refer to any of the four points of reference that were given by this House but just rose to defend what in my opinion, is indefensible.

Mr Speaker, what I would expect a leader in the position of the Prime Minister to say to this House and to Uganda is to strike a reconciliatory tone and probably apologise for those who lost their loved ones and to those who are harmed but not to come and defend the situation where all the evidence is pointing to what has been said in the report.

Denial of torture when even Government has cleared the honourable members to go for further treatment abroad; tell me what would be the reason for them going to seek further medical attention if they were not tortured? 

They were participating in an election, they were not sick. They did not have wounds on their bodies but they happen to be what they are today. Yet we are here denying that they were tortured? It is a shame!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you still on procedure? 

MS OSEGGE: Yes. Is it procedurally right - (Laughter) - for the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, a medical doctor, whom Ugandans have trusted and seemingly loved and who we expect to cause a balanced situation in this country, to stand on this Floor and create a potentially explosive situation by continuing to deny the facts on the ground? He should be calling all of us to say, “Yes, it happened and it was wrong. Can we reconcile and correct the position? ” Was it procedurally correct?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. This is the right time to deal with that procedural issue. Honourable members, at the beginning of guiding this particular debate on this subject, I said the terms of reference should guide us on what we are going to do. 

I actually indicated to you in my ruling that some aspect of the terms of reference have been overtaken by events. For example, the charges that are against the people, whether they were in detention in Gulu. Those ones have been overtaken by events. In my ruling, I said that I needed guidance but I never got the guidance so I allowed this House to proceed with the debate. 

The Prime Minister was speaking about the report and I did not hear him referring to anything outside the report. Could it, therefore, be possible that the committee went beyond the terms of reference? Is it possible? I can particularly raise the issue of the evidence in Arua. 

I have read the report and I would like to draw your attention to what the Prime Minister was probably referring to.  On page 18, paragraph two, “the committee did not find any evidence that the situation in Arua was beyond the ability and capacity of the Uganda Police Force and therefore, find their recourse to brute force by the military against civilians not only disproportionate but also inhumane.” Did they go to Arua? By the time you are saying, “the committee did not find evidence that the situation in Arua…” These are the things that we need to talk about.

Then they went and started talking about visiting women in prison. Was that part of the terms of reference? If it was not, did they exceed the mandate which they had been given to go there? I think that is the point that the Prime Minister was raising. 

It is not for me to say but whatever is in the report is now subject to debate because the report has invited it. The terms of reference were four. Usually where the person giving the instructions intends that the committee should go and take on-spot decisions about what else they can look at, in law we normally put the paragraph called the incidental clause. In summary, we would say to do other things necessary to fulfill the general purpose of this inquiry. 

However, that is not in these particular terms of reference. The committee, therefore, did not have the latitude to go beyond the terms of reference and deal with matters outside the terms of reference. That is the point the Prime Minister was making. So, was he proceeding properly? I think so.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, you may recall that yesterday, when I took the Floor, I pointed out that having internalised the report and having seen the charge sheet, in particular the statement of offence and the particulars of the offence, we took the opinion that it will be difficult during debate of this report to sever what is sub judice and what is not –(Interruption)

MR ACIDRI: Honourable colleagues, I already see somebody saying that I am NRM but this is beyond NRM. My point of order is that the Assistant Attorney-General – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Deputy Attorney-General.

MR ACIDRI: Deputy Attorney-General. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record show that the Member is referring to the Deputy Attorney-General.

MR ACIDRI: The point of order is that – whether he is deputy or assistant, there is somebody who is ahead of him. (Laughter).

Now, Mr Speaker, the Deputy Attorney-General misguided this House. He gave a legal opinion in which we lost the seven year extension. (Laughter) That loss has caused a lot of psychological and physical torture to Members of this House. Is the Deputy Attorney-General in order to give legal opinions regarding matters of this House anymore?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue before this Parliament this afternoon, which is being debated, is the report of the ad hoc committee of Parliament. I have looked at this report and I have not found anywhere where the issue of seven years was mentioned. (Laughter) 

The rules of this House are very strict on relevance. Therefore, that aspect of your point of order puts you out of order. (Laughter) 

However, on the second aspect of your point of order, whether the Attorney-General is still competent to give any opinion - (Laughter) - you carried out a constitutional amendment and there was another one yesterday which the learned Attorney-General withdrew. But none of them has affected Article 119 and 119(a) of the Constitution. They remain in force. 

Therefore, for as long as those provisions are in force in the Constitution, he can competently give a legal opinion. (Applause)

The other aspect, which I would like the Deputy Attorney-General to be careful about, is to come back here and start raising issues of the charge sheet. I requested the learned Deputy Attorney-General yesterday that he should avail me a copy of this charge sheet so that I could look at it and it guides me in my ruling on a matter that I needed to rule on today. The learned Deputy Attorney-General did not and even now, he has not. 

Learned Deputy Attorney-General, please, do not rely on a document that only you know about and you do not want anybody else to know about. (Laughter) Please, proceed with your point.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I will withdraw any reference to the charge sheet and will restrict myself to the contents of the report and what has been –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you going to debate or you rose on something else?

MR RUKUTANA: I am still raising a point of procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. If you want to debate, I will give you time to debate this report. However, if you want to raise a procedural point, raise a procedural point because that is the basis on which I got you to speak.

3.43
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is increasingly becoming clear that this country is long overdue for national dialogue and reconciliation. 

I say this because I lost four years of my school because of violence in our politics. I was between Okema and Onyango in my second year at the university when they collapsed dead and I almost lost my guild speaker, who is now a very useful person to this country.

Mr Speaker, yesterday I almost requested that we do not discuss this report in the Plenary but that we should have had a Committee of the whole House because the matters therein do not need to be discussed in a partisan manner of the Government side against the Opposition. 

The matters of parliamentary privileges and parliamentary immunity and the mandate of Parliament and how much security and the military can do is not a matter for just cameras and the public gallery to look at before we can have an in-house interaction. 

Where we have reached, we have deteriorated to the level that it is increasingly becoming difficult to give hope to the citizens that this Parliament is a House of dialogue and indeed, Mr Speaker, as you put it yesterday, the place of last resort.

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for really rising to the occasion and giving hope to citizens that the intention of the sub judice rule was never to stop the Executive from functioning and it was never in public policy litigation and peace and stability. It was never intended for Parliament stop operating because of the sub judice rule.

Is it, therefore, possible that even after losing two weeks plus, Government finds space in their busy schedule to bring to Parliament the efforts they have taken to correct this very ugly situation since this matter happened? This situation is not helping the country that wants to become a middle-income economy in terms of – (Member timed out.)

3.46
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Jovah Kamateeka, who volunteered to present the report. I would like to thank her because at one time, she was my chairperson on the Committee on Human Rights. At times when she travelled, she would get embarrassed to defend the indefensible.

Mr Speaker, the issue of human rights is very touchy and Uganda is a member of the African Union, where there is the Commission for Human Rights. Uganda is also a member of the United Nations, where the issue of human rights ranks very high.

At all international conferences, the issue of human rights comes up and Uganda is always abused. You will never attend any international conference where the issue of human rights in Uganda does not come up. During the “Walk-to-Work” protests, people were beaten. In Arua, people were beaten and we were looking on and we come here and tell Ugandans – who watched what took place in Arua and Kisekka Market here – that nothing happened. The whole world saw what took place in Arua and Kisekka Market here. We saw demonstrations all over the world and this has affected the name of this country. 

Tourists are no longer coming to this country. Should we hide our faces to say that there is no trouble in this country? We are deceiving ourselves. We are embarrassed. We are spoiling the name of this great country. Why can’t we address this issue that touches everybody? Let us come up and resolve the issue. We saw our colleagues beaten and they came limping and we come here to say nothing happened. Are we being sincere? 

We should address this issue and find a solution. We should admit what happened. I have seen the entourage of the President and it is a long convoy. 

I expected that if somebody threw a stone at that vehicle, the people behind could have stopped and apprehended that person who threw the stone –(Member timed out.)

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report but I have some queries and points of clarification. I, too, visited the colleagues and the other suspects who were detained at Gulu Central Police Station shortly after the Leader of the Opposition had visited them. 

The first point I would like this committee to clarify is that the report is not indicating the right number of the people detained. The report is saying there were four Members of Parliament and 26 others. I would like to put this record right; there were not 30 people, Mr Speaker, but 32 people. For that matter, the number in the report is questionable. 

The second point in the report is the number of female prisoners. The report indicated that there are five female prisoners. I would like to put the record clear that there were four female prisoners. So, I do not know where they got the fifth person. That questions the integrity of that report. The report indicated five female prisoners but there were four and the Leader of the Opposition is agreeing with me.

Mr Speaker, when a committee is given an assignment, it is better they go and find facts on the ground and put what is right on the paper. 

The third query on the report is the physical condition of the detained suspects. Mr Speaker, one of the terms of reference is for them to ascertain the condition of the detained suspects. It so happened that I was also there. I give you a copy of the condition and it is unethical for me –(Member timed out.)

3.49
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I condemn violence. I would like to thank hon. Kamateeka for the report. However, I find this report wanting. The report mentions that members of Parliament were tortured and it specifically mentions hon. Kyagulanyi and hon. Zaake. 

However, they do not give us reasons as to why they were tortured. They also do not mention what happened or why other members of Parliament were not tortured. For example, hon. Kassiano Wadri was arrested with a gun and he is here; he cannot deny that. Why is it that –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. We consider ourselves national leaders and we are just trying to strike a tone that is commensurate with who we are. It is unfortunate that my honourable colleague, in his expression, seems to think for any reason, a Ugandan has to be tortured. 

Is he in order to stand on this Floor and say that there should be a justification for torture on any Ugandan when we have a law against torture? Somebody can be arraigned in court; why would we advocate for torturing a human being? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you use the word torture, you call upon an assessment of your statement on international conventions, the Constitution of this country and other laws that relate to that subject. When you mention that word, then now you have to be careful how you proceed with it. It is because it is expressly prohibited. Anything that you can call torture is prohibited. It is one of those things you cannot derogate from. So, if you would like to use another word in its place, maybe; but the word torture, honourable members, you should use it carefully.

MR KASUMBA: I started by condemning torture. Maybe, the right word to use would be; why is it some Members were subdued to beatings? Were they trying to resist arrest or otherwise? 

My other issue as far as the report is concerned is that it has been overtaken by events. It is outdated. We all know that our colleagues - some of them are here - are no longer incarcerated. Some are abroad for medical attention. 

We are also aware from the report that a Member presided as an investigative officer, a prosecutor and a judge in his own court. Therefore, he could not have signed on this report. We are also aware that before the report was concluded, one member who the hon. Speaker has already mentioned here, hon. Benard Atiku had signed it. Therefore, there is no way we can entertain this report in this House. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.58
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to also condemn any form of violence. Violence, whether it is from Opposition or NRM, is very dangerous to this country. 

Mr Speaker, I have been a victim of violence. Actually, I did not know that I had the talent of an athlete until I experienced violence. (Laughter) I did not know I could run so fast until violence was unleashed on me that I ran and to my own shock, discovered that I am actually a very strong athlete.

Let us all stand as a country and a Parliament of this nation in condemning any form of violence because violence breeds violence. When you participate in violence today, it is like giving birth. You will have it against you in future; even you who begun it. 

So, all of us should desist, avoid and restrain from being in any form of violence; whether in elections or any other type of violence. We should all restrain ourselves. I have been a victim; I have suffered violence and I stand to condemn it in the strongest terms. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.00
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kampala Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to also thank the committee for presenting a good report. We should ask ourselves a series of questions as leaders because we are all stakeholders in our nation and have different roles to play.

In as much as we condemn violence of any nature because this must be very clear - I do not think that there is any leader who can condone violence.

The million dollar question is - we are discussing issues of national concern where many Ugandans and not only members of Parliament have been tortured by members of our security organs.

When we hear some of our colleagues playing it down that there was no torture, we feel like shedding tears. Thank you, Mr Speaker, you visited our colleagues and saw the condition in which they were in. As we speak now, hon. Zaake is in intensive care at Manipal Hospital in India. The fact remains that the honourable members were tortured. When NRM came into power, they promised a fundamental change and that was the reason why many Ugandans supported it –(Member timed out.)

4.03
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say something about the report presented by the ad hoc committee. I thank them, very much, for the good report.

Violence, torture and suppression of Ugandans whether members of Parliament or non-members of Parliament as you earlier ruled, is unconstitutional. 

What happened to Ugandans, including the members of Parliament, before the whole world has exposed Uganda and put the country on another scale altogether. This is unacceptable and Government must come out and explain.

There is no amount of explanation that can repair the level of damage that was done in the aftermath of the Arua Municipality by-election and it was very shameful to Uganda. What the Government did to Ugandans considering the level of torture; I believe they are inciting Ugandans against the peace that was built for so many years.

On behalf of the people of Agago, I join my colleagues in condemning torture and I do support the report that was presented by this committee. We thank them for making it on the Floor of Parliament.

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report. However, let us also note that it was written in the heat of the moment and I can summarise it as defective.

For instance, the report casually refers to torture and yet it is defined in the law and I invite Members to read the definition of torture in the law which we passed. 

When you say that one of the women suspects was bleeding; did you establish that it was because of injury? It could be a physiological condition causing bleeding. When you said that the situation in Arua never warranted the involvement of the army; did you go there –(Interruption)-

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Councillor Night Asara who was bleeding was very healthy before being arrested. At the time she was arrested, she was manhandled by security personnel from Arua, brought to Gulu Central Police Station and she started bleeding after being tortured by the security personnel.

Is the qualified honourable doctor, who knows how to assess the situation of patients, in order to come up with that statement where he says he does not know what might have caused the bleeding?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know how factual in terms of eye witness accounts the honourable member who raised the point of order rises.

I would like to confirm from him that he was there and he witnessed the arrest and torture and when she was being transported to Gulu. Otherwise, I am going to engage on ruling on speculative facts.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I raised the point of order because I was in Arua and witnessed how our colleagues were being tortured.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are talking about this woman.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Yes. I witnessed how ladies, including that Councillor Night Asara, were being carried by men and thrown into the police truck. I personally witnessed how they were being tortured.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By his own testimony, the honourable member witnessed how the lady was picked and thrown into a car. From his own evidence, I am failing to construe what he alleges happened in terms of torture.
Dr Baryomunsi is also interrogating his thoughts to find out what is reasonable and what may not be reasonable in the circumstances. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling. However, I also want to add that if the situation hon. Olanya is expressing is true, in a woman of reproductive age that can make you go into monthly periods - the stress. I am saying this as a trained medical doctor - (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, we all know that hon. Baryomunsi is a medical doctor. However, you all saw this woman even in the courtroom in Arua and how she could not stand or walk –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In Arua?

MS KAMATEEKA: I beg your pardon, in Gulu. Some of us were witnesses there because we had been sent by this Parliament. 

Is it in order for the honourable minister to insinuate that a woman should be denied justice just because she has the natural duty of bearing children and out of which she may have menstrual periods? Does having menstrual periods mean that one cannot be tortured and bleed as a result?
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not able to come to the same conclusion as you, based on what the minister has said.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me go to my second point – (Mr Mukitale rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I gave this debate an hour, which passed 15 minutes ago. If you are reluctant to have a proper debate and you are raising points of procedure and points of order even when they are unnecessary, you are spending the time we should use to debate this report. I am not going to enlarge the time. I have already given 15 more minutes to this report.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure and I seek your indulgence. Parliament has already suffered. This country’s image has already suffered. I would like to seek your indulgence. 

Some of these matters, as you rightly said, have been overtaken by events. Is it possible for us to now debate in such a way as to provide healing, a way forward, repair our image and give the world hope? They should know that there is still a Parliament, which can help this Parliament move on. If we are going to debate in a polarised manner, this Parliament will look uglier. 

As the head of this institution, can I seek your indulgence so that when we are debating, we do so in a manner like I used to see before in this Parliament? The Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition would sit and would not put the Speaker on the spot to deal with their extremes, polarisations and partisan ways when dealing with a matter of the common good.
 
Mr Speaker, can you guide that Members try to give a way forward rather than defending any extreme side? That is my prayer, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable Member of Parliament for Buliisa County did not proceed properly. He rose on a point of procedure but he presented a debate he had presented earlier, to remind the House how we should proceed, but he himself did not proceed properly. However, the point is made. Please, wind up.

DR BARYOMUNSI: My next point is that as a medical doctor, I would be the last person to underrate somebody’s medical condition. At the same time, I would be the last person to allow somebody to use his medical condition to play politics.

I would like to state here that the two Members of Parliament have been examined by medical specialists from Government and they have been found to have no significant injury that warrants – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am constrained to raise a point of order against my colleague, the honourable minister. The honourable minister made a very serious statement on this Floor of Parliament, which I would like to request, with your guidance, is expunged from the records of this Parliament. 

When giving his first point about the medical condition of a bleeding woman, – the suspect called Night - he was trying to insinuate that she must have been bleeding because she was undergoing her menstrual periods. He was also insinuating that this menstrual period could not make her stand in court. 

I was in court myself; I wonder whether the menstruation period takes a period of two to three weeks constantly. The woman was in court where I was and she mentioned that she was bleeding. Is he in order to proceed before explaining this matter and he instead goes ahead to say somebody uses it for political reasons? Mr Speaker, I beg you guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have ruled on that matter already.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was making a point that yesterday, we spoke to the press that our colleagues, hon. Zaake and hon. Kyagulanyi, have been examined by Government medical specialists. The preliminary report indicates that they do not have any significant injury that warrants specialised treatment both locally and abroad - (Interjections) -I am saying this as a doctor. (Interjections)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had restrained myself following your guidance about rising on any matter. However, we are aware that the Members of Parliament were referred abroad for specialised treatment from Rubaga Hospital. It is a fact that in Rubaga Hospital – even my colleague can testify – there are competent doctors. Dr Ssekitoleko, who is the head of Rubaga Hospital, indeed examined them with his team and recommended that these honourable Members of Parliament be referred abroad for specialised medical treatment. 

Is the honourable minister, a former crusader of human rights, in order to dance on the graves of the dead and cast his card as a medical doctor and run down the credentials of his colleagues and even the Government team of doctors that went to examine them at Kiruddu and allowed them to proceed for further treatment? Is the honourable minister in order to come and start putting forward a different report from that of Rubaga Hospital as well as Kiruddu? Is he in order to cynically comment on matters that are of life and death and he is here taking it casually? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know when you bring factual things - I do not want to rely on my own knowledge of what I was told by both Dr Ssekitoleko and Dr Anena, whom I met in the room with hon. Zaake. I do not want that to be another area of debate, because I was also there. I have also seen the letter that was written to the Clerk by Dr Ssekitoleko. Therefore, please, let us not go into territories that open things that we do not want to start debating here. I beg of you.

However, honourable members, I had allowed this debate knowing that term of reference one - whether indeed the suspects in detention were in Gulu - has been overtaken by events; and number three - the charges preferred against the detainees - has also been overtaken by events. Therefore, I was hoping that the balance is what we should be debating. 

We also know a bit about the physical condition of the detained suspects. Since that time, almost three weeks ago, things have changed so much. If we are to discuss it on the basis of what it was three weeks ago, we might be discussing irrelevant subjects because things have since changed in terms of their health. Therefore, I said that we can debate that in a guided way.

On the last aspect, - whether the rights of the detained suspects were being respected - the report is here and I thought that was the area we would be debating so that we have this thing out. I allowed this debate for that purpose. However, now we are debating by point of order, point of procedure and we are not prepared to listen to each other. 

The time that I had assigned for this debate was one hour. It is now one and a half hours. I am now going to pause this debate here and we process the recommendations from the committee and finalise this matter. Is that okay? That is where we are. Can we deal with this?

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the House, for allowing debate on these issues. At least finally, we have debated this report and put it behind us. Lack of debate was creating suspicion among the Members and members of the public. We are all happy that it has been debated.

Mr Speaker, on behalf of the members of the ad hoc committee, I would like to state in the strongest terms that we condemn the act of members of the public pelting stones at the convoy of His Excellency the President while in Arua. We do not want anyone to think that because of what appears in this report, we condone that action.

I would like to clarify on the number of suspects. There were 26 plus the Members of Parliament, which brings them to 32. Therefore, the 26 refers to all others other than the Members of Parliament.

The condition of the suspects was alluded to, especially the lady councillor. Mr Speaker, we were charged to go and observe and come and report. We talked to the lady and she is the one who revealed her medical condition. You are all aware that sometimes pain makes people say things even those they would otherwise not say. She told us in the hope that she would get assistance. She told us how she was passing blood in her urine and in her stool. We were not doctors and were not supposed to present a medical report. Therefore, Mr Speaker, it was within our mandate to state the condition of the suspects especially after talking to them.

There was also an issue about us visiting people in prisons. We did not visit anyone in prison other than hon. Kyagulanyi in Makindye whom we had not been able to see. For all these other suspects, we found them in the holding cells and they were together with the Members of Parliament. Therefore, it is not that we went out of our way to look for them. However, in any case, they are Ugandans and our mandate referred to “suspects”. We were not supposed to see only Members of Parliament. 

With those few remarks, I would like to thank you for allowing the debate on this matter. Mr Speaker, we were not supposed to find out why these were tortured. Our duty was to find out the condition in which they were and come and report to you. Therefore, it is up to the honourable minister to report as to how they were tortured and why. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, having gone through this report together with you, the key recommendations that remain are two. The rest of the recommendations, like the affected Members being taken out for further management - they are already out so we do not have to take a decision on that. 

In addition, the recommendation that the Speaker takes it upon herself to liaise with the President - that has also been done. I think we have seen the correspondences and the Speaker would be able to give us the extent of their discussions.

There are two outstanding recommendations that I would like to draw your attention to, one on page 17 and the other on page 18. Those are the ones that are contained in the Speaker’s letter. The first recommendation that I would like to bring to your attention is the one in which the committee recommends that those individuals and state institutions that are accomplices in the derogation of human rights and dignities should be punished. Justice should not only be done but must be seen to be done. The second one, which is almost the same, is that the military and other errant state functionaries that are complacent in violating the law and eroding human rights and dignity should account for their actions. 

Those are the key recommendations that have come out of these. Honourable members, we will present those recommendations to you and then we see how to proceed.

4.31
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, in light of the fact that the salient recommendations have been overtaken by events and those that seem to be remaining are still subject to investigations, can we express ourselves on this report other than noting it? 

My guidance would be that we do not adopt the report because substantially, everything in the report has been rebutted. The only aspects that are still outstanding are under investigation. We can only know the contents of the report and allow the law to take its course. I beg to move.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I thought the purpose of every investigation, especially where you are investigating crime, the tail end, is to punish the culprit. It cannot be the recommendation of this Parliament that you go and punish without investigating. With the Deputy Attorney-General – (Interjections) - I wish hon. Tumwine would be exemplary to me by sticking to the rules when you want to speak. 

I thought the purpose of every investigation is to get a remedy. If you are investigating a person who was complacent in torture, which is a crime, the first thing is to punish, either by taking disciplinary action or by –(Interjections)– If I were hon. Rukutana, I would listen then I would comment. The first thing after every investigation is to punish either by disciplining or prosecution. 

Is the hon. Rukutana, therefore, in order to say that we express ourselves other than noting, and then in the end he says that we should not adopt the report? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the procedure of this House is that when we have a debate of this nature, we conclude it, and we conclude it in any way we desire. 

The learned Deputy Attorney-General is proposing one way of completing this debate. So, should I rule him out of order? No. He has just proposed that the House notes instead of adopting the report; the House can reject this proposal. Therefore, I do not have to rule him out of order. He has simply given a proposal.

4.34
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Other than the two resolutions to be processed, in view of the fact that Members who have been on the Floor have alluded to the fact that there was not enough time and that there were no conclusive investigations done, may I move to add a third one. My proposal is that the report be referred to the Committee on Human Rights to take up the matter and investigate it to its final conclusion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do we refer the report or the matter? If you are talking about the report, it is different from referring the matter which is in issue. If it is the matter, then do we have to refer it? 

It is the mandate of the Committee on Human Rights to do such things on its own. They are not limited. Do we have to move them? If we want the Committee on Human Rights to look into this matter, do we have to tell them to do it or it is within their mandate to do it? The Member has made a proposal and I am just trying to interrogate that same proposal.

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to seek guidance from you because my understanding is that committees of this House receive business from the plenary. They do not go out on their own to look for every business outside. However, I am subject to your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a committee of Parliament can act on instructions of Parliament and can also act on its own initiative. When the Committee on Gender went to deal with the issue of human trafficking in some parts of the world, they were not sent by the House. They just looked at the problem and said, “No, let us go and find out”. 

When committees of this House go on oversight visits to different places of this country, we do not send them. It is part of their mandate to say, “This matter is touchy, let us go and find out about it” and then they go. That is why I am asking if the proposal by hon. Ssekikubo is in relation to the report or to the matter that is contentious - the matter that is being debated. It should be the matter itself and not the report.

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to build on what the Leader of the Opposition mentioned, that in this Parliament, we are in the temple of democracy and we should speak the truth and be objective and constructive. 

You have stated, Mr Speaker, that the rest of the issues have been dealt with and some have been overtaken by events. What remains are the two that you have read, that the military and other errant state functionaries are violating the law and eroding human rights and that they should account for their actions. 

It is now presupposed that the committee has investigated and found out that the military tortured people. Torture is a process. I do not accept it but it should be dealt with in the right manner, which is to investigate and confirm that this person was tortured and this is the person that tortured. 

Therefore, to stand here and the Parliament of Uganda, without investigations, condemns men and women of the armed forces, who sacrifice their lives to defend us, without investigating and leaving it to the due process of the law, I think would be defective. Because of that, Mr Speaker, I move that these two recommendations are rejected.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, does this House agree that those matters should be investigated? Are we in agreement? - Well, the investigations would be done by the people who ordinarily do investigations. If we have agreed that these matters should be investigated, wouldn’t it be proper for us to say that they should be investigated and put a timeline within which either the Prime Minister or the minister in charge of security would come back and brief the House as to how far they have gone with the matter?  We could do this instead of saying too many things which are not – 

We can give a timeline - two weeks, one month - and we agree on it. We say, “Okay, this report is here, we have debated it, can we give them time to respond to this issue?” That is also in line with what the Speaker requested. We can then deal with this at a time when information has been gathered, – whether there has been any investigation carried out, whether anybody has been arrested or whether nobody has been arrested - then we will have an opportunity to review this matter again. Would that be proper, so that we avoid grounds that are not necessary? I am just proposing. Honourable members, we have come this far. Can we agree on a timeframe? 

4.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I strongly support the guidance you are giving, that the matter should be properly investigated and Government should come within a month to inform this august House on the progress that has been made both with the investigations and dealing with issues found out decisively. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Prime Minister has requested that Government can come back in a month and deal with all the outstanding issues: where we have gone with the investigations, whether anybody has been arrested and whether anybody is being prosecuted. We can again pick up the matter from there. He has requested for a month. Leader of the Opposition, would a month be reasonable?

4.43
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We can afford the one month. However, our fear is that sometimes, the perpetrators are even supposed to be the investigators. That is the biggest fear we have. In the event that the police – I said here that the District Police Commander (DPC) of Gulu tortured the Arua woman councillor. Even the Regional Police Commander (RPC) of West Nile was involved in the torture –[Gen. Tumwiine: “Order.”]- You can say your “order” but that is the truth –(Interruption)

GEN. TUMWIINE: Mr Speaker, I respect the Leader of the Opposition. I also respect the guidance you have given. I respect the way we have proceeded and we are coming to a conclusion.

Is the Leader of the Opposition in order to categorically accuse specific officers of the security forces like those she has mentioned without investigations and final judgments by courts of law? Is she in order to use the privilege of this House to condemn the officers for torture, a word we have questioned in this House? Is she in order to allege what she cannot substantiate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is important that we use our words carefully. The Leader of the Opposition was saying there are already areas where there are complaints. She should have stated it that way, so that it would be like information that could lead the people who are going to investigate those particular allegations instead of already concluding on the Floor that, that happened. I wish you had just given information and said that the investigation should also touch this category of people. 

Honourable members, I hear issues of who will carry out the investigations. All these forces have their units that deal with issues of indiscipline. I do not see any possibility of anybody else going to a military installation to carry out investigations. It would be a wild dream. I do not anticipate that any civilian can go and start investigating members of the police force. That would be a high-sounding thing, which is empty. If they abuse it, we still have recourse when this matter comes back. They have their units that deal with these matters and we trust them now to do their job. 

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, I believe that committees of Parliament have powers and authority. Even then, the committee which will be assigned to do this can actually summon people who deploy. Who are the people who deploy? Do you mean the Inspector General of Police cannot come before a committee of Parliament? Do you mean even the Chief of Defence Forces cannot come before a committee of Parliament? They chase us like dogs but sometimes, they can also come before a committee of Parliament. Why can’t we use them to expose those who were deployed, if at all we want this to be credible? Otherwise, how can the police, which perpetrated –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have done well. We have come this far. Let us keep moving this way. Let us trust the institutions that are mandated to deal with these things. They will come back. When they come back and we are not satisfied, we would have given them the chance to do it and we will then have full recourse to deal with the matter. Let us trust institutions that are mandated.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, there was a statement made by the Leader of the Opposition, in general terms, that the police are the perpetrators of these events. She did not qualify it. I am aware that in this House, the police have been the punching bags. However, there are also good members of the police force. 

Is it in order to leave it on the record of this House that the police per se are perpetrators of torture and crimes in this country when in fact the police have been doing a very commendable job? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, would you like to correct the record?

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also do not mean all of them. That is why I said the Inspector General of Police and the commander of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces know those who were deployed. 

If I said it in general terms, I just would like to say it is specifically, that it is those who tortured – not all. I know that we are also protected by the police here. So, I cannot say all the police are bad but I mentioned the RPC of West Nile and also the DPC of Gulu who were accused by the people who were tortured. Thank you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I am rise on a point of order with a heavy heart. First of all, the motion is for adoption of a report. Secondly, the Leader of the Opposition is focusing on the police and individuals. 

Mr Speaker, you guided yesterday. In the scientific way of making decisions, you look at cause and effects. Let me add that in the Theory of Relativity, if you take action, you expect a reaction. Why are we concentrating on the effect without answering the question, “Who threw the stone at the convoy of the President?” Who did it? Was he alone? Did he have others? What was the motive of throwing this stone? Don’t they know that by annoying the President, ridiculing him, alarming him, they commit an offence? Why don’t you allow – 
	
This report is defective. Unless you answer the question about what sparked off the consequences we are suffering from, we are wasting our time. Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for Members of this Parliament to obstructively engage you and almost exhaust your patience? You have adjourned Parliament twice or thrice because of obstruction. Is it in order? Surely, we cannot come here-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are trying to deal with a situation that is not very normal. We are trying to get the best out of it, which will bring this House and the country together. We do not want to inflate anything by what we say or some of the decisions we can make. We want to bring healing by what we do. Healing means there should be justice and accountability. This is what we are drawing towards. The victims must receive justice. Whoever is responsible for victimising them must account for their actions. That is why we are here. 

There are ways of doing this. We do not want the popular way of doing things; we want the correct way of doing things. The popular way may not necessarily be right. Therefore, we would like to do it properly so that when the people are doing their job, they know we are also waiting anxiously. They will come and report to us what they have done and if we have a problem with it, we can pick it from there. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and the Leader of the Opposition. I would like to confirm to you that in the UPDF, now we know a board of inquiry has been put in place and it is doing its work. However, I just want to raise a point of procedure. We have moved miles on this issue this evening. We actually now have a common ground where justice will be dispensed in an orderly manner. 

Mr Speaker, we have proposed, you have guided and the Prime Minister has committed that within one month, we will come back to this House and report on the progress we are making in terms of investigations and the actions that have been taken on whoever would be found culpable from whichever side of the issue. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, now that we have reached this level in a very bipartisan manner and we are moving forward, for this debate to close with this mood in the House, so that we move from this House when we are on common ground?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I was proposing. Leader of the Opposition, can I wrap this up? The honourable member had sought a procedural issue. Can you deal with it and then I see how to wind it up?

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I take your guidance with relief because it leads us somewhere. There seem to be two issues; the first is: Who does the investigation? You rightly guided that the institutional mechanism be given a chance, and I would only like to seek guidance from you. 

From the statement of the Prime Minister, who is the official Government representative in Parliament, he has already justified what these men did; he has already praised them. The minister responsible for security, Gen. Elly Tumwine, yesterday already justified what his men did. Yesterday, I restrained a Member who told me that Gen. Tumwiine himself is not free from violence. I restrained that Member because he reminded me of the past when he was alleged to have assaulted another Member. I gave him the benefit of age. It is age I respect because I am yet to get there. 

I would seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, on whether under those circumstances, it would not be proper to get an independent body, not to punish but to heal. This is a parliamentary process; when we get our own process and hand it over, in that process the players could be under investigation. Take the example of Brig. Don Nabasa; if he is assigned to investigate his men and then there is a question of command and responsibility, which may also be a subject of investigation, how is he going to do that? You will make life difficult for him. How is he going to investigate?

If you are talking about –(Interjections)– I am seeking guidance. If you are talking about the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF), my brother Gen. David Muhoozi –(Interjections)– I am seeking guidance; I will not be informed. Assuming Gen. David Muhoozi, the CDF, is supposed to be investigated, wouldn’t you find a difficulty, Mr Speaker? Would it not be persuasive to our colleagues that we assign an independent body, because the Prime Minister, the minister and even the President are on record; they have where they belong. They have all justified. 

Mr Speaker, I normally seek guidance from hon. Guma Gumisiriza because of his seniority but not today. The President has also given his version. Since we started talking about this issue, the killing of Yasin Kawuma has been avoided by the state. Would you not guide that we get somebody to do it independently? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are all in this country and we have witnessed things that have happened in this country. I never intended to mention this but now we all know that the person who was commanding the entire police is under prosecution and he is a full General in the military. It did not take an intervention from us for them to do it. 

There is a decent way of doing this and that is what I am calling for. We are all here. One month is 30 days; calculate it in hours, it is not that long. Let us give Government and the institutions that are in this sector the chance to do their job, failure of which we activate other proposals. 

I am proposing a good way to end this debate: The House resolves that those individuals and state institutions that were complacent in the derogation of human rights and dignity should be investigated, prosecuted and punished and the honourable Prime Minister reports to the House on the actions taken within one month. I put the question to this.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise this matter of procedure. I rise on two issues, which arose before and after this report was presented. One of them is my involvement as a member of the ad hoc committee, which was yesterday raised by hon. Odria of Aringa South Constituency and this afternoon, another honourable member who was seated there specifically mentioned my name. 

I would like to put it on record that I did not in any way solicit to be on this committee while it was being formed in this august House. I was informed after the House was adjourned by hon. Oboth that I had been requested to be on the committee and therefore, we should go to the Speaker’s Chamber. I complied and indeed, the Speaker informed me of her decision to bring me on board and I did not object to her assignment. It is true that I travelled with this ad hoc committee to Gulu and witnessed whatever the committee reported.

The second issue I would like to put on record was about my signature on the signature page of this report, which was also queried here. On the day we agreed as the ad hoc committee to sit and look through the report before we sign it, I had a trip to Rome. However, on Monday morning, I sat with the committee, we looked through the report and I was in agreement with most of the issues that were raised. I asked the committee to excuse me to leave because my flight was in the afternoon and check-in was at 1.00 p.m. They allowed me to sign the signature page and leave out the other pages of the report because the Clerk was yet to reproduce them with the corrections. I left for the airport. 

That is the correct version as far as my involvement in the production of this report was concerned. I have no another ulterior motive other than the terms of reference that were given by this august House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, for correcting the record. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL HEALTH LABORATORY SERVICES BILL, 2016

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have had some consultations with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister regarding the Uganda National Health Laboratories Bill at Cabinet level. We would like to request that this matter be shelved for the meantime as we consult internally. At an appropriate time, we shall update you on our decisions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what are you consulting on? The committee has examined this matter and it is ready to report. If there are issues of consultation that relate to things that are not part of what Parliament has already done, do we still have to hold this Bill on the Floor.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, they are on some of the issues, which are in the report and we request –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, may I know the meaning of this exodus of the ministers? (Laughter)

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, the committee has produced a report, which we have looked at, and you are aware that Government is right now trying to rationalise boards and certain institutions. This is why we are requesting that we stay discussion on this until we have discussed it internally.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are we going to stay? You guide me; what are you asking me to stay?

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, I request that we stay the second reading of this report until an appropriate time when we are ready.

DR MICHAEL BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue at stake is about establishing an authority. I think that is what is contentious. If we removed the authority from the Bill, 80 per cent of the Bill collapses. I would propose that the minister withdraws the Bill and they go back and formulate another one. That is the best way forward, unless Cabinet changes its decision and agrees that they are going to authorise the formation of another authority.

5.12
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, it is true, as you have heard from both the minister and the chairperson of the committee, that Government is reviewing parastatals, bodies and authorities with a view to merging a number of them and absorbing some into their mother ministries. This is to streamline the running of Government and also minimise expenditure, and above all improve service delivery. Therefore, I think the view that Cabinet should first of all handle the work it is doing and do more consultations on this matter is appropriate. 

The issue is: Should the Bill be withdrawn or should it be deferred to a later time? I think it would be more realistic to defer it because Cabinet has already started discussing this matter and in the next couple of weeks, it should have been concluded. After that, this august House can be authoritatively advised on the next step to be taken. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is not to say the Cabinet should not look at it again. Once it has, are we going to send it back to the committee? Those will be new issues. The committee is ready with the report that is uploaded already. Therefore, when you come back from Cabinet, are we going to send those issues back to the committee? 

If the issue will substantially affect the Bill, it might be smarter to take it back for review, plug in all that you need to do and then come back with it in a different form. However, if you think it is a smart way to do it, proceed.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, your advice is taken.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, would you like to move the House to give you leave to withdraw this Bill?

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, as hon. Oboth has said, painfully I would like to request that the House gives us leave to withdraw the Uganda National Health Laboratory Services Bill that we had presented to this House.

(Motion Seconded)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Member of Parliament for Oyam County North, the minister in charge of lands, the minister in charge of security, hon. Moses Kizige and hon. Oboth. The motion is seconded. Do we need to debate this motion or should I put the question?

Honourable members, I will put the question to the motion proposed by the minister that the House gives her leave to withdraw the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Health Laboratory Services Bill, 2016.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS,
SECOND READING

THE MENTAL HEALTH BILL, 2014

5.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Mental Health Bill, 2014” be read for the second time.

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Member of Parliament for Bugabula, the Minister of State for Karamoja, Member of Parliament for Kinkizi East and the Member of Parliament for Oyam South. Others are hon. Oboth and hon. Ocen Peter. The motion is seconded. Would you like to speak to it?

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Mental Health Bill has been proposed because the current Mental Health Act of 1964 is outdated. This Act that has been in existence does not provide for treatment of persons with mental challenges. It provides that persons who have mental disorders are supposed to be removed from society and confined in certain places. 

Mental disorders now account for close to 13 per cent of the global burden of disease worldwide. Uganda has been ranked among the top six countries in Africa with the highest cases of mental disorder according to the World Health Organisation (WHO). The latest WHO report of 2006 indicates that at least 7.4 per cent of Ugandans suffer from common mental disorders, particularly depression, anxiety, and also as a result of alcohol and other substance abuse.

The mental health services in the country are supposed to be delivered in an integrated manner under our minimum healthcare package based on the Uganda clinical guidelines. The World Health Organisation developed the Mental Health Action Plan, 2013-2020 to guide member states on mental health care. The Bill that is being proposed is to provide for care and treatment of persons with mental illness at primary healthcare centres.

I would like to state that currently, we have limited services at lower health facilities for mental health care. A majority of our population in the rural communities seek treatment from traditional healers for mental health care. 

The Bill is to operationalise the National Health Policy, which identifies mental health services as an essential aspect of healthcare. The policy advocates for mental health services at all levels to be integrated into general healthcare and prescribes for update and enforcement of appropriate laws to promote mental health. This Bill is intended to ensure that Ugandans with these challenges can be able to access mental health care at all facilities across the country. 

Therefore, it is in that spirit that I would like to propose that the Mental Health Bill, 2014 be read for the second time. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have teachers and pupils from Abilonino Demonstration Primary School in Kole South County, Kole District, represented by hon. Ocen Peter and hon. Alyek Judith. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is that the Bill entitled, “The Mental Health Bill, 2014” be read the second time. To start this process, this matter was referred to the Committee on Health; we would like to hear this report and then we proceed from there. 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been trying to search for the report. Unless there is a problem with my iPad, I have failed to access it. Can we be helped so that we can proceed with the debate? I do not find it under today’s business. How did you get it? I just need some help.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, because the decision to bring this matter forward was taken this morning, it is possible that this report is not there. Clerk, would you like to crosscheck? This is he Mental Health Bill, 2014 not the laboratory one. It is there, please search again; it is already in the system.

5.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Before I proceed, allow me to lay on the Table a copy of the report and a copy of minutes that were made during the discussion with the different stakeholders.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes of the committee report and the text of the report of the committee.

DR BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I am here to present a report of the sectoral committee on the Mental Health Bill, 2014. 

The Mental Health Bill, 2014, was read for the first time on 15 August 2015. However, the Ninth Parliament was unable to consider the Bill and thus it was saved. Consequently, on 2l July 2016, the Tenth Parliament reinstated the Bill and the Committee on Health, in accordance with rule 185(c), commenced with the consideration and scrutiny of the Bill.

Part of the background has been mentioned by the minister and so in the interest of time, I am going to skip it. However, the main issue is that the current law which we are using - the Mental Treatment Act, 1964 - is outdated and does not take into account the discovery of medicines and other treatment interventions that have revolutionised the care of persons with mental illness. The human rights and medical treatment standards of persons suffering with mental illness are not taken into consideration.

The Bill seeks to:
a) 	Provide for care and treatment of persons with mental illnesses at primary health centres;

b) 	Provide for the admission in, for treatment, and for discharge from health units and mental health units, of persons with mental illness;

c) 	Ensure that persons with mental illness are enabled to seek treatment voluntarily;

d) 	Ensure the safety and protection of their rights and the safety of the people who come into contact with them; and

e) 	Establish the Mental Health Advisory Board.

Furthermore, the Bill is intended to operationalise the National Health Policy, which identifies mental health services as an essential aspect of healthcare. The policy advocates for mental health services at all levels to be integrated into general healthcare and prescribes for the update and enforcement of appropriate laws to promote mental health.

The purpose of the proposed Mental Health Bill is to bring the care and management of the people with mental health challenges in line with the principles of the National Health Policy. The proposed Bill takes into account the currently available evidence-based approaches of managing mental health challenges. The Bill seeks to safeguard the human rights of those who are affected and will be in line with international human rights conventions and standards.

The methodology is as outlined. I will skip it and go to key definitions.

Mental Illness

The committee noted that there is no agreed upon definition of the term “mental illness”. Some authors refer to the term “mental illness” as a variety of disorders causing severe disturbances in thinking, feeling and relating to others. Persons suffering from mental illness have a substantially diminished capacity of coping up with the ordinary demands of life.

The World Health Organisation does not have a definition of mental illness but defines mental disorders as “a broad range of problems with different symptoms characterised by abnormal thoughts, emotions, behaviour, and relationships with others.”

The fifth and most current edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (American Psychiatric Association) defines a mental disorder as, “a syndrome characterised by clinically significant disturbance in an individual’s cognition, emotion regulation, or behaviour that reflects a dysfunction in the psychological, biological, or developmental processes underlying mental functioning.” Mental disorders are usually associated with significant distress in social, occupational, or other important activities. Expected or culturally approved response to a common stressor or loss, such as the death of a loved one, is not a mental disorder, socially deviant behaviour, for example political, religious or sexual, and conflicts that are primarily between the individuals and society.

The 10th and most current edition of the International Classification of Mental Disorders avoids the complexities of the terms “disease” or “illness” and rather use “mental disorder”, defined as, “the existence of a clinically recognisable set of symptoms or behaviour associated in most cases with distress and with interference with personal functions.” Social deviance or conflict alone without personal dysfunction should not be included in mental disorder as defined here.

Mental Disability

This is the second definition. These definitions are important because we are going to engage with them in the actual Bill. The committee noted that most definitions of disability recognise that there must be impairment and functional limitation. The Collins English Dictionary defines disability as a general or specific intellectual handicap, resulting directly or indirectly from injury to the brain or from abnormal neurological development.

In Uganda, disability is broadly defined as “a substantial functional limitation of daily life activities caused by physical, mental or sensory impairment and environmental barriers resulting in limited participation.”

Psychiatric Disability 

The term “psychiatric disability” is used when mental illness significantly interferes with the performance of major life activities such as learning, working and communicating, among others.

To qualify disability as a mental disorder, it must interfere in one’s ability to work in order to provide for themselves financially; significantly reduce one’s capacity to complete tasks of daily living, for example shopping, self-care, food preparation, etcetera; and prevent one from caring for him or herself and/or others.

Recommendation 

The committee therefore recommends the use of the term “mental illness” as it is the one in use by known international classification guidelines.

Mental Health Illness Burden

The committee was informed that mental illness is a condition that affects a person's thinking, feeling or mood. Such conditions may affect someone's ability to relate with others and functionality. Different people have different experiences, including people with the same diagnosis.

Mental disorders account for l3 per cent of the global burden of disease. Uganda, like the minister said, has been ranked among the top six countries in Africa with the highest cases of mental disorder. This is according to the World Health Organisation. The Uganda National Health Survey (2005/2006) estimated that seven per cent of all households in Uganda have a disability, and of these, 58 per cent had at least one family member with mental illness.

There are common mental disorders, for example, depression, anxiety and alcohol-use disorders, among others, and severe mental illnesses, for example bipolar disorder, psychosis and epilepsy. The latest WHO report (2006) indicated that at least 7.4 per cent Ugandans suffer from common mental illnesses, particularly depression, anxiety and alcohol-use disorders. At the health facility level, WHO estimates that at least 33 per cent attend for a mood disorder such as depression. The number could be higher because many victims stay in the villages without care. It is estimated that the treatment gap for mental disorders – defined as the proportion of those that get treatment to the total that need it – in Uganda is 85 per cent, meaning that only l5 per cent of those with mental ill health that need care, do get it.

Ironically, there are no reliable national estimates for the prevalence of the severe mental disorders but there is evidence that attendance in mental health Out Patient Department (OPD) clinics of such disorders is on the rise. The rise in mental disorders is due to factors such as poverty, prevalent infections particularly HIV/AIDS, rising burden of chronic diseases such as cancer and diabetes, effects of civil war or insurgency, and the growing problem of alcohol and substance use disorders. Previous studies in Uganda have put the prevalence of bipolar disorder at three per cent of the total Ugandan population while epilepsy has been estimated at three per cent in the community and l7 per cent in health facility attendances.

Observation

While mental illnesses are on the rise in Uganda, lack of or very little statistical data on the national prevalence of various mental illnesses is not helping the situation.

Recommendation

The Ministry of Health should consider carrying out mental health surveys and integrate mental health care services data into the national health planning.

Psychiatric Care for Mental Illness

The committee learnt that mental health services are still significantly underfunded (with only one per cent of the health expenditure going to mental health) and skewed towards urban areas. There were 1.4 community-based in-patient beds per 100,000 persons by 2005. These are beds in the regional referral mental health units. These beds are now much fewer, that is, 0.9 beds per 100,000 persons, since the beds have not increased but the population has grown to nearly 40 million.

The mental hospital also houses 116 forensic beds but there are hardly any mentally ill offenders admitted there. This is because it is not secure enough for such patients. As a result, these patients continue to be kept in prisons around the country. There are no forensic beds elsewhere in the country.

There are 13 regional referral mental health units and one national mental hospital with 550 beds. However, the bed occupancy is 150 per cent, indicating a 50 per cent rate of extra cases. The national mental hospital has a few specialised units.

There are 30 beds in the children and adolescent health unit, dedicated to children and adolescents with mental illness in the country since there are no specific services dedicated to the children with mental illness in other regions in the country.

Thirty of the beds at the mental hospital are dedicated to alcohol and drugs rehabilitation services. There are no other beds in the country dedicated for this purpose. A few beds are available in private hospitals but the number has not been established. 

Much of the country has no access to specialised mental health services such as child and adolescent, and alcohol and drug rehabilitation services. Of necessity, some specialised care may need to be residential, whether public or private

Observation

The committee observed that the 30 beds available for these specialised services (children and adolescents) at the national referral hospital are not adequate to serve the entire country

The procedure for admitting and discharging persons with mental disorders is not feasible in the present context where the numbers are quite big.

The Bill should provide for sensitisation of the public about the causes of mental illness and the methods of prevention of mental illness. The idea of treating people at the primary health care level is very progressive. There is need to address child psychiatry, which is a growing discipline.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that Government should:
a) 	Establish a framework for extending mental health care services to regional and primary health centres.
b) 	Encourage the private sector to participate in mental health care services.

Alternative Treatments

The committee noted that alternative healers provide an alternative system of care for the mentally ill. They are a culturally accepted resource in communities. Mental illnesses are a common reason to visit traditional healers and religious leaders as an alternative.

Abbo and others in their study (2009) found that majority (65.1 per cent) of people that visited traditional healers had psychological distress. Of these people with ill health, nearly 30 per cent had severe mental illness like bipolar disorder or schizophrenia, 14.6 per cent had the more common mental disorders like depression and anxiety, while 3.9 per cent had suicidal tendencies.

Observation

The committee observed that while these traditional healers and religious leaders are accepted and widely used by communities, there is no legal framework to regulate their activities. At times they may cause harm and delay in seeking effective and evidence based treatments in health facilities even for patients with severe mental disorders and suicide.

Recommendation

This matter will be conclusively dealt with in the Indigenous and Complementary Medicine Bill, 2015, which the committee is about to conclude.

Stigma and Mental Illness

The committee noted that the stigma surrounding mental health and its treatment is one of the greatest barriers to mental health care. It causes discrimination, deprivation and exclusion of individuals and reduces access to care by individuals who need it the most.

Despite the high prevalence of mental illness in Uganda, previous studies in Uganda have consistently demonstrated that stigmatising of the mentally ill is still highly prevalent and not only by the general population but also by health providers. According to Dr Mutamba of Butabika Hospital (2005), the hospital had 34.6 per cent of patients in the outpatients department and 42.5 per cent in the in-patients who felt stigmatised, indicating that local beliefs were the major cause of mental illness. One such belief is that mental illness is contagious.

Observation

The committee observed that stigma makes communities discriminative and exclude people with mental illness from community activities, including work and development activities which they would otherwise engage in. This is perpetuating poverty in families and communities. This vicious cycle of poverty and mental illness has been well elaborated in low income countries such as Uganda. Due to stigma –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, are you going to read the whole report?

DR BUKENYA: Maybe I can read the recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think so.

DR BUKENYA: The committee recommends that Government should: 
a) 	Allocate resources from mobilisation and sensitisation of the communities on the mental health care services; and 
b) 	Work towards eliminating discrimination, deprivation and exclusion of individuals’ access to mental health facilities.

Human Resource

The committee expressed concern over the low staffing levels of mental health workers required in order to serve the country more equitably and efficiently. The staffing levels cannot cope with the growing burden of mental health challenges in the country. 

The recommendation is that the Government should make deliberate efforts to train and recruit mental health service providers.

Health Promotion and Disease Prevention

The committee recommends that:

a) 	Government should adopt a multi-sectoral approach to enhance collaboration with development partners to undertake mental health promotion and disease prevention interventions.

b) 	Messages for behavioural change must be redesigned to communicate in a manner that gives adequate information to the population on health promotion.

Community mental health service delivery: The committee recommends that Government should work out a method of implementing the community mental health service provision.

Mental Health among Children and Adolescents

The committee recommends that Government should put in place a progressive legal, policy and regulatory framework to address accessibility and affordability by the children and adolescents to alcohol and drug rehabilitation services.

Ways of Admission and Treatment for Persons with Mental Illness
There is emergency admission, assisted admission, voluntary admission, and involuntary admission which involves the police. 

The committee recommends that-
a) 	The Government should fund the police adequately in order to empower them to effect the apprehension of persons with mental illness in a humane manner and consequently take them to health units for assessment and treatment.

b) 	There is need for a deliberate effort by Government to establish specialised units and accordingly, train and skill police officers and other persons who are empowered by the Bill in the administration and apprehension of persons with mental illness for purposes of taking them for assessment and treatment so that it is done in accordance with human rights standards.

Study Visit

The committee also undertook a study visit to Nairobi and learnt a few things and accordingly recommends that –

a) 	Government should adopt the World Health Organisation best practices in the management and governance of mental health service delivery by ensuring global practices that promote equitable health governance systems through polices that are defined by WHO. 

b) 	Government should improve the quality of service and ensure respect of human rights in mental health units and social care facilities as are provided in the WHO quality rights tool kit and checklist for evaluation of a mental health plan.

Treatment options

Members should note that there are treatment options such as Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT) that are not very palatable to the patients and human rights organisations. You will read the details about this treatment but the committee recommends that:

a) 	ECT is a viable method that should not be deleted from the Bill; instead checks and balances should be put in place to cater for possible abuse and misuse of the treatment option. Such measures include ensuring that it should only be recommended for use by a highly-trained and experienced psychiatrist in case of involuntary admission, and for voluntary admission, informed consent should be given. 

b) 	A deterrent fine and sentence should be given to a person who performs ECT contrary to the law in order to deter would-be offenders.

c) 	The head note, “treatment for involuntary patients”, appearing before clause 11, should be deleted and substituted with “treatment options” since the treatment options are not only for involuntary patients.

There is a clause that provides for seclusion of patients. The committee recommended that seclusion –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, don’t you think dealing with the provisions should be at another stage?

DR BUKENYA: When it came up, there was a lot of debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will come up in the amendments.

DR BUKENYA: Okay, let me read the recommendations:
a) 	Seclusion is a treatment option that cannot be dealt away with. However, as WHO guidelines clearly state, the Government should ensure that rooms for seclusion satisfy the standards required in order to ensure safety of the patents. 

b)	Seclusion should only be given as a last resort and under the supervision and recommendation of a psychiatrist.

c) 	Budgetary allocations should be specifically made towards funding the current National Mental Health Referral Hospital – Butabika.

d) 	A deterrent fine and sentence should be put in place for a person who keeps someone in seclusion contrary to the law in order to deter would-be offenders.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. Honourable members, I have already proposed the question but let me ask a question. The minister presented this matter in the justification of the motion and in the report, the committee has agreed with the principles of the Bill and has gone ahead to begin making proposals for amendments that could improve this Bill. I have proposed the question for debate. Should we engage in the debate on the principles of this Bill at this stage or should we go straight to committee stage and handle it at that stage when dealing with the amendments?

MR JACOB OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There cannot be a better time than this very time in my generation to see the Mental Health Bill in this House. What hope for this country!

Mr Speaker, we are talking about mental health and I do not think the committee disagrees a lot. It would be my humble prayer that when time allows, you put the question and we go to the committee stage and debate at that stage. 

If all of us knew about this Bill, it was needed the other day. Good resolutions or decisions must be carried out like what they do to crying babies in church during sermons - they are carried out immediately. Therefore, I propose, Mr Speaker, that if it could please you, put the question, we adopt the report and we go to debate the amendments at committee stage.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, would this be a good way to proceed? Do we need to debate the principle of this Bill?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would concur with the proposal of my colleague but there are some key areas that we feel should be included in the report. 

There is one important point that I feel the committee should add as one of the recommendations. As the chairperson said, one of the major causes of mental illness is local beliefs. We have witnessed this in my area and part of Omoro in Koro where because of local beliefs, you find people behaving in a unique way and they actually end up committing suicide. Research was done in my district, Amuru, and part of Koro in Omoro and it showed that the two districts are leading in suicide cases. Also, we have witnessed this in so many primary schools, especially in my district. 

My recommendation, therefore, is that the committee should incorporate a provision in which Government should recruit experts in mental health and deploy them in Government schools, to provide guidance and counselling especially to school-going children. It is because we have witnessed in many cases that when children have problems in school, the head teachers become stranded. They take them to the hospital and after they are brought back to school, that issue comes back. Therefore, our children suffer terrible mental health problems. That is the small bit that I wanted to add, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, at this stage you are not debating the report of the committee. The report of the committee is advising us on what they have found. What we are debating is the motion for second reading of the Bill. We will use the committee report as a foundation to guide us in our debate. However, if it is in the interest of Members that we debate this - 

I will have the Member for Padyere and then the Member for Mitooma on whether we require a debate on the principles of this Bill or whether we move and deal with the actual provisions.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would ask for your indulgence to prevail in this situation. I think we should start by debating the principles of the Bill. By the time we go to committee stage, we would be already informed of the loopholes which are not addressed and areas of concern that may have to inform our decisions at committee stage. Therefore, it would be in the interest of the House, and I pray you find this in good will, to first debate the principles of this Bill because it is highly technical.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member for Mitooma, should we or shouldn’t we?

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson and also the minister for tabling the Bill. However, I rise to pay tribute and ask this House to recognise the late Sheilah Ndyanabangi who was a director of medical services directly in charge of mental health services. She passed away last week and of course, her body was interred. 

The Members might not know that this lady worked very hard in the area of mental health services in Uganda. For us to receive this Bill and start debating it without recognising her contribution, I thought it would be a disservice to this nation. Therefore, in the same spirit, I would like to convey my sincere condolences to her family members and the people she worked with in the Ministry of Health. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, should we debate the principles or should we go to- 

MS KAMATEEKA: I do agree with hon. Anywarach that we do debate the principles so that we gain a deeper understanding of the subject which will inform the Bill, so that when we put this law in place, it is a law that will stand the test of time. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I think let us now have the debate tomorrow. We defer the debate to tomorrow. 

I would like to seek your indulgence, honourable members. There are some three short items and the ministers are here. They are questions for oral answer. You know how these have been a problem to Members. There are other issues that we will deal with tomorrow. 

There are three questions for oral answer. One is from the Member for Bunya County East, another one is from the Member for Kwania. Has the honourable member for Kwania, who I do not see here, delegated a Member who can stand in for him so that we finish this question? Also, there is one from the Member for Aringa County. We can have these questions dealt with today and then we rise and deal with other matters tomorrow. The debate on the Bill will be resumed tomorrow. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

     QUESTION 40/01/10 TO THE MINISTER OF HEALTH

5.57
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, BUNYA COUNTY EAST, MAYUGE): “Honourable minister, why have you not operationalised Namalege Health Centre II in Bugondo Parish, Kigandalo Subcounty, and Wamulongo Health Centre II in Wamulongo Parish, Mpungwe Subcounty in Mayuge District, constructed in 2010?”

5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Waira, the Member of Parliament for Bunya County East, raised a question for oral answer in January 2018 asking us when we shall, as Ministry of Health or Government, operationalise Namalege and Wamulongo health centres II.

Mr Speaker, allow me inform the House that the Ministry of Health acknowledges that the first National Health Policy, 1999-2009 defines the national health structure which stated the different levels of care from community to national level. At the village level, we have the Village Health Teams (VHTs), health centres II, health centres III, health centres IV, general hospitals, regional referral hospitals and of course, the national referral hospital. Each of these facilities has a particular number of people they are supposed to attend to. So, the structure aims at increasing access to primary health care services and ensuring proper referral systems within the district health services. 

All these different levels provide graded promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative and palliative care services to a defined catchment population as I did indicate. A health centre II covers a parish with a target population of 5,000 people and provides services which are outpatient services for common conditions and emergency delivery.

In support of the implementation of this policy, the Ministry of Health developed the Health Infrastructure Development Plan under the Health Sector Strategic Plan. The objectives were to rehabilitate and improve the performance of existing health facilities; increase access to healthcare within a five-kilometre radius of households from 49 per cent to at least 80 per cent by 2005; provide appropriate medical equipment for healthcare; establish a functional referral system; and also provide a sustainable maintenance programme.

The Ministry of Health established the Primary Healthcare (PHC) Development Grant for local governments through which annual infrastructural development grants were allocated to the local governments. The Ministry of Health appreciates the local governments’ utilisation of the PHC grants for infrastructural development. This resulted in an increase in the access to health services in terms of walking distance from an average of 49 per cent to 75 per cent by 2010. The local governments receive grants for non-wage and essential medicines and health supplies for health service delivery. However, despite this increase, there was no increase in the wage and non-wage funds to the district local governments. This is the reason why a number of health centres II that were constructed in the various parishes across the country have remained non-operational - lack of the wage and non-wage funds to actually run these facilities. 

The health sector has not received any budget increment for PHC grants for non-wage and essential medicines and health supplies over the last 10 years. The ministry has not allocated resources to all these new health facilities as I said and as hon. Waira also mentioned, when he referred to the two health facilities in his constituency. 

The focus, as we speak now, is to ensure that all subcounties have functional health centres III - we have reported to this House about this - or higher levels like health centres IV or general hospitals. Over the next four years, the ministry, in collaboration with local governments, will be upgrading health centres II in subcounties - please, let us get this right - where we do not have health centres III. Therefore, there should not be a misunderstanding that we are going to upgrade all health centres II. This is the focus for this financial year.

In the case of Bunya East Constituency, Kigandalo Subcounty has a health centre IV; and for Mpungwe Subcounty, Muggi Health Centre II has already been earmarked for upgrading to a health centre III in the financial year 2019/2020. It is not within our mandate to have this facility operational because we are constrained due to lack of funds. 

In the meantime, the Ministry of Health continues to advocate for an increase in the health sector budget and it is in the process of introducing financing reforms like the National Health Insurance Scheme to address the funding gap and improve the quality of services to Ugandans. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to say this, in case Members would like to know about constituencies without health centres IV: We are now in the process of looking for funds so that the 93 constituencies in the country that do not have health centres IV are also dealt with. Once we have that money in place, we should be able to inform Parliament accordingly. I thank you.

6.03
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Given the importance of this matter, I beg that you allow me to ask three short supplementary questions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One supplementary question, please; you can combine all of them in one question. 

MR MAJEGERE: I will ask one and then the second one will go to you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I do not answer questions.

MR MAJEGERE: I have a third health centre II called Isikiro, which was given to Government by Madhvani. That building is also idle. As Government, what do you intend to do about it?

Most of us have got a chance to manage public affairs at a high level; when a policy comes into place, it does not affect the work in progress. That policy the minister was talking about came when Government had already built -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a question or a debate?

MR MAJEGERE: It is a question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ask the question.

MR MAJEGERE: I am reliably informed that the Cabinet has approved a loan of over US$ 50 million to renovate, rehabilitate and upgrade other health centres II. Why can’t the minister fix these three health centres II in the programme under that loan?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, in case the minister plays hide and seek then fails to come out and bring a proper solution, I would beg that you direct the health committee to take over this issue of health centres II in the next financial year. Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought I was very clear when I was responding to this issue. We have had a challenge over the years; we gave funds to the district local governments and you are aware that as we speak now, some health centres III lack accommodation for health workers. We expected the districts to plan and ensure that these health centres III are complete. However, every councillor was scrambling to have a health centre II constructed in their parishes and at the end of the day, while the health centres II were constructed - I said this in my report - we did not receive funds for non-wage expenditure and for medicine.

Right now, most of the Members here know that they have health centres II in their subcounties that are not functional. This is why we are first focusing on the subcounties without health centres III and they are about 225. We would like to ensure that we first upgrade the health centres II in subcounties that do not have them and then we also functionalise health centres III. There are those that are health centres III just by name. This is where we are putting the $50 million that you are talking about. We brought a list of those facilities here and they are over 100 across the country. 

You are also aware that the rate at which we have been creating subcounties is increasing and does not match the resources that we get as a sector. For us to be able to move forward and deal with matters of the health sector - I have mentioned this before - we need to have an increase in funding. Unless there is money provided to the health sector, we shall not be able to functionalise all the health centres II as constructed by the districts. 

You are aware that we decided to withdraw money from the districts and brought it back to the centre in order to deal with that problem, so that they give us their plans. Once we agree with them, we give the money. When we gave money to the districts initially, every district was doing their own thing and yet we have to be coordinated as Government. If Isikiro Health Centre II is in a subcounty that does not have a health centre III, we can take on it; short of that, it falls under the other categories as of now. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Supplementary questions are from the Member who raised the question. The next question was referred to the Minister of Local Government. Is there somebody standing in for the Member for Kwania?

QUESTION 42/01/01 TO THE RT HON. PRIME MINISTER

6.10
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Mr Speaker, this is in response to the question raised to the Prime Minister by hon. Ayo Anthony, MP Kwania County, on bicycles for villages and parish chairpersons.

Following the decision of Government to procure bicycles for village and parish chairpersons, it was agreed that the procurement be handled in two phases, basing on the availability of funds. Consequently, bicycles were procured for 52 districts in the first phase while 75 districts were to be considered in the second phase upon release of more funds to the ministry.

The second phase procurement for the remaining 75 districts requires a total of 35,882 bicycles, estimated to cost Shs 10,767,600,000. However, we are of the view that given the short lifespan of bicycles, the hustle and bustle of chairmen riding these bicycles, and some of them giving them to their sons and daughters to ride, it would be plausible to procure new bicycles for all the 127 districts. 

In view of the above, my ministry has prepared a comprehensive Cabinet paper with proposals to Government on how to facilitate the village and parish executive committee members, including providing bicycles, remuneration, village registers and central stamps as per the presidential directive. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there any supplementary question?

6.12
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank the minister for providing some information regarding the issue of bicycles. However, the minister seems not to have the urgency of a timeframe. We have already had elections and it was long overdue and indeed –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when will you procure the bicycles? 

MR BUTIME: Mr Speaker, as soon as the funds are available; preferably, during this financial year.

MR AMORU: Mr Speaker, that is not satisfactory. The minister could commit himself to a timeframe; otherwise, it means it is not a priority to Government and yet it is very important.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We may have to bring in the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who is not here.

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY THE HON. ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, ARINGA COUNTY, YUMBE) ON EWANGA BORDER DISPUTES BETWEEN ARUA AND YUMBE DISTRICTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Member of Parliament for Aringa County here? He is right there.

6.14
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am responding to the question asked by hon. Olega of Aringa County on Ewanga Border disputes between Arua and Yumbe districts. 

The First Deputy Prime Minister convened and chaired a meeting in October 2003 with the objective of resolving the border dispute of Ewanga between Arua and Yumbe districts. This was followed by setting up a technical committee chaired by the Ministry of Local Government, comprising of senior officials from the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment; Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs; Ministry of Internal Affairs; Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; and the Internal Security Organisation for the purpose of conducting a technical study and making recommendations.
 
An inter-ministerial committee conducted a study and produced a report in 2004. Using a Global Positioning System (GPS), Ministry of Lands’ surveyors established that Ewanga is a parish in Yumbe District. Consequently, my ministry invited the leaders of the two disputing districts of Arua and Yumbe to share the committee findings and propose an implementation mechanism. However, at this meeting, leaders from Arua disputed the findings. 

In a further effort to resolve the longstanding dispute, on 4 July 2018 a delegation from Yumbe District met the Prime Minister. The meeting was attended by, among others, officials from the Ministry of Local Government. At this meeting, the Prime Minister was informed of the 2004 technical report and he was glad that the technical study had already established the proper boundary that technically establishes that Ewanga belonged to a particular district. He thus directed the Ministry of Local Government to implement the recommendation contained in the 2004 report. 

The ministry is to visit the disputed area in the month of October 2018 to implement the recommendations of the report accordingly. Therefore, I would like to report to this august House that I have planned to travel to the area and the matter will be logically concluded in October 2018. Thank you for your attention.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Olega, any supplementary question?

6.18
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information is noted. I will be standing by.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, that brings us to the end of the session of the questions for oral answer. This is a better way than the one we tried to use for some time because you get proper information and you have copies of this supplied to you. When you come, you are able to engage with the ministers and you get better information.

I now direct that the Clerk activates the following Bills for tomorrow’s Order paper:

    a) The Indigenous and Complementary Medicine Bill, 2015
    b) The Data Protection and Privacy Bill, 2015
    c) The Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2017
    d) The Security Interest in Movable Property Bill, 2018

All those Bills should come tomorrow and we see how far we will go with them, plus the one that we have already proposed for second reading. All these Bills will come before the Sugar Bill.

Honourable members, in the circumstances and given the time now, I would like to thank you for having done well today. We are trying to make up for lost time. House adjourned to tomorrow, 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.19 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 6 September 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

