

Wednesday, 20 September 2017

Parliament met at 2.17 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I wish to remind you that the National Prayer Breakfast will be held on 8 October 2017. 

The chief guest will be His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda and the host will be the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, the Speaker of Parliament. The Keynote speaker will be Pr Dr Eng. Toluhi Olusegun Ayobami from the Institute of National Transformation in Nigeria.

Please confirm your participation. I earlier announced about the processes you need to go through to make your confirmations. You can also call 0775412558 so that they can prepare sufficiently for all the members. 

This particular National Prayer Breakfast is hosted by the Parliament of Uganda. Therefore, Members, please let us all be there so that we can honour God for the grace that He has extended to us this far.

Honourable members, like I communicated yesterday, there seems to be some anxiety and I do not know where it is coming from but it is there even in the public.

I think we have a responsibility as Members of Parliament to let the public know that what they sent us here to do, we will do without them getting anxious about it. We will be able to handle whatever is before us properly and in the interest of this country. 

The public should have trust in their representatives that they brought here and let them handle what happens here. The public should go on with its business out there and whatever Parliament will decide, they will decide when the time for that decision comes.

I am receiving petitions and notices of petitions. I received a petition from a group whose name I do not remember now, that I should stop debate of the motion in regard to lifting of the age limit. I do not have that motion, how can I stop what I do not have? I do not have anything in the House and they are urging me to stop it.

I also received a notice of a petition for tomorrow to stop constitutional amendments. How can you stop constitutional amendments? That act itself would be unconstitutional. The Constitution itself allows and provides for processes which should be used for its amendment. Because I am receiving all these, it means there is some anxiety.

Honourable members, there is nothing that shall be done in this House in secrecy. There is nothing that the leaders of this House will do that will surprise members. If there is any business, then it will be scheduled according to rules of this House.

Yesterday, I communicated that I had received two notices of motions. The first was brought on Monday; making some prayers. I received another notice of motion yesterday and I told you that we have a meeting tomorrow with the Speaker of Parliament in the morning. 

In that meeting, we will take a decision on how to process these matters. If it requires them to be referred to the Business Committee of Parliament, we will make that reference to the Business Committee of Parliament. 

I also said and I would like to repeat for clarity that if that meeting of tomorrow morning does not take place, the items that have been brought to my attention, none of them would be on the Order Paper tomorrow.

However, if in the morning, we sit with the Speaker and we agree that this is how we will process these matters, then by the time the Order Paper is published - I do not know which one will be on it. But up to now, I do not even know who will preside over Parliament tomorrow. We will take that decision tomorrow with the Speaker. 

Therefore, honourable members, you entrusted us with this responsibility to manage the affairs and business of the House and make things be done in a way that is comfortable, that brings honour and legitimacy to whatever decisions we arrive at here. 

In addition, we are not living in Mars, where we are not seeing what is going on - we are right here with you. Therefore, please trust the leadership of this House to do the right thing to facilitate whatever decision you will make as Parliament. Therefore, let us not make the public anxious.

If you go around Parliament or the streets, you can see that there is a sign of anxiety - a lot of it. Yesterday, there were no cars in town. Even where jam used to be, I could not see cars. Please let the public continue doing what they are doing; let business continue normally because we are also going to handle our business here normally. Is that okay honourable members? Let us rescue the public because what is out there is not right; what is on the airwaves is not right, it should not be there.

Yesterday, a member here rose to complain about Police deployment, we invited them to come. I would have been surprised if there was no deployment around Parliament because from some statements that I saw, they were saying that there is going to be war in this place. When you alert security people that there is going to be war somewhere, they will want to see how the war will be carried out.

We have actually invited them. Therefore, to be surprised that they are around, I think it is not to be acting fair. Therefore, let us do our things the best way we can. We have rules that govern what we do, let us just proceed that way. I urge you honourable members please.

Yesterday, I also heard of members who resorted to other means of solving debate issues. That is not necessary honourable members. I am just urging members; let us not debate this matter. Let us just leave it like this and deal with other business.

There is nothing that will come as a surprise, there is nothing that will come by trick. Everything will come through processes that are transparent with due notice to all the Members and we will take the decision. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SALE OF PLOTS OF LAND IN NAMANVE INDUSTRIAL PARK BY PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS

2.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Mr Speaker, the ministers are on the way. They are still engaged for item number 3 but I am ready for item 4 as they come.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one are you ready with?

MR BAHATI: Item 4.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Can we defer the statement and wait for when the ministers are here.

LAYING OF PAPERS

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO EURO 270,266,042.15 FROM THE UK EXPORT FINANCE (UKEF) AND EURO 37,110,585.9 FROM STANDARD CHARTERED BANK (LONDON) FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF KABAALE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT IN HOIMA

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the proposal by Government to borrow up to Euros 270,226,042.15 from the UK Export Finance and Euros 37.1 million from Standard Chartered Bank (London) for the construction of Kabaale International Airport in Hoima. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, that stands referred to the Committee on National Economy to handle and come and advise us on how to deal with this matter. 

Honourable members, you remember there was a proposal from the rules committee that the motion should have been received now and then we refer the substance of the motion to the committee so that the committee comes back and reports on it. 

However, we are just sending there a document. Maybe, in future, we need to look at this again because by now, the minister would have presented the motion, spoken to it and that is what we would have referred to the committee. 

We were not able to achieve that this time round. We will find time to deal with it. Therefore, it is referred to the Committee on National Economy to handle within the framework of the Rules of Procedure and then report accordingly. Thank you.

The member for Chua West County had raised an urgent matter with me. I am sorry that I forgot.

2.29
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving this opportunity to raise this matter which is of very important significance. 

Mr Speaker, you will recall that sometime in October last year, the Member of Parliament for Kitgum Municipality, hon. Beatrice Anywar, raised a very important issue on the insecurity in Kitgum District. That year alone, we had lost about 16 people to armed thuggery. 

We would like to thank the Police for their intervention that year. When they intervened, the scale and magnitude of the problems actually went down a little bit.

However, Mr Speaker, this year as we speak, there is a lot of armed robbery and killing in Kitgum District in which we have now lost eight people. The latest was yesterday when a businessman from a trading centre was shot dead at about 7 o’clock in the night.

The matter of insecurity in Kitgum District is actually compounded by the fact that we have not had power from umeme for almost two to three months. Therefore, there is total darkness in the town. People are scared and at 7 o’clock, you do not find any shop open. We also lack the effective deployment of the Police force. 

I remember last year when the IGP intervened, he promised that he would create a regional unit in Kitgum District to cater for three districts in East Acholi. However, up to now, that has not come to pass.

Mr Speaker, as we speak now, people are scared and wondering if there is a Government in place which takes care of their security. Therefore, in my prayer, I would like to make it clear that something has to be done about this situation.

Secondly, I also understand that some people who are arrested with illegal guns hardly spend two to three days in jail before they are released on Police bond or whatever other means. 

I would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to pronounce himself on that matter and we rescue our people effectively so that they are able to live a normal life –(Interruption)– it is okay; let him give information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the information is yours. You are the one who rose on an urgent matter. You do not have the information? If he would like to comment, let him comment after you have finished.

MR OJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We need a very clear position from the Ministry of Internal Affairs and if they are even aware of what is taking place in Kitgum and the steps they will take to rescue my people from this anxiety cutting across the district. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member for Kilak, speak very briefly so that we can get the undertaking from Government.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Okin P.P. Ojara for raising this important matter. 

I remember when the situation was bad in Kitgum, the Office of the IGP went and camped in Kitgum. From that time onwards, the situation was cool. There were no serious iron bar hitmen and rampant killing. The same applied when it happened in Gulu. The IGP went, based in Gulu and the situation was calmed.

The information I would like to give is that it is not only in Kitgum; even in Gulu, some three days ago, the iron bar hitmen came back. A woman was hacked seriously two days ago and right now she is fighting for her life at Gulu Independent Hospital.

Therefore, I urge Government, Mr Speaker, to take the security matter very seriously. It is because these boys and robbers wait when the security is serious, they retreat. However, when the security relaxes, they come back and continue with their hooligan acts. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One more comment from the member for Kampala Central. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Touching the same matter, in many urban centres, there has been a huge complaint from mainly women. 

As these women drive back home and get into the traffic jam, criminals open and enter their cars with knives and other weapons. They either take their bags forcefully or force them to drive to a given area and rape them and go away with their cars. 

You realise that wherever there is traffic jam now, there are a lot of men standing by the road sides. These are not ordinary people passing by. Those who have security may not realise it but it is so rampant at the moment. It is coupled with other people who waylay people at their gates as they are entering their homes. 

If we can look at what happens - I would like to invite the Minister of Internal Affairs to address his mind to the security patterns we saw in Kigali where for every 100 metres, there is either a soldier or a Police officer on the opposite side. In such a pattern, even if they are four on the alternate sides on a road of about 1,000 metres, there is no way a criminal can flee without being identified.

To mention but a few, there are no more street lights in this city. These street lights are only lit for about two to three years and they black out in the night or only run for about three months. We do not know what is happening. 

We appropriate money here to KCCA and other urban centres to see to it that street lights are available on the roads. However, you can bear me witness, for you who stay in this city, that street lights stay alight for about one month and they are no longer functional or they do not light at all. 

We are the only city in the entire East Africa that is dark. We need to do something on this in order to work on the security around our areas. Thank you very much.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to pass over related information to the House. We sat here for almost an hour and a half, discussing the issue of the killing of women that even led to the suspension of the House for the minister to come up with a statement. 

Well, the minister came up with a statement and a promise was made that security was going to be beefed up. 

We received information that the entire Entebbe zone was guarded by the army and Police but unfortunately, more women continue to die. Yesterday, another woman was murdered and another has been murdered today around Nkumba. 

This is an indication that even when we think the security is taking a lot of precaution and talking about the security lights; there is more to focus on beyond what ordinary eyes can see.

I do not know whether the procurement of the tukutuku cars by the Police will be of any help to address this issue. We need something more from the Police that will help them to do their work than the tukutuku that have been procured.

It is a shame that the entire Police force can opt for tukutukus for purposes of doing their work. All we would like to say is whether tukutuku or not, we need our lives secure. Something needs to be done. Whether it is the army taking charge or the Police, we need to go beyond the ordinary eye and ensure that Ugandans are safe and secure. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This House received a statement. What we need now is not a statement but a report on action. When this kind of information stops coming then we know something is happening. However, as long as we are reporting death incidences that means the intervention has not yet reached the level it should to stop all these incidences of killing.

Honourable, would you like to make a report to the responsible people?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Internal Affairs will be asked to come to the House to tell us the progress that we are making. However, at the same time, we would like to take this opportunity once again feel the sympathy for those who are losing their dear ones.

I would like to assure members that Government is doing what it can to ensure the security of every Ugandan. Next week, the Minister of Internal Affairs will be asked to come to the House to the make the progress report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you have looked at item No.6; are you ready with that? The petition was referred to your office. Are you looking at the main item No.6? Can we follow the Order Paper now? Procedure.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This House is composed of the majority Members who form the NRM Government and the minority who are the Opposition members. The procedural point I am seeking your guidance is, are we proceeding rightly when the members for NRM who should be the majority are now the minority –(Laughter)– and then the Opposition Members seated here are the majority? Should we be proceeding that way? I beg your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would have hoped that this would be the time the Opposition would move up some of these businesses and finish. (Laughter) You would take advantage in vain. Why are you blowing your cover? You are selling out the opportunity you have. This is the only chance you have had in a long time. Why don’t you use it? 

Can we now go to the Order Paper? Let us start from the beginning, the minister is here.

RESPONSE ON A PETITION TO PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER RULE 29 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FOR THE FOLLOWING COMPANIES: 
    A) AKE –JO CO. LTD
    B) AHMOS INVESTMENTS
    C) ABSOLUTE HOME LTD
    D) BENICO INVESTMENTS LTD
    E) GUNYA CO. LTD
    F) J.B. TRADING AGENCY LTD
    G) HERBCO COLOUR PRINTERS LTD
    H) OPENTENC UGANDA LTD
    I) APEL ENGINEERING CO. LTD
    J) MENELICO STORES; AND
    K) JARUTS

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The companies mentioned here are companies that traded with South Sudan and this is the third time this matter is coming to the House.

To update the House, we signed an undertaking with the Government of South Sudan, if resources allow, to pay these companies which were affected because of the importance our export trade has on our economy - and then the Government of South Sudan will pay us back.

We are processing a motion to this House because it has to be approved by the House. We hope that in the next three weeks, we would be ready to come to the House because what we have been doing was verifying the companies and their amounts and whether they supplied through the Uganda Revenue Authority.

Therefore, when we are ready, in the next three weeks we would come to the House with a motion seeking approval of the House to allow Government, if resources allow, to pay these companies then the Government of South Sudan will pay us back after.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Would these companies be included because they petitioned Parliament? Are these companies going to be part of what you are considering or reviewing so that we can take this matter off from our list and write to the companies accordingly? 

MR BAHATI: Indeed if they supplied Government of South Sudan, they will be included after the verification process. We are verifying whether indeed they supplied. Therefore, all companies that supplied the Government of South Sudan after verification will be part of the motion that will come to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Wait. Therefore, if they are not part of - there is a motion that the minister is bringing. I would like to mark this petition off. There is a motion that the minister is bringing that is why I referred this petition to the minister. 

Therefore, if the minister is to bring a petition the way forward will be, if any of these companies that have petitioned is not in the minister’s list, what do we do? Do we handle the process with the committee or what?

If one or any of these companies that petitioned Parliament are not in your list in the motion that you are bring to Parliament - I am sure that motion is not going to be debated outright. It might end up in a committee. How would we handle this matter? I would like this petition marked off our Order Paper.

MR BAHATI: Our proposal was that when we bring this motion, we also mention the status of these companies. If they are not among those that have been verified to have supplied South Sudan, we will state so. 

Companies supplied South Sudan but the fact that Government of South Sudan is willing if we get resources and pay them, will pay back the Government of Uganda, then they must have a say on the companies that supplied them.

However, it is proper that we deal with companies which supplied South Sudan. That is done through a process. In brief, we will make a comment on these companies during the motion we will bring.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister for giving way. The clarification we would like to seek is; assuming from the Speaker’s question, they were 80 companies that supplied South Sudan, what criteria will you use to ascertain which companies you will bail out first in this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not a bailout. It is a payment because they are owed money.

MR NSEREKO: Yes, because the issue was they are indebted as a result of the supplies that they did and at the moment they can no longer raise capital to run their businesses and that is why the Government of Uganda must intervene to save them so that in future, the Government of South Sudan repays the Government of Uganda.

Indeed there is no harm in that. The only question for clarity is what criteria will be used assuming they were 80 and we see six or 10? Why should it be that 10? It is a matter of equal opportunity here.

MR BAHATI: Can I first clear this at once? The issue concerning the criteria to be used, we are verifying all these companies and the Ministry of Trade is taking leadership on this. From the finance point of view, is that if we have resources like Shs 100 or Shs 30 billion and we have 80 companies that have been verified, then it is logical, from our point of view, that they are paid proportionately. That is the best we can do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, many people are affected by this and some of these people have got representatives here. What I wanted to achieve today was to see if I could get out this petition from the Order Paper. If the minister was ready to report properly on it, we would then mark it off as a petition, notify the concerned parties, the people who petitioned Parliament that the following steps had been taken by Parliament. 

However, it looks like that is not about to happen, but the petition is with the minister. If the minister is coming back in two to three weeks, can we wait for that motion? Do you want them to be paid today? Even the report on the petition is not ready and you are saying that two to three weeks is too long, honourable members? What should happen tomorrow? Are you going to ask them to pay tomorrow? Please, let us be realistic honourable members.  

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason we are saying that the two or three weeks is too long, is because this matter was raised some time back. I am also privy to information that the minister travelled to South Sudan concerning this matter with a member from this House about three to four months ago. I do not want to disclose more information which I am aware about. Therefore, the minister can be able to produce this matter so fast -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no underhand way here. They went, negotiated and the President went and signed the undertakings. Therefore, it is not an opaque thing, but a transparent one. The President went there and signed the document that now says Government of Uganda should pay that debt which becomes a South Sudan sovereign debt to the Government of Uganda. This information came to us and it is transparent between two countries; Government of Uganda will pay its suppliers and Kenya did it sometime back to save its business people.

The burden now is between government and government. That is what they were trying to achieve. Therefore, let us not impute anything beyond this. There is every transparent process happening. The question is why these companies came because I think they got information that the minister was coming to Parliament with the list that did not include them. That is why they came and petitioned Parliament and that is why I referred this petition to the minister. Therefore, there is background to this petition, honourable member.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I am not imputing any bad motive. That is why I am saying that because all these companies are financed – in a distressed situation because most of them had acquired loans from the banks and the banks have put pressure on them. And some of them were from these banks which have already closed. 

Mr Speaker, the minister should be able to report to the House in a week’s time because this matter came long time ago; giving him two months would be too much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, how soon can you really come with this motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the verification of some of the companies whose verification was not completed, is being handled by the Minister of Trade. With your permission, she can tell us how fast she will finish this process. Thank you.

2.52
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, concerning the issue of South Sudan traders, we carried out verification on the first lot and forwarded it to the ministry of finance for management and negotiation. We are now going through the second lot. Therefore, if there are any who have not registered, please submit your documents with us because we are going through the second verification exercise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many did you verify and forward to Ministry of Finance?   

MS KYAMBADDE: The first lot was about 84, but we have started getting new applicants.

MR BAHATI: Maybe if we could restrict ourselves to what is in the House; we have all these companies in the record and the process of verification is ongoing. We have written to URA asking them whether these companies really supplied. Therefore, these are catered for and there are those that are coming as the minister said. 

At one stage, we will come to the House – and that is why we were suggesting three weeks – and whoever will have been verified, we will deal with them. And those that are still being verified, we can agree to have another phase. Otherwise, we have got to have a cut-off on how to handle this issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many do you have so far, verified?

MR BAHATI: Eighty four, and these are the numbers we are bringing to Parliament.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

ON THE SALE OF PLOTS OF LAND IN NAMANVE INDUSTRIAL PARK BY
PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS

2.55
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The land in Namanve Industrial Park was allocated to individuals and companies. There were individuals who opted to source for additional investors for a joint venture; thereafter, they came to Uganda Land Commission to ask for consent for purpose of joint venture and partnership.

It is true, as hon. Elijah Okupa indicated, that some individuals at the beginning started selling to investors because they could not raise enough capital to develop. However, when government realised that few people had started selling – because under the law, even if you sell to another investor the land you were allocated, you have to come back to Uganda Land Commission for purposes of consent and variation –(Interruption)-    

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statement which the honourable minister is raising is very important and honourable members feel like following it closely. Unfortunately, we do not have the statement on our iPads and neither do we have the hard copy.  Is it, therefore, procedurally right for her to continue reading the statement without circulating it to the honourable members?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought we were dealing with this particular statement? Are there some other issues you would like to discuss? Honourable members, what I said came under Rule 39 not Rule 44. And Rule 39 is about matters raised as urgent matters and questions asked without notice. Even then, the responses should be in writing and a written answer should first go to the member who raised the question so that they can prepare to ask supplementary questions. 
However, we do not seem to have a written response to this question. Is it something we want to listen to or is it something we want to see in writing? Sometimes we also need to see what is more practical because the information is here and somebody has it. Nevertheless, it looks like the ministers do not have a written response so we will pause the matter here for now. Honourable minister, you need to prepare a written statement. Please, we cannot eat our cake and have it at the same time. We can no longer proceed with this matter because members want copies. So let us pause it and go to another item. 
MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I raised this question to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, specifically to the minister in charge of investment, hon. Anite. I was surprised because I shared with hon. Betty Amongi and I told her that Uganda Investment Authority, which gave this piece of land, falls under that ministry. It arose from an advert the individuals were making in the newspapers. I even laid those adverts here and the minister, hon. Anite, had promised to come back after consulting with Uganda Investment Authority. 
We had also asked the Committee on Finance to follow it up.  So by the time it reached the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, it should have been at the transfer level, if the transfers had been made. 
So it is the Minister of Finance, in charge of investment, who is supposed to come here and tell us what she found out because she said she had carried out an investigation and she would report here. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I think hon. Betty is just generous like she is always while responding to these land matters. The rightful person to come and answer these issues is hon. Anite, who is in charge of investment. I think she would have more information to respond to this. Hon. Bahati could deliver this information and that answer comes here. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think the way the information was transmitted is the one that had caused this kind of – because you can see that item one is the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Therefore, she is not just being generous but she is responding to her obligation which has been communicated to her by the Order Paper. 

The House has now said they want the statement in writing which is okay but if she had information that we could use, I would have taken it. Since you want it in writing, we will wait for the written text from the responsible person. Please, Clerk, amend this to go to the minister responsible for investment in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 
For the next item, I have received communication that hon. Janat Mukwaya is away. She had delegated hon. Muruli-Mukasa, who also is now away. (Laughter) He called me to say that the delegation came while he had already left; so he could not be here. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

ON PRICE DISCRIMINATION OF HIMA CEMENT PRICES IN KASESE DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you have circulated the copies of this statement. 

3.01
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Yes, we have already uploaded on the tablet. Mr Speaker, I am supposed to talk about the price discrimination of Hima Cement prices in Kasese District. 

On receipt of the concern raised on the price of Hima cement in Kasese District, the ministry duly consulted the company on this matter. The management of Hima Cement provided a written response on the matter in its letter to the ministry dated 7 April 2017.
 
The company does accept that its price for Hima Multipurpose brand in Kasese is Shs 31,500 per bag, all taxes inclusive. This is higher than the price in Kampala which is at Shs 29,500. 

The company provided the following reasons to explain the price differentiation between Kampala and Kasese: 

    1. That they benchmark their pricing on the prevailing market prices, which are dictated by their competitors in the market. The price of their main competitor brand in Kasese is Shs 32,000.

    2. That the company is part of a global player.

    3. LafargeHolcim, which is listed on the major global stock market and, therefore, is mandated to adhere to good competition practices and law that are enforced in the market where the parent company is listed. It states that if they set their prices in Kasese to match the Kampala market prices, their competitors will not be able to sell in Kasese and this will be against fair competition practices. 
    4. That Kasese is a border town with a lot of cross-border trade activities. Having a price that is much lower than the prevailing market prices in Mpondwe, DRC would encourage smuggling. 

    5. The company claims that to avoid smuggling, the company has to set its prices in Kasese close to the prevailing prices in the eastern part of the DRC. 

Mr Speaker, the ministry notes the following: 

    1. That Kasese District is the host of Hima Cement and the people deserve better, despite the technicalities raised by the company, which include compliance with the principle of fair competition and deterrent measures against smuggling.
    2. The ministry also raised concern about the technicalities raised by the company to explain the price differentiation that it does not make sense to the people of Kasese. We do not see the justification for them to pay more to protect the interests of the company’s competitors and to avoid smuggling. 

    3. That the duty to curb smuggling rests with the government and not with the company, so it is not their role to control smuggling. 

    4. The matter before this august House is a consequence of over-liberalisation of the economy. We have a serious anomaly in our distribution where a manufacturer is also the distributor – because that is also another challenge that we raised with them. They are the distributors and they are the agents and yet they are the manufacturers, wholesalers and even the retailers. Therefore, this monopolistic syndrome is a major source of market and price distortion in the commercial sector. 

We have disagreed with them for the justification they gave and we have insisted that they find a way of resolving this matter to ensure that we have standard prices on the market. 

Mr Speaker, we are still consulting with them to ensure that the people of Kasese also enjoy a fair price of Hima Cement brand. 

The most substantive action of the ministry is that it is formulating a comprehensive regulatory framework to regulate the distribution and sale of locally produced goods and services in Uganda. 

As a ministry, we will soon issue a statutory instrument on distribution regulation which we believe is very essential and urgent to streamline the challenges we are currently faced with in the commercial sector.

So, I would therefore, like to commit as a ministry, that we are struggling to ensure that they have standard prices, and we do empathize with the people of Kasese; we will make sure that we rectify this situation. I wish to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any supplementary question?

3.08
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank the honourable minister for taking up those steps.
 
When the people of Kasese raised this matter through their members of Parliament, they had pain in their hearts. You will all agree with me that Hima Cement is spoiling the environment where the people of Kasese are, and the people of Kasese are the ones who will suffer from these emissions that are coming from the cement factory. 

For the people of Kasese, to mention that the price in Kasese is higher because it is centrally located at the border is a lie. This is because when one crosses over to Democratic Republic of Congo, a bag of cement coming from Hima Cement Factory is sold at a cheaper price than in Kasese and this has actually encouraged smuggling. People are now crossing over to Democratic Republic of Congo to buy the Hima cement at a cheaper price.

When the people of Kasese talk about competition with the other players - we will possibly tell our people to stop buying Hima cement, so that they bring it to the Kampala market, where they think there is fair market play. We are supporting the factory but when it comes to giving out jobs, our people are just given the jobs of –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, was it a supplementary question?

MS KIIZA: Yes, it was a supplementary question, but I would like to lay a background to it. Our people are only employed as casual labourers. Many of the people working in that mine have had challenges with some of the machines affecting them, and they are never compensated. There is a man I introduced to the MP for workers, he had suffered damage but they have not compensated him. All these challenges are some of the reasons our people are complaining. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for taking a step to even investigate these matters. That alone gives us hope. However, I am surprised that while we talk about a liberalised economy, the ministry cannot give a firm position on the protection of the local community. I expected the minister to say, “We have issued” - by the time she came to report - an instrument to compel Hima cement to have a uniform pricing, so that when one comes to Kampala, they will know that Hima cement is sold at Shs 28,000, same price as sold in Kasese. We should not be victims because the factory is located in our area. Can we see some action taken? Apart from interacting with them and possibly say that consultations will continue happening, did the local leaders also participate in these negotiations? When you discuss for them and they are not part of the negotiators, that can’t make them own the decisions taken in the negotiations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are supplementary questions; it is not a debate. The Member who got up - you should have been the one to raise the supplementary question.

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. My supplementary question to the honourable minister is - having given us the information she got from Hima cement, that the competitor is charging Shs 32,000 per bag of cement, which I also know that is not true because right now, a bag of Hima cement in Kampala is at Shs 31,000, a bag of Tororo Cement is at Shs 31,000 as well - I purchased cement this morning in Kasese – Did you go ahead to verify and investigate further the authenticity of the information they gave you about the process on the market in Kasese?

Did you also go further to find out whether it is true that cement in Kasese is actually cheaper than it is in Congo? I would like to authoritatively tell you that it is cheaper to buy cement from Congo and re-import it to Kasese, where Hima cement is manufactured.

MS KYAMBADDE: Mr Speaker, well I am –

MR SSEMPALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is rather interesting - I would expect that cement in Kasese should be cheaper in order to allow us to export it to earn foreign exchange. But sincerely speaking, if you are telling us that cement prices are higher in Kasese and we have to import the very Hima cement from Congo, are we really helping this country? We are now spending our own foreign exchange on things that we should not be spending money on. Thank you so much.

MS KYAMBADDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to point out that we are still in the process - and as I mentioned we are still negotiating with them. 

On the issue of prices, this is a cross-cutting issue. It involves taxes and resources of the company. It is not an overnight issue that I can decide on by just ordering them to stop. It is a process because they have to establish on how they can break-even or how they could balance out their taxes with the URA in view of the amendments or the cuts that are made in the course. 

Therefore, as I said that we are still negotiating with them and they are taking that into consideration; they have not resisted that at all. They have taken note of our concerns as we raise them. 

On the issue of the victim who have had issues with the machinery dissects, please submit their petitions. Once you submit the petitions about those victims that have not been treated, we could approach them and we ensure that they manage their medical bills. 

Thank you very much for advising me to involve local leaders. We are going to do that in the process of our further discussion. 

As far as employment is concerned, I have noted that about 30 or 40 per cent of their employees are actually Ugandans but I do not know whether you meant that people from Kasese per say or Ugandans. Anyhow the biggest percentage of their workers is actually Ugandans.

As far as environment is concerned, that is another issue that we also have to work on with NEMA. Please give me time. In about a month or three weeks, I will be able to come back with some of the responses to the questions that have been raised here. I wish to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, Uganda is running a liberalised economy so you cannot set a price for them. However, when you talk about price variations in the same market, it is not a matter of liberalisation any more but extortion. So, you may need to look at it differently because it does not offend the privatization policy but at the same time some balance is required.

There are laws in economics that determine those things but where there are complaints about the way the things are happening, maybe you need to look at it without thinking you are violating our policy of privatization.

MS KYAMBADDE: I have taken note.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON RESUMPTION OF VACCINATION OF CHILDREN IN PRIVATE HEALTH FACILITIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On that item, the Minister of Health is still on the way. Can we have the next one?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON DELAYED PAYMENT TO TOBACCO FARMERS IN WEST NILE REGION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister of agriculture, the statement of delayed payment for tobacco farmers in the West Nile Region.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Speaker, the minister of agriculture is also still on the way with the rest of the ministers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you the Government Chief Whip today? (Laughter)

MS BETTY AMONGI: I have been requested by the Government Chief Whip to communicate that on her behalf.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can we then delay the statements since we have other matters on the Order Paper?

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE CLOSURE OF PRIVATE SCHOOLS BY THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

3.19
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Connie Nakayenze): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you are aware, Mr Speaker, when you sent us to find out about the closure of private schools, you gave us two weeks and indeed we beat the deadline and our report was presented to Parliament towards the end of last session; it is only pending debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, this report was already presented and the motion for debate was proposed to this House so can we continue with the debate? Is that correct?

MS NAKAYENZE: Mr Speaker, maybe before we open up the debate, I would request that I just give the final observations and recommendations - a few of them so that Members can catch up. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Didn’t you do that that day?

MS NAKAYENZE: I did it but I am only requesting to give Members a summary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, please give only the summary.

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. These are just the other observations and recommendations, which were made by the committee:
 
Absence of Government schools in some places

The committee observed that some proprietors opened schools because there were no Government schools in those areas and children had to walk in order to access government schools. For example, in Bulambuli District an individual started a nursery school because there was no Government school. The area had been deserted and the population was resettling back after the cattle rustling problems had ended.

In Mayuge District, the committee observed that private schools had been opened in a forest reserve, which is densely populated with encroachers. Since Government could not open up a school in a forest reserve, it prompted the community to initiate a number of private schools to fill up the gap.

The committee recommends that Government follows its policy of building a primary school in every parish and a secondary school in every sub county with proper infrastructure, including adequate numbers of teachers and teachers’ houses, to provide the necessary learning materials required.

The ministry should create public private partnerships with private schools in such places to strengthen the schools by providing teachers and scholastic materials.

The ministry should also consider taking over community-initiated schools in such places and develop them further as alternative to the substandard private schools being closed in those areas.

Understaffing

There was a general outcry from the chief administrative officers of the affected districts about understaffing resulting from the ban on staff recruitment by the Central Government. This is affecting the quality of delivery of education services in those districts and undermining the quality of Government services in the sector.

With the increasing enrolment, resulting from the closure of private schools, it is expected that the need for teachers will more than double the current teachers’ gap.

The committee recommends that Government lifts the current ban on recruitment of staff to enable districts recruit more teachers.

Mr Speaker, it was also observed that there were bureaucratic procedures for licensing of schools. In many of the district authorities the committee met, it was indicative that the centralization of the licensing function for primary and secondary schools – 

    i) created unnecessary bureaucracy and turned licensing into a tedious and lengthy process;

    ii) tasking all prospecting proprietors to apply to the centre was expensive and prohibitive; and

    iii) the ministry depended on the information provided by the proprietors on the application forms and recommendations of the district education officers but did not verify any of these physically. This meant the decision could as well be taken at the district levels.

The committee recommends that the ministry –

    i. provides a comprehensive client charter and guidelines to prospective applicants for licensure to fast track the process of licensing schools; and

    ii. considers strengthening the capacity of district education officers to be able to handle licensing of private schools. The ministry can retain the oversight function through the insurance of guidelines and standards.

Inadequate inspectors

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that there were few inspectors coupled with inadequate resources to facilitate the inspection function, which encouraged unnoticed cropping up of unlicensed private schools.

Out of the Shs 4 billion allocated to the inspection function in 2016/17, only Shs 800 million had been released by the end of the second quarter. For instance, in Mbarara there were only five inspectors to supervise 324 schools. Besides, there was a single motorcycle for the inspectors to carry out the inspection function and this is the reason Mbarara has the highest number of private schools that were closed.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the ministry allocates more resources to the inspection function and reviews the education structure at the districts with a view of recruiting more inspectors.

In conclusion, the committee finds that the decision of the ministry to close the affected schools was justified. However, action should have been taken to ensure that the affected students or pupils find places in other schools.

Further, the inspection function and community awareness should have been carried out to avoid a near crisis situation where parents had to begin looking for school placements for their children in the middle of the term.

Mr Speaker, the ministry therefore has to ensure that the existing gaps in the Government schools are addressed progressively to provide a sustainable solution to this challenge.

The committee is concerned that failure to address these challenges in Government schools will continuously drive the emergence of undesirable private schools.

Given that this review was restricted to the closure of private schools, the committee finds it very necessary to carry out a comprehensive assessment of public schools at both the primary and secondary levels before presenting a comprehensive report with the recommendations to the House. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chair and the committee. Honourable members, the report has now been presented. I now propose the motion for your debate. The motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the closure of private schools by the ministry. Debate starts now and each Member will take three minutes. We start from Masaka Municipality.

3.28
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to extend my appreciation to the chairperson and her team for a task well considered. You can easily see that this is not an air conditioned report; it is a field report. For me, it is very important that we are able to go and practically feel the sense of their report. 

It is very true as they did conclude in their report that Government was justified. Justification ordinarily is based on the factors; there is a law and guidelines which are not being followed by people who seek to establish schools. Mr Speaker, hitherto, schools were not considered a business. They were considered a service but that was when Government had capacity to offer education wherever it was needed. However, we have experienced changes in this country; demographic, economic and others that have made it difficult for Government to fully provide education in depth and wherever it is needed in different forms.

The challenge I find with this report is failure to properly navigate us through how the parents coped when, in the middle there, schools at their service were told to close. How did they handle this? 

We are dealing with a problem of children dropping out of schools because of distances travelled. I understand, some time back, when Government was establishing a necessity to have a school in an environment where there is no school it used to work with the private proprietors. Some of these schools became Government aided and some were church funded. We agree with you that some of these schools do not have capacity to hire competent teaching staff or even erect good infrastructures to support these schools. 

Have we found out whether some of these areas are improbable to have these schools fully closed and recommend to Government to work with proprietors - for instance, to have a new wave of Government aided schools so that we do not simply close and deny our children education? For me, that would make more sense other than saying Government was “justified”. I agree there is a law and guidelines to be followed but the duty of providing education cannot be abdicated by the fact that the quality is bad. Can Government –(Member timed out.)

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, as the Shadow Minister –
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you had spoken like that, you would have spoken towards the end. Since you started, you suffer the three minutes rule.

3.32
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I concur with the report that the inspection department is underfunded. If we do not fund it now, we are going to see a vicious cycle of what we are doing. We shall be closing schools every day because the bad schools will come again and even the good ones will become bad.

However, I have got another proposal. The idea of building schools in those specified areas could be very expensive. We could give an incentive to the private sector since we are partnering with them. What could happen is that we can set standards and specify the facilities a primary or secondary school should have. If a private individual has those facilities, then we assist him or her with the recurrent expenditure mainly the teaching, laboratory equipment and laboratory consumables. This will raise the standards to what we require and if the standards come down, we withdraw the service. By that, we shall sustain the standards and the schools will definitely be enough in the country.

Even in the present situation, we do not have enough schools. I am aware that 70 per cent of the schools in Uganda are private. Therefore, we actually need to increase and strengthen the partnership with the private sector by assisting them in the recurrent expenditure and making sure the standards rise. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

3.34
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. As she said, Government was right to close the schools because of the criteria used and they found those schools wanting. 

Mr Speaker, it is good the chairperson did not come to my constituency because how would you close those schools which are under trees? We can move to other trees; would you come and cut them? (Laughter) 

Recently, we were mobilising our people to build pit latrines. Some of the people who were arrested and taken to the prison because they did not have pit latrines found that even the prison did not have pit latrines. Therefore, there is crisis of service delivery –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I would like to thank the honourable member for accepting to clarify on a very important matter. Mr Speaker, for those schools which are operated under trees, what would Government close? Would they close down the trees?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was his question and somebody suggested that you cut down the trees. (Laughter)

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, since we have accepted liberalisation, those that are trying to put an effort to develop these private schools, first of all, we start by giving them the standards. Maybe, we should think of a way to support these entrepreneurs to develop these schools. 

In my constituency, out of about 60 parishes, I have Government schools in less than 15 parishes. How have people been going to schools? We have schools called ABEK (Alternative Basic Education for Karamoja). Most of them are under trees and the pupils sit on stones. We have to look for pieces of timber. Sometimes, some of us have to carry timber from Mbale to go and make these things. However, we have been asking Government to help us build primary schools, at least, one per parish. Some of the people there are very athletic. Even if you build the schools in a radius of 20 kilometres, our children can run and go there. 

There is a challenge in terms of service delivery. Mbarara may be lucky; they had some structures to be closed. In some of our constituencies, we do not have things like that. Once it rains, you can run with your blackboard and hide in maybe the next –(Member timed out.)

3.37
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the detailed report. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with the committee’s observation that in most of the areas, some of these private schools are cropping up because there are no Government schools. Whereas the policy talks of one secondary school per sub-county, many of our rural sub-counties actually do not have even a single school. Therefore in most cases these schools are established as an alternative.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request the committee to look at the Government schools. In my constituency, Government schools are badly off compared to private schools. Most of them have dilapidated structures. Some do not have classroom blocks at all. It is not only in Karamoja but also other parts of the country. 

The committee should interest itself in looking at such schools and bring a comprehensive report to this House so that we can fully debate it. Otherwise, the Government schools are doing worst. They do not have the required standards and lightening arresters and some of them live in condemned structures. Since some schools were founded by parents, Government has never added a brick on them. They are very terrible.

I would like to support the committee’s recommendation that we give the inspection team money. Most of these inspectors do not have means of transport and money. They complain that if you want them to come to your school, it is up to you to facilitate them to come and do whatever you want.

However, it is very rare for an inspector to have a normal routine that we shall inspect schools monthly or quarterly. They do nothing completely. 

Therefore, Government should look at the issue of increasing the budget of the inspectors’ of schools and recruiting more in areas they are not. I thank you.

3.39
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you chairperson and the committee for the report. In rural areas especially in Moyo District, the primary schools are not enough.

There are about 10 parishes that do not have primary schools as I talk now. When you come to secondary schools, there are about three sub counties that do not have secondary schools in my constituency.

Secondly, I would like to draw the attention of the minister to the areas hosting refugees. Right now as I talk, rains are on and raining seriously. You find children right from nursery up to primary seven studying under trees. Whenever there is rain, you find them running, moving up and down. This has caused a lot of problems there.

Thirdly, the issue of lightening arresters; recently, lightning struck in one of the schools in the refugee camp and killed two pupils. I would like to draw the attention of the education minister to these issues.

Fourthly, is the issue of hardship allowance; more often than not teachers fear going to the rural areas in my constituency because of the issue of lack of hardship allowance.

Some of these schools are in remote places and far away from the town centres. Teachers fear going there and as a result the standard of the pupils in those schools has dropped down.

It is my request that the issue of hardship allowance for my teachers is considered.

Lastly, there was talk that soon, the money that is paid for implementation of USE is to be phased off. That will be a disaster if that rumour becomes true. Otherwise, I am a proprietor of two private schools in Arua and one of the schools implements USE. Once that money is removed then the students are going to suffer and the standard of education will go down. Thank you.

3.42
MAJ.GEN. PECOS KUTESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have read the report and I try to be on the educational committee; I have got a different approach. Does this nation have a national planning programme? 

When you put eight million pupils in primary one, what is expected of them after the first seven years? When we go for training, we say that by the end of this course -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say you are a member of the committee?

MAJ. GEN. KUTESA: I am supposed to join it but I have not. I have not yet because I do not concur with what is there and I have not yet been registered well. Therefore, my observation from outside was that before you put a class or school, there should be an aim.

Now who has got the general picture of these children? The report I have of 2017 of the eight million who are supposed to be in primary, 18 percent of them failed before primary seven; those who go to senior secondary school, 24 percent of them fail; those who go to advanced level 25 per cent fail.

Now what happens to those who fail? What is the original plan? Educate them to do what? If there was a concerted effort that we would like to make productive Ugandans out of these young men, there should be a curriculum. Who designs the Ugandan national curriculum? Is it done by Oxford University, Manchester University or is it done according to the needs of the nation? Have you identified what the needs are so that we train our children to fit into those needs?

That is what I wanted to find out from those who are more educated than me.

3.45
MS JACKLET ATUHAIRE (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and madam chairperson for the comprehensive report. In your report, you mentioned inspection; last month the Ministry of Education and Sports wrote to all chief administrative officers and directed them to mandatorily appropriate money for cars.

However, I am wondering when you found out in your report, one car which costs almost Shs 150 million, what is the cost benefit analysis of having one car for a district education officer than having no teachers in a school or even putting up buildings for these schools which are under trees?

I do not find it viable to have one car for one district education officer equivalent of Shs 150 million and above when our children are still studying under trees and without teachers in these schools. Thank you.


3.46 
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, this matter before the house is a serious one. We are all aware that in this country, there were national minimum standards that were set by the education ministry for all the schools to conform to across the country.

However, whenever we go out as a committee of local government to verify the reports of the Auditor-General; the Auditor-General has made a great revelation which exposes the weaknesses arising from the education ministry in failure to implement the requirement for schools to conform to those agreed standards.

Before the Government came up with the position to go and close private schools, Government knew that in some parts of the country, there were areas in which people were returning, for example, in Teso, Lango and Acholi where there were no schools. Parents could not abandon the education of their children, but they had to go - and those who loved education had to start private education so that their children could acquire education. 

However, Government responded by closing them suddenly. When you look at Government schools, they have no teachers. How can you have a school with 400 children with only five or six teachers? How do you expect pupils from that school to perform? If teachers are there then there will be no scholastic materials. If it is not scholastic materials, the supervisory department is not supported. How do you expect miracles from where attention has not been accorded?

This is the reason why across the country, only private institutions are the ones trying to put Uganda to the limelight. However, when you look at Government institutions, their performance is very poor and this is because attention has not been accorded to these institutions by Government. 

Therefore, does the minister mind about the taxpayers who send their children – (Member timed out)   

3.48
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Mr Speaker, we are products of education and if you want to know a person who has undergone poor education, look at their behaviour. For even the behaviour is different in the community. This explains why it is important for us to deal with the issues concerning education seriously.

I would also like to thank the committee for the report, but there is something that needs to be scrutinised, especially in areas where there were no schools and those schools were closed. How are those pupils now living? That means you are doing nothing for the country if you have done that. For example, I have got schools in my constituency whose structures are very poor and they are not registered. However, they send their children to register in the Government schools and they are the ones who pass exams. This further explains to you that what you are doing is wrong. It is better to close the Government schools and leave the poor private structured schools that you think are useless to continue. Even if they are not registered, they send their students to register in Government schools and they are the ones who pass with first grade.

Additionally, we have many teachers who are not recruited by Government and are redundant. We are talking about job creation and the local people do not have enough resources. Everything you see on earth starts small even the human beings started very tiny in their mother’s womb and these are the people you see now.

If you now stop them because you want to bring your standards and the standard you have put yourself, you are not even following it; this raises questions to the nation. Also, what beats my understanding, sometimes when I sit on this side, the lamentation is on both sides and this leaves me wondering? 

I used to think that it is only northern Uganda which is affected, but when I visited western Uganda, the schools and structures look almost the same. Therefore, what are we doing in this country? We need to open our eyes and look at serious issues and know areas that destroy human beings. When you destroy education in a country, then you are destroying the country. Thank you.

3.52
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues to thank the committee for the extensive report they have presented. I have three areas to comment on.

I understand that every area of this world, if it is to develop, it will develop depending on the education levels of that area. It is very paramount for us members to ensure that we put a lot of effort to ensure that we uplift the standard of education in this country. It is still a problem whereby we are saying that we produce very many and the Government will take care of them and yet we ban the recruitment of teachers.

When you look at the education policy, the ratio of teachers to pupils is 1:55 pupils. However, when you go to a class, you find over 200 pupils in one class and they are supposed to be taught by one teacher. It is an alarming situation in this country and this is one of the reasons why Government schools which are commanded to have such a ratio are failing.  They are not given enough teachers to assist our children and that is why we have high levels of failures in Government schools. Therefore, we need to follow the education policy to recruit more teachers because we mobilise our children to go to school, but there are no teachers. 

Secondly, we do not have staff housing facilities in most of our primary schools and when we recruit teachers; we do not consider the proximity of the teachers’ homes to schools –(Member timed out)  

3.52
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report she has made.

Mr Speaker, there are some communities that normally come up with ideas of establishing seed schools, especially when Government came up with a policy that every sub county should have one secondary school. However, it is very disappointing that some of these seed schools take a long time without Government taking over management. This has affected the level of education, especially in rural schools. For women members of Parliament who are fighting for the girl child to be retained in school; there are very few girls who can walk many miles away from their homes and be retained in school. Therefore, I call upon the Ministry of Education to think through this very fast.

Secondly, there are some teachers who are recruited, but they take long to be put on the payroll. This also demoralises teachers so much; there is nobody who can sustain his family in this country when they do not earn anything from the work they do. We would like to know the policy that Government uses in the recruitment and how long should somebody take to be included on the payroll.

The ceiling on the recruitment policy has also brought us issues. Why should we have a school which has only three teachers and yet when you look at the number of students, it cannot be rated to the number of teachers. As we advocate for science subjects in this country, how are we going to promote this, when we have this low level of teacher to student ratio? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.56
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last month, I had a meeting with the head teachers of both Government and private schools in my constituency. The question I asked them was why Government schools perform poorly compared to private schools? The answer was that in most of the Government schools, head teachers and teachers do not attend in time. Teachers have got four private schools where they teach. The teacher is present at Government school on Monday and does not appear the rest of the other days because the head teacher or teacher knows about his movements.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that we need to go to the ground and tell our head teachers that there is time for everything; this is a time for them to know the teachers who have come and those who have failed to come in time. This is the time to also get to know those who have failed to come in a week. They should also be penalised. 

Mr Speaker, on the issue of the few inspectors in the schools; I would like to inform you that these people do not have enough facilities. It is quite hard for them to move throughout the district to inspect the teachers that have failed to reach their work places in time. We need to look for this money so that we help our districts, schools and people. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.58
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a teacher and I feel so bad sometimes when I move to schools and find out how the schools are. We even moved under the Quality Education Forum to Luuka District and the schools are terribly bad; both primary and secondary. It looks like we have forgotten that capital development is actually education. It looks like if we give Shs 2.7 billion to education, we think we have given too much which is not the case. 

For example if you go to a sub county and you want to find out the number of civil servants there, you find more teachers than any other category of workers -(Interjections)- including health. 

Health facilities are not as many as education facilities. In the education sector, you can get a school with seven teachers, but you can get a health centre with about four or five staff. Therefore, let us begin to think of adding a little more to education and also emphasise inspection. 

The inspectorate of education should be supported a little more so that they can also go on impromptu visits to schools. If they do this very many times, then that can help to improve the standard of schools. Right now, if we talk about the standard of schools and closing of private schools, I think we should start with the Government schools. This is because the private schools are a little better than the Government schools. 

A lot of our children do not actually advance in life simply because we have not prioritised education; let us prioritise it. Although we are not discussing health, I would like to say education will promote every sector because –(Member timed out.) 

4.01
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Members of Parliament have talked about the education but we all know that a healthy mind lives in a healthy body.

We have talked about primary schools, but in my district, Namisindwa, the situation is very bad. We call it Namisindwa because it is in the high hills on the ranges of Mount Elgon. The students have to cross rivers like Sala, Manafwa and Rwerima to get from one place to another. There are also times when they stay on the other end when it rains for two days before they can cross over. Therefore, the Ministry of Education and Sports needs to put up some incentives to some primary schools or all schools. For example, if a school performs very well, then the head master should be given a gift. That can motivate teachers to teach very well with one heart and the students’ standards will improve. 

Many times I have heard of our place coming last in performance. I have observed that other countries have incentives. For example, they can give the head teacher a bicycle or motorcycle to improve the school. Community work can be done and the Minister of Education and Sports pools some money and the head master improves the standards of teachers’ houses. With this, a teacher can go to Mama Fiina and continue teaching and not move to another place. If we put some other tactics in education, then the students’ standards can improve. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is Mama Fiina? 

MR MASIKA: I am talking about Mama Fiina the witchdoctor because in all your constituencies, you have seen people- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is alright, honourable. 

MR MASIKA: Okay, thank you. 

4.04
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Education together with her Members for this report. I have a few questions that I would like to ask arising from the report to the minister, good enough she is here. 

First of all, we recently carried out the population census and the report indicates that Uganda’s population has increased tremendously. The population structure also indicates that majority of the population is below the age of 15. That means the demand for educational facilities has more than tripled in this country. 

Now the question is how often does the Ministry of Education and Sports review the education policy? If we are to go by the policy of one primary school per parish, honourable minister, isn’t it time that we reviewed this policy to have at least more than one primary school per parish? This is because the population in those parishes has more than doubled. 

Secondly, by the time you see the number of private schools mushrooming in all parts of the country, it means the current Government schools are not enough. It also means that the quality, the commitment and the input in the Government schools is not enough. Therefore, before you think of closing the schools, you need to think about the health of those facilities that are currently in existence. 

We are also talking about the 1,000 schools that were closed. On average, that is about 3,000,000 children now wondering in communities not studying. Now, where do we lie in terms of the commitment? This is because we signed the Sustainable Development Goals that stated that by 2030, our education level should have improved. Honourable minister, respond to these humble questions. I thank you. 

4.08
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join members in thanking the committee on education. The honourable members have alluded to the fact that when we see and when we get the results – and very soon they are going to sit for exams in November and October; the results that will come out of them, will show that it is private schools that are performing better than the Government schools –(Interjections)- apart from a few like Buddo. When you go to the primary schools, it is the private schools that are performing better. In Lira, my district, it is the private schools that are performing well and I see no reason why Government should close those schools that are supporting the education system to keep the  children in schools - children are better off in those schools other than loitering in the streets.

The grants that are sent to schools, especially in the primary schools; Shs 400 or Shs 700 per child is inadequate. Sometimes schools open with no desks, the toilets are so poor, and in the classrooms, there is no chalk. The number of children to be assessed by a teacher - which is the teacher - pupil ratio is not commensurate. It is one teacher to 400 pupils. How can we get quality education with such ratios? It is not realistic. The minister should check that.

The next thing is commitment and attitude of our teachers. Sometimes, the ministry may come with guidelines and the DEOs are also working. But when the head teacher tries to delete a teacher who is not committed, such a head teacher is threatened that once you delete me from the payroll, I will delete you from the world. That is not acceptable and yet it is happening. I do not know whether the education minister is aware of that.  

Sometimes the schools are too far and the community may come up with community schools. They make an effort to pay, simply because the children have got to be in schools. I would like to find out from the education minister; in the last three years, how many schools have you coded to support the community schools so that the children do not loiter in the streets but are engaged in schools. They do not have to go to the private schools that you do not want –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is how we are going to move as we draw to a close. I am going to change the time to two minutes: Chua South, Mukono South, Ngora County, Bbale, Aringa North and Upe. Let me move like that first then we see how we will proceed.  

4.12
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua County South, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Part of what I would like to seek clarification on, is getting facts and figures in terms of how many schools have been closed. Secondly, I would like to understand how many private schools are there in this country? Do we have the statistics? How many pupils and students are enrolled within the private schools?

When you talk about private schools, we are talking about senior secondary schools, primary schools and it goes down to the level of kindergarten. Can we understand how many private schools we have in the country and how many have been closed and how many children have been affected by the school closures? That is what I would like to understand.

4.12
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson, who is also a teacher like me, for the good report. Mr Speaker, when you look at the circumstances in which schools are failing, you will find that 80 per cent of the private schools are owned by the head teachers of the Government supported schools. We made research on that and we know that it is true. It is therefore a deliberate move to frustrate Government programmes.

When you look at the salaries – I own schools in Mbale, next to the area of the chairperson of the committee. I pay only Shs 450,000 per month to the teachers. Some Government schools are paid higher, but they are not performing well because there is no serious monitoring. I do monitor my private business, from Monday to Sunday. With Government schools, there is no supervision at all.

Secondly, when you look at the grading, which is done by UNEB, it is a deliberate effort to frustrate Government. They hike the marks to 95 per cent for one to score a distinction one, which has never happened. The results are very clear, my colleague has them here – I will allow you to give information; let me first finish –(Laughter)- something must be done.

Thirdly, when you look at the so called Government-aided schools, it is as if the Government is not paying them, not equipping the schools, they are charging colossal sums in tuition. Even the UPE schools are charging indirectly, but there is no serious supervision. 

I was a mayor; we were getting Shs 4.5 million every quarter within Mukono Municipal Council. Is that little money to facilitate an inspector of schools to go and execute their mandate? They simply do not go there. They all wait for the head teachers to come with envelopes; they sit in office there and wait. When you ask them what is going on there, they simply say that they are doing well – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have finished your time –(Laughter).

MR WABOYA: I am going to give information but allow me to speak a little bit on behalf of the –(Laughter)- indeed my colleague had looked through what I was about to say and our concern really is about the grading system by UNEB. This is a disfavour to the rural schools; it actually favours those urban schools where there is coaching and better learning.

I have here information – first of all, the fact is that it is unpredictable. They keep changing the grading system every year, which is not proper. 

You will note that in 2014 and 2015, the grading was 0-29 as F.9, 75 and above is a D.1. When you come to 2015 and 2016, it was 0-30 as F.9, 80-100 as D.1. When you come to now the proposed one, they are proposing that from 0-49, be an F.9 and a D.1 should begin from 90 and above. 

This is going to disfavour a lot of learners and it is going to discourage parents from taking children to school. We are competing; you need to have Ugandans go to study in universities abroad. How are they going to compete, when somebody getting 49 is awarded an F.9? Yet we are cognisant of the fact that the learning is not fair, especially in rural areas as compared to urban areas. 

The information which I am giving my colleague is that indeed the grading is poor. It is not predictable and something must be done immediately by UNEB; there should be a policy by UNEB instead of that ad hoc –(Member timed out.) 

4.17
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. I have about three or four brief points. First, there is a problem of staffing in schools. I would like to give an example of Ngora where we have a secondary school called Kobwin Seed Senior School with a population of more than 500 students but with only seven teachers on Government payroll. That is where there is a big problem.

In primary, there is a staff ceiling - I am wondering why the ministry is insisting on staff ceiling in primary schools. In a school of about 1,000 pupils, you have only five to six teachers, what are we doing?

Secondly, nowadays, we talk about information, communication and telecommunication (ICT) age. However, for our case, in our secondary schools, there are no computers and the ministry is just lamenting there is no money and yet Parliament is approving money every year. That is why I am concerned.

The other very important issue is the welfare of our teachers. The ministry should be focused on improving the welfare of teachers. Short of that, they are going to pretend to teach and at the end of the day, we shall get bad results. I see these things in Uganda.

There is also this problem called “Skilling Uganda.” Let me ask a simple question; where is it? What is the ministry doing? What is going on? What is happening and who is benefiting? It appears it is only the officials in the ministry who are benefiting and denying other Ugandans the opportunity to benefit from some of these programmes –(Member timed out.)

4.19
MR GEORGE NSAMBA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report that she has delivered to us.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request the minister of education to re-visit the education policy to combine formal education and vocational training or vocational education right from primary one up to senior four - even when you are in a driving school, you need practice. In Mukono, they have started combining formal education and vocational education right from primary one. You find pupils of primary four and five doing mechanical work, some tailoring and all these other activities so that if somebody cannot go ahead with his education, he will be equipped with a second resort when he leaves school.

Therefore, I would like to request the ministry to re-visit this area and see how they can combine formal education in the morning and possibly vocational education in the afternoon. That is how these people are doing it and they are doing very well. The primary seven classes are actually doing mechanics on vehicles - in the morning they are in class and in the afternoon they put on gowns to go and do some work. I feel this would help us since education in this country has become very difficult especially the school fees - (Member timed out.)

4.21
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would like to agree with the committee observation that some of the private schools were closed.

Mr Speaker, many of the private schools start as business enterprises although the academic element is also there. You will find that in many cases, some of the proprietors of these schools only look to the aspect of whether school fees is being paid and whether the teachers are paid. 

However, the condition of the pupils is not taken into consideration. In one of the private schools, the whole population was attacked by smallpox, which was caused by congestion in the dormitories. Therefore, in such a situation, I think it is proper to close the school.

Mr Speaker, one of my observations is that some of these schools engage in none academic activities - issues that require a lot of money. In one of the schools I came across, they were demanding a parent to pay $3,000 to take a pupil on a trip to Dubai. I wondered what this pupil was going to learn in Dubai. 

The idea of uniformity, where every pupil is to put on uniform and where all the pupils are supposed to eat the same food is to avoid other pupils from poor families feeling bad. However, a situation where a pupil goes to Dubai and others do not go, I also see that some of these schools go beyond their mandate of providing education; I think it is an element of soliciting funds -(Member timed out.)

4.23
MR PAUL ASABA (NRM, Kyaka County North, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to talk about secondary education and majorly two issues.

The first is about inspection. In secondary schools, you find that inspection is almost not there because the staff members at the district level, the District Education Officer (DEO) and the inspector of schools concentrate on primary education at the expense of secondary education. The DEO spends almost a whole term or a year without going to a secondary institution. I would therefore urge the ministry of education to write a circular instructing the education department to supervise and inspect secondary schools so that they can also perform better.

Secondly, there are transfers without replacements. These are done here at the centre - you find that if a school had around ten teachers, they can all be transferred or they leave there one or two and no replacement is made. At times, the secondary school teachers do not want to go to hard-to-reach areas and these schools in these areas are marginalized; this is also another important issue that the ministry should look into. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.25
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report. 

Mr Speaker, in the United States, during slavery, a slave was not supposed to be educated beyond Grade III because it was believed that when you educate a person, you liberate that person. Education in Uganda is faced with many challenges and Members have mentioned some of those challenges. In my constituency, the level of illiteracy is at 90 per cent. That means that 10 per cent only are literate. In Amudat District, there are a few Government schools; around five, the rest are community schools.

The challenge we have there is that there is no coding of schools so that the Government can aid them. That is why I am asking the ministry of education to help us code 31 schools in Amudat District so that our children can access good education and get teachers.

Secondly, when you work in a poor or pathetic situation; you will not deliver because you will be demoralised; our teachers are demoralised. All of us are here because of education. However, teachers are the least paid in the whole country and yet they play a vital role in the development of our country. My request is that the Government increases the salaries of teachers so that they can be motivated to work and help our children and the country - (Member timed out.)

4.28
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, the government on your left would like to thank you and the committee for doing some good work. The net effect of this report is that it is an indictment on the Ministry of Education and Sports.

Secondly, it is a vote of no confidence in the education provided by Government. Why? If you have these dilapidated structures - Part of the report reads that you have a Government school and on the opposite side, you have a private school that does not even have a bell and has semi-complete structures. 

However, it has students or pupils against the Government school, which is providing what you would call cheaper education. That is an indictment. They cannot afford a bell and they went past the teaching time. The committee asked them why they went past the teaching time and they said, they were waiting for the bell to ring on the other side as they could not afford one. That is an indictment. 

Why would parents in these villages send their children to these schools while Government schools exist? I think what we need to do is to see how we can help these private schools to provide better quality education instead of closing them down. 

I am made to understand that there a standards agency in the Ministry of Education and Sports. The question to raise is, does it set standards for private schools alone? If there are Government schools with equally poor facilities and they are continuing to run, this indicates that we are operating on double standards.

Mr Speaker, we have over and over again emphasised science education in this country and this is a matter that I have brought to the Minister for Higher Education. Where are these science training colleges in Uganda? For example, in Central Uganda where I am more conversant, there is none, which trains science teachers. The nearest I know of is in Kabale. However, you are talking about promoting science education. 

We introduced UPE and USE at a time when we were closing down teacher-training colleges. Therefore, how are you going to get teachers? You have teachers that are not employed or deployed and yet you are crying of scarcity of trained teachers in Government schools.

Mr Speaker, this is the only country I know of where you have teachers in Government schools that are not on the payroll and the pupils are not paying school fees either. Are these teachers volunteers? How do you expect them to provide quality education to our children? We are doing a lot of experiments on the core and foundational aspects of our society. 

Mr Speaker, one day I was watching the television and I saw children on a canoe crossing Lake Bunyonyi. You expect them to cross from Monday to Friday, from the beginning of the term to the end to access education on the other side. Go to the islands in Kalangala. How many schools do we have in the islands and how do you expect those children to cross? 

I am a little dismayed when I look at page 2 of the report. There you will find that the committee was able to interact with officials from the ministry, the district and others. They also visited these closed schools but they had no interviews with the proprietors of the schools. All the committee relied on was that there were some minutes they were shown indicating that the officials of the ministry and the districts had meetings with the proprietors of the schools. 

Of course, having closed the schools, we were doing a post-mortem and you cannot blame Parliament as the committee could not access the proprietors to confirm or deny what the ministry people were saying.

Mr Speaker, what happens to taxes on these private schools and on laboratory equipment where you would like to promote science education? They are grappling with the issue of laboratory equipment as you promote sciences but you continue to tax laboratory equipment. What efforts have been taken by Government, in particular the Ministry of Education and Sports, to assist these private schools in areas where people cannot access Government schools? 

For example, you could give them donations in terms of books and other materials for use because they are doing this job on behalf of Government. We are not able to do it but somebody is able to.  Whether it is for a gain or not, all you need to do is assist them. You could give them loans or grants.

Finally, the President was in Makerere University recently and this is where I agree with him - There is need to keep reviewing the education curriculum on a regular basis. He said that there are some courses, which are not relevant. He may have studied political education and economics in the 1960s and they may not be as relevant today. The President is not a scientist and neither am I. However, he was asking why we do not invest more in sciences instead of teaching some of the other courses. Some of the courses that we did in the past may not be as relevant today and yet we continue spending on them in terms of research, paying teachers and facilitating those schools.

Therefore, if you hear the Chief Executive of the State lamenting then there is a big problem. I do not want to agree with the committee that it was justifiable, in the circumstances, to close down these schools. Actually, it has created speculation amongst our population that Government fears competition from the private schools. It is because even with their poor facilities, Government schools are excelling and yet with our poor and sometimes good facilities, we are not excelling. 

Therefore, if you cannot supervise, where do you want these children to go? On our part, we think it was wrong, ill-advised and in ill faith to close these schools. 

The officials manning the education system, right from the politicians, the education ministry and the technocrats must be re-examined in terms of their competency and how they do their work in this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to give a summary? Please, you cannot go through them one by one as that will take us the rest of the afternoon. 

4.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me, first of all, to thank the committee for the work well done and I honestly acknowledge the report. I would like to assure you that the work that was done by the Ministry of Education and Sports was in good faith.

Mr Speaker, issues of education are really pertinent and they are quite many, based on what my colleagues have pointed out. I have a number of issues to shed light on, if I am allowed to. For instance, I would have loved to be on record on certain issues that have been raised by the committee. Much as I support and appreciate the recommendations of the committee, I would have liked to throw some light on some of the recommendations. I think I will stop at that.

Mr Speaker, I would like to make it very clear that section 31(3) of the Education Act, 2008 clearly spells out the requirements for any school to open. Therefore, if schools have contravened the Act, we have to implement the law, as Ministry of Education and Sports. However –(Interjection)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my sister and twin Member of Parliament from Wakiso. The point of clarification I am rising on is, does this apply only to private schools? How about Government schools, which do not meet these standards?

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I would like to clarify it clear that before Government establishes a school in an area, it first establishes the need, which is not the case with private schools. Government always plans to have all its schools meet the minimum standards. The question is time - (Interjections) - Colleagues, let me build –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I am very much restrained, normally, but I am constrained to rise on a point of order, Mr Speaker. The Government establishes the need and the minister says when it establishes the need, it puts up a school. 

One would ask whether this exempts Government from complying with the standards in the statute by the minister justifying an illegality on the part of Government. Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought I heard the minister saying it establishes a need then it meets the requirements of the law in establishing the school. That is what she said. Did I hear it wrongly? You heard it wrongly.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, because of time, let me go to some of the issues in the report that I may not agree with. 

On the issue of (c) bureaucratic procedures for licensing of schools, I do not agree with what the committee has indicated. It is indicated in the report: “created an unnecessary bureaucracy and turned licensing into a tedious and lengthy process.” I would like to make it clear that as a ministry, we require only three reports. The first report is the health inspection report and that is to do with sanitation and hygiene. The next report is on environmental impact and the last one is a report from the district inspector of schools. This is not a tedious exercise because we require only three reports.

Secondly, the service is free. They said, “tasking of prospective proprietors to apply to the centre was expensive”. However, the service is totally free and therefore, there is no reason why we say that it is expensive.

Thirdly, before any school is licensed, an inspector from the Directorate of Education Standards visits the school to verify the authenticity of the information provided. Inspection services were decentralised with regional centres and we have a regional centre in Mbale, Mbarara, Gulu and Mpigi. After all these centres have verified or confirmed the documents, the file is sent to the centre and the centre works on the process of licensing a school. Therefore, I did not agree with that observation and wanted to clarify it.

I would also like to add that the system must have checks and balances and that is why Government cannot leave the local governments in charge of registration.

Concerning the issue of transport, Ministry of Education and Sports and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provided a one-off opportunity in the Financial Year 2016/2017 to all local governments to utilise SFG funds to purchase vehicles. 

I would also like to add that under the GPE project, the Ministry of Education and Sports also provided 75 motorcycles to some inspectors of schools. Therefore, we have worked on the issue of transport to make sure that we put emphasis on inspection.

There is still room for some districts, which did not use that opportunity and we have given them a chance to apply to use the SFG funds to purchase vehicles and solve the transport problem.

The other issue I would like to talk about is in the conclusion. Mr Speaker, before we closed the schools, we made sure that we sent circulars to all districts and we know that the schools got the circulars. This circular was advising the schools not to open the schools before they met the minimum required standards. 

I would like to add that the committee’s statement that, “… failure to address the challenges in Government schools will continuously drive the emergence of undesirable private schools” is not justified because private schools mushroom for various reasons. One of the reasons is that schools are seen as a business, using this opportunity of liberalisation. You will agree with me that much as we have allowed schools to open, in most cases we have seen many schools operating as businesses.

That is why I do not agree with colleagues when you say that private schools teach better than Government schools. You will agree with me that we have seen schools, which only care about marks yet we need to consider the quality of education as well.

Therefore, I would like to assure you, dear colleagues, that as a ministry, we are not seated. As a sector, we shall continue to execute our mandate of closing illegal schools where need arises. We will continue to advise those schools in the country, which do not meet the minimum requirements and good enough, we have put up the list of all the schools that we had closed and we –(Interruption)

MR AKOL: Thank you, honourable minister. I got concerned when you said that Government schools teach better than private schools. We are in Uganda and we keep seeing the results. The quality of education is seen in the performance in the country.

Maybe you can help us understand how you measure the quality of education coming from Government schools, which quality you think is better than that coming from private schools. Thank you.

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister has insisted that schools that do not meet minimum standards will be closed. Since this exercise started, I have not heard of a single Government-owned school being closed. Does that mean that all our Government schools meet the minimum standards in the country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you now have five minutes.

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate that I cannot give justice to the issues the Members have raised because of time. However, I would like to inform this House that in 2016, as a ministry, we came up with a needs assessment survey, which was to establish the status of our Government schools.

We managed to come up with about 962 schools that require refurbishment. I would like to assure this House that as Government, because of low funding, which you are aware of, we are operating in a phased manner as funds are released.

I would like to add that Government, through the GPE fund, has managed to build a number of schools - (Interjection) - I wish Members would allow me to conclude.

Mr Speaker, if Members raise pertinent issues and we cannot ably respond to them because of time then we are not doing justice to this House. I beg that since I have all the issues and the responses, we put everything on soft copy and send it to their iPads if it can make sense. 

Members have asked quite a number of concerns that I would have loved to respond to. However, I have not been given enough time and when I respond hurriedly, I would not give them detailed information. Mr Speaker, I beg if this House permits, that we put all these responses together and send them to their iPads if they can read them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the issues are many but we do not have the time to go point by point. Prepare the responses, submit to the Members copies and we appoint a day when you can have the discussions with the Members concerning those issues. (Applause)

MS SENINDE: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much dear colleagues and I would like to thank you very much for the passion you have for education. The issues you have raised, many of them are more of advice and while others are issues that we need to take up as a ministry. I would like to assure you that we will play our part. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: These matters are important and urgent. So, we will find time when you have circulated and we have received copies of those responses and schedule a day for a proper discussion on this.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON RESUMPTION OF VACCINATION OF CHILDREN IN PRIVATE HEALTH FACILITIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a statement in response to urgent questions. They are not ministerial statements.

5.07
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Once again, I apologise that when the item came up, I was not in the House. 

Allow me to start by giving a preamble on the event leading to the alleged withdrawal by the private sector from providing immunisation services to the population. On 6t March 2017, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health wrote to all Chief Administrative Officers on the issue of cello vaccines supplied by Government to private health facilities. This was in response to observations and complaints from residents in urban centres, especially areas surrounding Kampala and Wakiso districts. 

On 22 May 2017, the UNICEF country office forwarded a scanned copy of a letter dated 18 May 2017, addressed to the Country Director of UNICEF from a one Mushagara Masaba and Company Advocates acting on behalf of their client Kampala Private Medical Practitioners Associated (KPMPA) notifying the UNICEF Country Director of the intention of their client to cease private partnership with Government.

Mr Speaker, the letter read in part: “Reference is made to the captioned matter. Therefore, we bring to your attention that we do represent KPMPA an umbrella that brings together private medical practitioners in the five divisions of Kampala and addressed to you as here under;

Following the deletion and amendment of section 8(2)(f) of the Trade Licensing Act Cap 101 by section 5(b)(c) of the Trade Licensing (Amendment) Act of 2015, to include medical practitioners to pay trade license fee on top of other licenses paid to Government through their professional bodies, including operational license, annual practicing license, license to Allied Health Professionals Council, Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council, Uganda Nurses and Midwives Council, monthly biomedical waste licenses, Local Services Tax, Income Tax and others; our clients felt dissatisfied with this law and instituted Constitutional petition No. 11 of 2017.”

Mr Speaker, the letter goes ahead to complain about denial to hear their court petition and the brutality of Kampala Capital City Authority towards their client by the enforcement officers.

Lastly, the letter indicates that they have decided to cease all private partnership with Government, which includes free immunisation services, counselling, disease surveillance and reporting and calls upon Government to collect its fridges from their facilities.

Mr Speaker, in addition, on 24th July 2017, the Daily Monitor newspaper ran an article entitled, “private hospitals stop children immunisation following an editorial on the 25th July 2017”. New Vision also ran a similar article reporting that over 100 private hospitals and clinics in the country had suspended childhood immunisation services quoting a one Dr Denis Kimalyo, the Executive Director of Uganda National Association of private hospitals referring to the letter from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Federation of Private Health Professionals under the Private Public Partnership in July 2013. The Federation of Private Health Practitioners represents the interests of the private practitioners in Kampala. Under this MoU, the Federation of Private Health Practitioners accepted to take responsibility of contributing towards the implementation of the minimum health care package under the health sector strategic and investment plan with support from GAVI immunisation system strengthening support so as to reduce childhood morbidity and mortality from diseases that can be prevented through vaccination.

Mechanisms of dispute resolution are clearly spelt out in this MoU. To-date, the Ministry of Health has not received any notification from the Federation of Private Health Practitioners of dissatisfaction with the terms spelt out in the MoU. The fridges provided under the MoU continue to be used for the intended purpose of immunisation. The Directorate of Public Health and Environment of Kampala Capital City Authority working together with the Ministry of Health responded to the letter of KPMPA through their lawyer on the 7th June 2017 and scheduled a meeting for the 14th June 2017 so as to know their association better and understand their grievances. 

On 13 June 2017, KPMPA through their lawyer notified us of their inability to meet us on the stated date but promised to notify us on the appropriate date. To-date, the Ministry of Health and Kampala Capital City Authority Directorate of Health and Environment are still awaiting a notification from KPMPA.                        

Permit me, Mr Speaker, to allay any anxiety that may have been caused by the print media articles from the Daily Monitor and New Vision newspapers. I would like to assure the country that the partnership between Ministry of Health and private practitioners represented by the Federation of Private Health Practitioners has never ceased.

In addition, immunisation services from the private health facilities have not ceased to the best of my knowledge and I believe it will continue. The Ministry of Health and Kampala Capital City Authority continue to receive applications from private health facilities requesting to be granted permission to offer immunisation services and be supplied with the World Health Organisation certified product quality and safety fridges of UNEPI.

Records in the division vaccines stores of Kampala Capital City Authority to-date indicate that many private health facilities in and around Kampala have continued to collect their monthly vaccine requirement. They include: Nsambya, Mengo, Rubaga, Nakasero, Old Kampala, Case Hospital, St Catherine’s Hospital, Norvic Hospital, Kampala Hospital, SAS Clinic, Kololo Hospital, Kampala Medical Chambers, Mukisa Nursing Home, Elgon Family Clinic, IHK, to mention just a few. 

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health will explore mechanisms of engaging the KPMPA on any other issues that come up through the appropriate channels. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, permit me to reiterate that immunisation is the most cost effective mechanism of prevention and hence a very important public good. The Immunisation Act, 2017 Part VII compels the State to provide free vaccines and other related services to every Ugandan requiring vaccination. 

The Government of Uganda is committed to this position. All children and targeted age groups should have access to free immunisation services from both the public and the private health facilities, with whom the Ministry of Health has a Memorandum of Understanding, to provide free services to the population. I thank you for listening to me. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, like I said, this was a question. I do not know whether the Member who raised the question is here to make a supplementary question. It is not for debate but it is a response to a question under Rule 39. If the Member is not there, we will take this information. The rest of that thing that remains outstanding can be taken up with the Committee on Health and they can help us process these matters further. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON DELAYED PAYMENT TO TOBACCO FARMERS IN WEST NILE REGION

5.00
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I rise to respond to the issue of delayed payments to tobacco farmers in West Nile. It has already been uploaded on your iPads. 

At the beginning of 2017 crop season, the ministry received applications and licensed six companies to sponsor tobacco growing and related activities in the country. These companies are Alliance One Company Limited, Meridian Tobacco Limited, Global Leaf Limited, Continental Tobacco, Nimatabac Uganda Limited and Uganda Tobacco Services Limited. These companies operate in 27 districts divided into three sub regions, which include: West Nile, Bunyoro and mid north.

On the issue of delayed payments, at the beginning of the current season, we had concerns on the delayed payments for tobacco farmers, specifically for the West Nile region and this was pertaining to Continental Tobacco Uganda Limited. Subsequently, we engaged the directors of Continental Tobacco Limited who acknowledged the outstanding balance of Shs 2,056,140,600 and they made an undertaking to settle the payment by the end of January 2017, which they did. They paid Arua Shs 1,500,005,426, Koboko Shs 550,000,714 so the total was Shs 2,056,146,600. The back balance relates to crop season 2015. The company was not licensed to operate in 2016 because of outstanding payments. 

What is the current status? In May 2017, we received confirmation from the district commercial officers of the above districts that Continental Tobacco Limited had paid the outstanding balances to all the farmers. 

However, the ministry is aware of a court case where some farmers have sued the company claiming interest on delayed payments, therefore, the case is on delayed payments. I wish to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Ayivu County, you raised this question. Do you have any supplementary question? 

5.03
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the response. However, the facts on the ground are different from the submission she has presented here. The figure that was outstanding is in the region of Shs 7 billion. If so far they have paid around Shs 2 billion, that means about Shs 5 billion is still outstanding. 

The second question is in regard to the interest. Mr Speaker and Members, these farmers are actually given support in form of loans. When the tobacco is harvested, processed and sold to a buyer like Continental Tobacco Limited, they expect timely payment because part of what is paid to them is removed in form of recoverable costs. 

Now, if you count from 2015 to-date, money has lost value and the dollar rates have changed. The ministry should help these farmers because you are the intermediaries who licensed these companies to operate in the country. Therefore, honourable minister, we expect your ministry to help these farmers and give them the interest lost while the money was being kept. 

There is also an issue where some of the company officials collude with some commissioners in your ministry. I was at pain because I moved to that ministry several times being tossed right and centre just because some officials of the companies are colluding with commissioners in terms of allocating the companies. 

Mr Speaker, therefore, there is a lot that needs to be done. Much as we want to phase out tobacco, some people still derive their livelihood from that business. Hence, the ministry should help these farmers to get their fair share of whatever contribution they have made so far in getting this tobacco. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the figures do not reconcile and there is an issue of interest. 

MS KYAMBADDE: Mr Speaker, allow me to cross-check with the relevant officers and I will report back in a week’s time or two. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I need from you now is just a confirmation by letter to the honourable member because we are not going to put this on our Order Paper again. 

MS KYAMBADDE: I am going to do that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need a correspondence by letter to the honourable member copied to the Speaker’s office so that we know that this matter has been resolved. 

MS KYAMBADDE: I will do that, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But if they remain outstanding, you are at liberty to bring it back. 

MS KYAMBADDE: Please, give me information about the officers who are colluding with them. It will be very useful. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one will not be on the record of Parliament now. (Laughter) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ADVERTISMENTS THAT ARE INJURIOUS TO PUBLIC HEALTH

5.07
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Mr Speaker, I regret to say that I do not have a statement on this item for several reasons. This item came up in the House under matters of national importance. It was an item raised by a Member on an advert on detergents that were actually the responsibility of the Minister of Water and Environment. 

I was in the House and I was asked whether I could comment and I did comment. Then later on, I told the Clerk that if I could get a copy of the advert, then I would write a statement. However, I am still yet to get a copy of that advert and then, I will respond, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was the advert about? 

DR ACENG: I have never known the advert.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I would like to do is not to have matters on the Order Paper to make our work look very big and yet, there is nothing in them. If this advert has not been secured, the Member that raised this matter – please, get the advert, from now onwards, this matter is off the Order Paper until that advert is found and then we can revive it. It is off the Order Paper.

DR ACENG: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DISEASE ATTACK ON THE EUCALYPTUS PLANTATIONS IN KYENJOJO AND NEIGHBOURING DISTRICTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If there is no minister in this sector – but we were notified that the statement was ready. Is the response ready from the Clerk’s office? If it was ready, then somebody could respond to this. If you do not have the text of the response, then the Leader of the Government Business – (Laughter)

5.09
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Mr Speaker, I have made consultations and the minister has requested that we give him time to come himself, either tomorrow or on Tuesday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You think he will be here tomorrow?

MS AMONGI: Yes, we can put for tomorrow or Tuesday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we then deal with these two items tomorrow; one is the response on the sale of land in Namanve. The Minister of Lands, Housing And Urban Development was ready to respond but the question was to the Minister of Privatisation and Investment. Can you notify the Minister of Trade and Investment to come with his statement tomorrow? 

Two, the statement on number seven. That statement can also come tomorrow. I do not know whether the minister will be around because the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is out of the country. She delegated the hon. Muruli Mukasa but the delegation came when he was already on his way somewhere else. I do not know whether he will be here tomorrow but I think it will be safer to handle this next week. Let us handle one and seven tomorrow.

All the other matters have been handled and as I said, honourable members, tomorrow we have a meeting to take a decision on the two issues of the two motions; the notices of motion that have been presented. After our tomorrow’s meeting, the Order Paper will reflect the full business of the day.

There should be no anxiety at all because it is nothing unusual; it is something we have always handled and we are up to it. We do not have to resource from elsewhere. We are here because they chose us as the best team to be able to deal with any matter that will come before this House. After the meeting with the Speaker tomorrow, we will advise the House on how we will proceed with this matter. 

My initial view is that the two notices of motion, one has a motion attached; the reconciliation of them might not be finalised tomorrow. If we do, we will have done a big job to achieve that but if we do not, you will also see that it will not be on the Order Paper tomorrow. Until we do, it will not come on the Order Paper. This House is adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.12 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 September 2017, at 2.00 p.m.) 
