MAY 10, 2022                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 10th May 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3.15 pm  
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Karanja) i n the Chair].  
PRAYERS  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Karanja ): Good afternoon, Members. Welcome  to 
today’s afternoon session.  
STATEMENT  
PENDING RESPONSE TO STATEMENTS  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Karanja ): We have pending Statements which some are 
as back as 2019 and therefore it is a concern for this House for those Members or Committees who 
have not responded to these Statements. Therefore, pursuant to provisions of Standing Order 47(2) 
(c) the following  Statements were requested and the responses are due as indicated.  
1. The Chair person Committee on Early Childhood  Education and Vocational Training to 
issue a Statement requested by Hon. Josephat Murage concerning the status of ECD 
classrooms at Nyondia Primary School and Nya kinyua ECD in Malewa West Ward and 
was due on 10th September, 2019.  
 
2. The Chairperson Committee on Roads and Public Works to issue a Statement requested by 
Hon. Zacharia Kahiro concerning the distribution of conditional grants by the Kenya Roads 
Board within the County and was due on 3rd December, 2019. I am humbly requesting the 
Chairs to be noting of the respective Committees.  
 
3. The Leader of Majority Party to issue a Statement requested by Hon. Jackson Githua 
concerning the distribution of headquarter projects in the County and was due on 31st 
March, 2020.  
 
MAY 10, 2022                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 4. The Chairperson Committee on County Roads, Transport and Public Works to issue a 
Statement requested by Hon. Jackson Githua concerning construction of stage Haramu -
Heshimu Kiambogo Road in Mau Narok Ward  and was due on 8th September , 2020.  
 
5. The Chairperson Committee on Lands, Housing and Physical Planning to issue a Statement 
requested by Hon. Daniel Mutai concerning land sub-division in Mosop Ward  and was due 
on 20th October, 2020.  
 
6. The Chairperson Committee on Environment , Energy, Water and Natural Resources to 
issue a statement requested by Hon. Grace Mwathi concerning quarry activities in Bahati 
Ward and was due on 25th August, 2021.  
 
Honorable Members, you reali se that as I have indicated  that these Statements are almost overtaken 
by events and therefore, I humbly request all the Chairs for the respective Committees to take note 
and take action on this matter so that they can be replied on the floor of this House.  
ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned until tomorrow 9:30 am .  
(The House rose at 3:15 p m) 