COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 8th November , 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House Met at  10:05 AM  
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): In the Chair).  
PRAYERS  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
KISUMU VISITORS  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Honorable Members, I recogni se Members 
from County Assembly  of Kisumu , Committee on Powers and Privileges and Equal Opportunities 
led by the Committee Chairperson , Honorable Speaker Elisha Oraro . They are :  
1. Hon. Kennedy Ooko , The Majority Leader  
2. Hon. Benson Andega , Vice Chairperson of the Committee.  
3. Hon. Nancy Matara ,  
4. Hon. Emily Og inga  
5. Hon. Vitallis Komutho  
6. Hon. Samuel Onyango  
7. Hon. Ann Ochola and, 
8. Hon. Ken Ouko  
I also recognis e the Staff from the County Assembly of Kisumu accompanying the Membe rs. They 
are at the Gallery.   
1. Annabelle Wabuge  
2. Rogers Wagude  
3. Valery Achieng ’  
4. Cyrus Kapesa  
In our tradition of recogni sing and welcoming Visitors  to our County Assembly, I take this 
opportunity to welcome you all to the County Assembly  of Nakuru . 
 
PAPERS  
TOUR OF NASHA  MARKET AND WAKULIMA MARKET S 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  We have a Paper  being laid by Honorable 
Robert Ruto.  
Hon. Robert Ruto:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker , on behalf of the Chairman  for the 
Committee on Trade, Tourism a nd Cooperative s Planning , I wish to lay a Report  of the Committee 
on Trade, Tourism and Cooperative s Planning on the inspection tour of Nasha  and Wakulima 
Markets  in Nakuru East Sub-County . Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  The Paper is properly laid before the House . 
Next Order.  
Hon. Wilson Mwangi:  Mr. Temporary Speaker!  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  What is it Honorable Wilson?  
Hon. Wilson Mwangi:  Mr. Temporary Speaker, I have a matter of County Importance , I want this 
Hous e to discuss . 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hold on a bit. I have noted and I will come back 
to you ; I understand that is according to the Standing Order 36. Let us first get a Notice of Motion  
and then we come back to you.  
Hon. Virginia Gichanga:  Point of Order Mr. Temporary Speaker .  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  What is the O rder?  
Hon. Virginia Gichanga:  Mr. Temporary Speaker , Hon. Wathiai is not in proper decorum . He 
has a tie, but he has not put the tie the way it should be, so he should go out and come back when 
he is properly dressed.  
Hon. David Wathiai : Mr. Temporary Speaker , I guess my tie is okay.  Maybe  honorable Virginia 
from Naivasha has a problem with her eyesight. Naona ni kama haoni vizuri  Mr. Temporary 
Speaker.  Anafaa aongezewe miwani zingine . Atumie kadi ya Insurance aende asaidik e, apate 
miwani zingine.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanw a): Hon. Wathiai you are not in order !  Resume  
your seat. Honorable Duale confirm whether honorable Wathiai is properly dressed . 
Hon. Hassan Hajj:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker, yes; Mheshimiwa Wathiai is properly 
dressed and I do not see any problem with the tie. But maybe I can just advise him to fix it well. 
Thank you.  
(Laughter)  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  Clerk next order!   
 
 
 
NOTICE (S) OF MOTION  
TOUR OF NASHA  MARKET AND WAKULIMA MARKET S 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  We have a Notice  of Motion being laid by 
Hon.  Robert  Ruto.  
Hon. Robert Ruto:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker. On behalf of the Chair , I wish to give a 
Notice  of Motion that this Hous e adopt s the Report  of the Committee on Trade, Tourism, and 
Cooperatives  on the inspection of Nasha  Market and Wakulima Market in Nakuru East Sub-
County . Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker.  
The Temporary Speak er (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  Thank you . Hono urable  Wilson,  you had a 
matter of County Importance and I want to confirm  whether  you have support from the House .  
Hon. Wilson Mwangi:  Yes, I have .  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  Clerk can confirm whether the threshold 
has been met. Thank you. Hon Wilson you can proceed . 
Hon. Wilson Mwangi:  Mr. Temporary Speaker, thank you for giving me this chance to bring this 
matter of County Importance . As we are aware, we have been having a Legal Tussle between the 
County Government of Nakuru and War Memorial Hospital, which is in my Ward, Menengai .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I just wanted first of all to shed light , that War Memorial Hospital has 
been the main  Hospital that most of the Middle  Level Class has been attending for Health services . 
Mr. Temporary Speaker, the Lease  that they had was  for 99 years, and it  expired  in May last year . 
And ten days ago, the County Government invaded that Hospital  and closing  the hosp ital for those 
10 days.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, there has been an uproar from  the community and residents of Nakuru 
County , considering that the War Memorial Hospital has been giving us good services. That issue 
has tainted the name of County  bearing in min d that the members  of the Press  brought it that we 
raided that Hospital and some of the  patients who were being given services , we are told some of 
them went along to seek services from other Hospital s, and they died.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, we wanted the Department of Lands  in the County Government of 
Nakuru , to give us clarity on who is the real owner of the War Memorial Hospital Land . There has 
been a tussle  that has been going on since the last regime and now it has become a trend because 
we remembe r our Governor  the other day declaring that she will fight with the land grabbers. So, 
Mr. Temporary Speaker, we want clarity on who the real owner  is, of the two parcels of land that 
War Memorial Hospital and Annex Hospital lies. Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  Members, you can comment on the matter . 
Hon. Mutai  from  Keringet  
Hon. William Mutai:  Thank you very much Mr. Temporary Speaker . I think I like what the  
Member has just brought to our attention. We kno w it is a very critical issue that needs a lot of 
engagement so that we can safeguard the situation that is prevailing at the moment.  Now, the 
Honorable Member  has just pointed out that the  Lease came to an end in May last year. Now, when 
a Lease comes to an end, I thought that the land should go back to the owner. Mr. Temporary 
Speaker, t hat is my main concern unless there is another formal agreement that will be made 
towards the Leas e and the use of that land. Mr. Temporary Speaker,  my question is, who wa s the 
owner?  who leased the land? And now that the Lease  has come to an end , what is the War 
Memorial Hospital still doing in the same area? That is my area of concern  Mr. Temporary 
Speaker .   
However  Mr. Temporary Speaker , I regret what is happening because if lives are getting lost 
because of such a scenario, it is quite unfortunate because this issue should have been addressed, 
foreseeing the emerging issues that could arise. So, I also need some clarity from the Member who 
raised the matter so that we continue engaging each other  and get the be st way forward . Thank  you 
Mr. Temporary Speaker . 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  Hono urable  Member representing 
Viwandani Ward , Hon. Muraya.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Thank  you Mr. Speaker. Kwanza niwakaribishe Waheshimiwa kutoka 
Kaunti ya Kisumu . Karibuni sana katika Bunge ya Nakuru . Pia nata ka kusema kama  vile 
mwenzangu  amesema, kwamba imekuwa mazoea katika Nchi  yetu ya Kenya, maana War 
Memorial Hospital  walijua kwamba Lease  yao inaisha mwezi wa Mei na walijua mahali walipata 
ile Lease  kwa hivyo si o kwa sababu hawakuwa wanaelewa,  ni mtindo tu wa Wakeny a kwa maana 
hata sahii naona watu wanaambiwa watoke sehemu za maji lakini bado wanaendelea kujeng a. 
Imekuwa ni mtindo wa Wakenya  kupuuza mambo.  Mheshimiwa Wilson ametuhakikishia ya 
kwamba Lease  iliisha . War Memorial needs…  
Hon. Peter Kajwang:  Point of order Hon Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  What is the Order?  
Hon. Peter Kajwang:  [On a Point of Order] Honorable Mr. Speaker, is it in order for this House  
to discuss an issue that is properly now in Courts?  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  Honorable Member! Is the matter before the 
Court ? furnish us with a bit more information on the same.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang:  Yes, as we speak this is an issue before the Courts  and the County has been 
served with Orders  restraining them  from the  taking over the Institution awaiting determination of 
the issue.  
The Temporary Sp eaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  Honorable Membe r, the information that I 
have is that as of yesterday, there was an Order  that was given that allowed the people who were 
operating the War Memorial Hospital to resume . It is in public knowledge that it has resumed 
unless there is an Order  that has been filed either to lift or an Order that has been given or another 
case that has been put before Court . But the matter that was in Court  was dispensed with yesterday 
and action  was taken.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker, tuwe watu wana ofuata Sheria . 
Ingekuwa hatia kama ingekuwa bado tunajadilia mambo ambayo yako Kortini. Lakini kama vile 
umesema , there  was an Order  yesterday.  Bwan a Spika , tumekuwa hapa na Miswada mingi za 
viwanja  na mashamba  ya Umma na ni  dhahiri kwamba Wizara ya Ardhi  inafaa kuhakikisha kila  
shamba la Serikali limepata  Title Deed.  
Bwana Spika, t umekuwa na Miswada  hapa  tumepitisha, hata tumezunguka katika  Hospitali zetu 
na tumepata there is no Hospita l or Dispensary  that has a Title Deed.  Kama tungeweza  kama  
Wizara kuhakikisha  tumepata  hizi vyeti , hatungekuwa na mambo mengine amba yo tunajadili hapa 
hivi. Hata Bibilia  inatufunza kujipenda kwanza kama vile t unapenda majirani . Lakini ni wazi 
kwamba Kaunti  ya Nakuru  haijipendi mwanzo ndio unaona hakuna mahali mtu hawezi ingia , na 
hakuna mahali mtu hawezi katalia.  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ningeomba ya kwamba Kamati ambayo inahusika na Ardhi 
na Ukuzaji wa Miji yetu wahakikishe ya kwamba zile Ripoti ambazo tumeleta hapa na pia 
Chairperson  Wa Implementation Committee  ajaribu kuangalia na kuhakikisha ya kwamba ile Kazi 
na Mswada tumepitisha hapa , na tumeungana kwa kauli moja ya kwamba itekelezw e ndio maneno 
kama haya yasiwe yakitukuta kila mara. Asante sana.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon. Eliud from Maai Mahiu Ward.  
Hon Eliud Chege:  Thank you  Mr. Temporary Speaker. I would like to echo what  the Honorable 
Member has just said. We are faced with two issues here, which I would urge the House and the 
County to differentiate because there is an issue of Land Ownership , and we have an issue of the 
Hospital.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , I do understand that all powers are given to  “Mwananchi”  where they 
can exercise their powers directly or indirectly. They can do it indirectly through  their 
Representative s. For instance, if you get a rodent in a Food Store , you cannot burn the whole  Store . 
We can get rid of the rodent. Here, our people are suffering although the County Government 
might be the owner of the land, our people are suffering and we must differentiate the two issues; 
between the Hospital  and the Land Ownership.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker my urge is, because we have the Committee on Lands and the Committee 
on Health, we should interrogate the matter from the County side and the Hospital part of it so that 
we can come up with a concrete solution for this issue.  As of now, I am happy to hear that the 
services ha ve resumed but this issue of eviction and other things happening around the Country , 
we must know that we are here because of those people whom we represent and if you look at our 
Hospitals, people are still complaining that they are not getting the servic es. 
Mr. Temporary Speaker , the other time, the Chairperson  for the  Committee on Health Services 
said in this House that our Hospitals  and our health are in ICU. As a County, if we go in that 
direction, we might end up not giving our people a lot. My wish Mr. Temporary Speaker , is that 
being the Vice Chair person  of the Committee, we do a thorough investigation in our County so 
that we can come up with clear information on who the owner of the land  is, and the Health 
Committee to do something so that the  Hospital operation is not interfered with. Thank you  Mr. 
Temporary Speaker .   
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon. Member representing Kamara Ward 
and then Hon. Anthony representing Nakuru East Ward, in that order.  
Hon. John Maritim:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker , I wish to take Members back a bit.  
There was a time when we were given a Report  on Health by the Chairperson of Health  Committee  
and it said that the Provincial General Hospital  and Njoro Dispensary do not have Title  Deeds . 
About War Memorial  Hospital  is that , these people know  that majorit y of the hospitals in Nakuru 
County do not have ownership Titles. That is why they are refusing to get out of the given area.  
To touch on the War Memorial, we have heard many things and we have said that we are losing 
lives, and I believe that for any cont ract to be binding, there must be an Agreement and that is what 
they did. The person leasing and the person being leased to. I believe that there was a binding 
Agreement  that both parties had.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , I think the reason why those people are there  is that they understand that 
the norm that we have in Nakuru is that we do not have Titles  for our Health  Facilities. The best 
thing is the Committee on Lands and Health  Services  should  follow these things up because they 
will keep on emanating time after time. Mr. Temporary Speaker , the best thing is that we need to 
find the Title of all the Hospitals in Nakuru County so that such incidents will not happen in the 
future. Thank you  Mr. Temporary Speaker . 
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Thank you Mr.  Mr. Temporary Speaker . I take this opportunity to 
welcome Members from Kisumu County Assembly.  Welcome to Nakuru and feel at home. Also, 
let me join fellow Members of this County Assembly to echo their sentiments on matters to do 
with the issue of that Hospital . I will address myself as the Chairperson of the Legal and Justice 
Committee and I can say that , let us look at the justice issues where there is Human Rights 
violation. It is being purported that we lost some patients  in that Hospital. To me, I may want this 
Honorable House to take this matter seriously and employ some Alternative Dispute Resolution 
Mechanism,  given that this issue is portraying the County Government in a very bad way . I 
understand this matter is in  Court and we may even lose this case.  
Let this House have a mechanism whereby we can be proactive. Let us not leave these things to 
the public …  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Honorable Anthony, the matter be ing in 
Court  had been raised and as you know, we cannot be discussing matters that are in Court and we 
said that the matter was dispensed with and we are not aware whether there has been any other 
plea or prayer that has been taken before Court. As far as we know, the matter is not before the 
Court.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Mr. Temporary Speaker, I stand guided and that is why I am saying that 
as an Honorable House, we should employ Alternative Dispute Resolution and the relevant 
Committees to come in handy s o that we can call all those people that were mentioned and were 
in that issue so that we can give a Report  and we protect our people. Mr. Temporary Speaker , on 
matters to do with the violation of Human Rights, I may want to be engaged in that issue as a 
Committee so that we can employ every bit of avenues that we can use to see that this matter can  
be put to rest because this is  just a litmus test. Tomorrow, another Lease will lapse and we will go  
the same  route. Mr. Temporary Speaker , we may not want to p ortray this Government as a rog ue 
Government. Thank you  Mr. Temporary Speaker . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Alright. I would like to commit that matter 
to the  joint Committee s on Lands, Housing and Physical Planning,  the Committee on Health  
Services and the Committee Justice  and Legal Affairs . Kindly follow up on the matter and bring 
back a Report  to the House in the next 7 days.   
MOTION  
WARD PROJECTS SAVINGS  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): We have a Mo tion to be tabled by Hon. John 
Mwangi Macharia, Member for Turi Ward.  
Hon. John Macharia:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker. I rise to move the Motion concerning 
the Ward Project Savings .  
THAT  Aware that the County Government appropriates  Funds for various projects each Financial 
Year in all 55 Wards of Nakuru County ; Recognis ing that the amount of each Projec t as approved 
in the Budge t does not translate to the actual cost of implementation ; Cogni sant that the County 
Government has put measures in place to ensure Projects Implementation meets the required 
standards and that there is prudent use of public resources ; Appreciating that a colossal amount of 
Savings  has been made in previous Financial years from Ward Project Implementation ; Noting 
that the Savings  accrued from Ward Projects are drawn from the respective Ward Kitties whereas 
those Savings  if deposited in an account could be used to fund additional Projects  in the respective 
Wards . 
Now therefore, this House resolves that as a long -term s trategy to enhance the accountability of 
public resources, the County Government creates a Ward Projects Savings Account after which 
the funds are re -channeled back to the respective Ward in a successful budgeting cycle.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , in every Financial Year  in all the 55 Wards, we usually go for what we 
call Public Participation. In Public Participation, it is the right of Mwananchi  as granted by the 
Constitution of Kenya 2010 that the powers belong to the people. Members of the public usually 
assemble in their respective Ward s where the Members of the County Assembly together with the  
County Executive usually join the m and allocate Funds  as per the wishes and needs of each Ward.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , you find that when it comes to implementati on of Ward Projects, the 
estimated amount that was allocated during the Public Participation is not actuali sed and therefore , 
at the end of the Financial Year, some Savings are left after the Projects have been implemented. 
For example, you may find a part icular Ward which has been allocated may be Kshs. 30 million 
in a particular Financial Year . In that particular Ward when the Projec t has been awarded through 
the Open Tender System , you find that that amount of Kshs. 30 million, only Kshs. 25 million has 
been utili sed in the Projec t. An amount of Kshs. 5 m illion has been left in the respective 
Department  and yet, the  Projects that were being anticipated in the specific Wards have been 
implemented.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , you can find a case of d rilling a Borehole  where the cost of drilling a 
borehole is Kshs. 3.2 Million . That is the estimated cost but when it comes to the action, you find 
that the contractor can drill water for Kshs. 2.5 Million. Therefore, an amount of Kshs. 700,000 is 
left, yet that Projec t in that Ward has not been done to the fullest. That is why I am requesting 
Honorable  Members that we pass this Motion , that we be allowed to utili se the Savings  that are 
left at the end of the Financial Year so that they can be conso lidated and plo ughed  back and rolled 
over to the next Financial Year where the respective Ward and Honorable Members can allocate 
those funds to other Projects. I beg to move and request Hon. Paul Warege to second. Thank you.  
Hon. Paul Warege:  Thank you Mr . Temporary Speaker. I wish to second that Motion and wish 
to commend Hon. John Mwangi for bringing th e Motion to th e House. I know this Motion is in 
line with Nakuru County Revenue Allocation Act 2018 which states that: - Ward Development 
Funds should be allocated to respective Wards. Part (2) of Act 12(4), states that Unspent  
Development Funds at the end of the Financial Year shall be reallocated to any eligible Project  
and such project s may be new or ongoing.  I support the Motion. Thank you  Mr. Temporar y 
Speaker . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): I will propose the question.  
 
(Question proposed that this House resolves that as a long -term Strategy to enhance 
accountability of Public Resources, the County Government creates a Ward Project Savings 
Account after which the Funds are channeled back to the Respective Wards in successive Budget 
Cycles ). 
The Motion is open for debate. Hon. Eliud.  
Hon. Eliud Chege:  Asante sana Bwana. Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii. Ningependa kumpa kongole 
Hon. John Mwangi  kwa kuja na M swada  kama huu. Huu ndio M swada  tunasema ya kwamba ni 
Mswada  wa wakati kwa sababu ameuleta wakati ambao unafaa. Bwana  Spika ukiangalia njia zetu 
za kupatiana Miradi kuna lugha ambayo tunatumia kwa Sheria ambayo inasema kuwa tutunukie 
yule mtu ambaye ameweka pesa za chini zaidi kufanya hiyo kazi. Inamaanisha ya kwamba kuna 
kiwango cha pesa amba cho kinabaki kwa kila mradi ambao tunafanya. Bwana Spika, i ngekuwa 
jambo la busara kama kila mwisho wa mwaka hizo pesa zote zingewekwa katika Department  zote. 
Ikiwa ni ya Maji, Ardhi  na Afya zote ziwekwe pahali pamoja ndipo ziweze kurudishwa kwa 
Wananchi ili turudi kwa Wananchi na tu jue ni M iradi gani tutafanya na hi zo pesa.  
Bwana Spika, Kwa mwaka uliopita tumekuwa na Miradi kadhaa na ukiangalia wale waliopatiwa 
hizo Kandarasi walivyo fanya kwangu, siwezi kosa zaidi ya Millioni tatu. Kulingana na hali ya 
mvua hizo pesa kama tungekaa n a Wananchi hatungekosa barabara moja ama mbili ya kutengeza 
kutumia hizo pesa. Nimesimama kuunga mkono huu Mswad a na kusema kuwa inaweza kufanyika 
haraka iwezekanavyo n a tujue kwamba hizi zingine za m waka uliopita ziko wapi na kama ziko, 
huu mwaka ambao tu meanza upya pia tukimalizia mwaka ujao pia tufanye hivyo. Naunga mkono 
na pia ninashukuru Mheshimiwa. Huu ni M swad a wa m ana na mwenz angu anasema old is gold.  
Mheshimiwa ako na experience  ya kutosha and I wish wale  wengine walio kaa kwa Bunge hii kwa 
mda wa lete M iswada  Hoja kama hii ambayo inaweza okoa Kaunti yetu. Nashukuru Bwana. Spika.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon. Virginia.  
Hon. Virginia Gichanga:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker for giving me this chance. First, I 
would like to congratulate the mover of the Motion Hon. John Mwangi and also the Chairperson 
for the Committee  on Implementation for bringing up such a Motion at such a crucial time. Mr. 
Temporary Speaker, I was in the second Assembly and I remember very well in 2021, all the 
Savings  were brought back to the MCAs, and every MCA was given the task of saying where the 
money or how the money would be spent. I had raised the concern to the Bud get Committee and 
the answer that the Executive gave was not satisfactory.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, this is a House of rules and order, and anything that is spent on the 
Executive side, if it is the Budget, we do approve the Budget  and also the Supplementar y so even 
these Savings  should be brought back to the Assembly for approval and we agree on how the 
money should be used because it is a Ward Fund . In my Ward , my people know that I have  Kshs. 
35 Million yet I may use  Kshs. 29 Million or 30 Million but whe n it comes to them trying to find 
out how the money is used, they do not know about the Savings. They do not know that there is 
the lowest bidder and that some  is money left . 
So Mr. Temporary Speaker , they judge me as per the  Kshs. 35 Million . It is high t ime we do the 
necessary because even after the Executive has done the procurement, how the money has been 
awarded in every Ward  should be brought back to us so that we can see how much money has been 
left in our Ward Fund Kitty.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I s tand to support and being a Member of the Budget Committee,  we 
expect to see something happening and as a Member  of the Implementation Committee, we expect 
to follow up on the implementation of the same. Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speak er (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Let us have Hon. Wathiai, Hon. Kirui, and 
Hon. Muraya in that order then we will come to this side.  
Hon. David Wathiai:  Asante sana Bwana Spika. Nataka kuunga huu Mswada kwa sababu 
Honorable  Chairperson  wa Implementation  ambaye pia ni Senior na ni "Njuri" anajua mambo 
yote na ako kwenye hii Bunge  kwa mara ya pili ,kwa hivyo anaelewa haya  maneno . 
Hon. Eliud Chege:  Point of Order Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Yes Hon. El iud. 
Hon. Eliud Chege:  [On a Point of Order] He should clarify what he means by "Njuri"  because I 
do not think that "Njuri"  is Parliamentary , but maybe if he elaborates further we might understand 
what he means.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon. Wathiai, what is "Njuri?"  
Hon. David Wathiai:  Mr. Temporary Speaker, "Njuri"  Means a senior  person who has been in 
this House ; may be a second -timer or third -timer. That is a word we use out there.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Michael Gathanwa): Hon. Muraya, are you on a Point of Order? 
Then resume your seat. Thank you. Proceed Hon. Wathiai.  
Hon. David Wathiai:  Bwana Spika wa Mda, kweli kila m waka  kuna pesa zinabaki kwa Ward  zetu 
na hi zi pesa ni za Wananchi wetu wa Ward . Sio zetu bali tumepatiwa jukumu la kuwapelekea pale 
kwa ground na waseme kile ambacho wanataka wafanyiwe pale kwenye vijiji. Naunga huu 
Mswada mkono ili tupate nafasi ya kurudi pale ground na ile balance  yote inabaki ikishikanishwa 
turudi kuongea na Wananchi wetu waseme tuwaeke stima, na kadhalika . Naunga huu Mswada  
asilimia  100%  Bwana Spika  wa Mda,  asante.  
Hon. Bernard Kirui:  Asante sana Mr. Temporary Speaker  kwa hii nafasi ambayo umenipatia. 
Kwanza nikumpongeza Mheshimiwa wa Turi kwa kuleta huu Mswada  ambao unafaa kwa wakati 
huu, Tumekuwa tukiweka pesa nyingi sana kwa Miradi  haswa zile za Ward  lakini unapata wakati 
hizo kazi zinapeanwa wanapatia yule ambaye a mequote chini na unapata kazi ambazo zinafanywa 
kwa Wards   ni kazi mbovu kwa sababu Contractor  amechukuwa kazi ambayo haina pesa.  Bwana 
Spika wa Mda k wa mfano tuseme tumepeana Miradi ya Millioni  tano pale Barut, halafu Contractor  
ambaye amepewa amequote mi llioni tatu na nusu, unapata millioni moja na nusu imepotelea pale 
kwa Department na zile kazi ambazo zinafnywa kwa Ward sio kazi amba zo zinafaa.  
Bwana Spika  wa Mda, nami n asimama kuunga mkono kuwa hizo pesa zote ambazo zinasalia pale 
zirudishw e kwenye hii Bunge, tuweze kupitisha na zisaidie kazi nyingine kwa sababu kuna Miradi 
ambazo zimesimama pale kwa Wards . Pia zitasaidia wale Contractor s ambao wanaelewa 
wanachofanya, waweze kushinda hizo Tenders  ama hizo Contract s kwa sababu wale ambao 
wanap ewa wakati huu,  ni wale ambao wana haribu kazi.  Bwana Spika  wa Mda,  wanaquote bei ya 
chini ndio waweze kushinda hizo Contract s halafu wanafanya kazi mbovu.  Bwana Spika  wa Mda,  
naunga mkono huu Mswada  na pia kumpongeza Hon. Mwangi  kwa kazi nzuri.  
Leo nimeamani hata  zzee akiketi chini anaweza kuangalia Naivasha,  anashinda yule Kijana  
ambaye yuko juu ya mti. Asante sana  Bwana Spika  wa Mda.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker. Mheshimiwa ameanza kujua lugha 
ya tatu y a taifa. Nasimama kuunga mkono Msw ada huu ambao umeletwa na Mheshimiwa  Rafiki 
yangu na namesake. Asante sana kwa sababu you are the mover of this Motion. I am looking 
forward to seeing you see this Motion implemented as the Chairperson of the Implementation 
Committee. Once again,  I am here to support this Motion.  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
Bwana Spika  wa Mda , imekuwa  tu mazoea na ni  sheria ambayo ilipitishwa ya kwamba “mwenye 
atakadiria chini sana ndiye atakayepewa Kandarasi”. Ni kweli kuwa katika kukadiria , kuna pesa 
ambazo huwa zinabaki na kama vile Hon. Virginia  amesema, wananchi pale wanatufanyia hesabu 
za pesa tu lizo waambia wakati tulienda kuchukua maoni kwao. Mimi wananifanyia hesabu ya 
Kshs. 35,000,507  nami hapa ninapata kuna mwenye amekadiria hii pesa na wamekadiria jumla 
ya Kshs. 27,000,000 . Kwa hivyo hapo kuna Millioni  kama nane ambazo zinabaki. Pia Mwananch i 
ananiangalia aone kuwa nimefanya kazi.  
Bwana Spika  wa Mda , nisipopata hizi fedha, Kshs. 7  000 000 nitakuwa na vita vigumu sana pale 
Mashinani . Naunga mkono Mswada huu na kama kuna uwezo wa kuharakisha na iwe ya kwanza 
hata kama Hon. John Mwangi  hatafuatilia zile zingine ambazo tumepitisha angalau afuate hii 
ambayo inatufaa na ni yetu. Hakikisha kwamba imeafikiana ili tuweze kujinasua kutokana na yale 
maneno na vita amba vyo viko pale Mashinani amba vyo vinaweza kutuletea madhara baadaye.  
Kwa hivy o Bwana Spika wa Mda  naunga mkono na kushukuru sana kwa sababu kama vile 
Mwenzangu amesema, ni vile  hakuweza kuelezea vizuri. Katika jamii yetu hauwezi uk aita aliye 
mkubwa wako kwa jina lake. Unamwita jina la heshima. Tunapomwita Hon. Mwangi  "Njuri" hata 
pia yeye anafurahia, anacheka na pia anaongeza miaka yake. Mtu anapocheka ni dawa ya mifupa 
kwa hivyo tunamfanya awe kijana lakini ni Mzee. "Njuri" sio jina libaya bali  ni jina la heshima 
kutoka kwa jamii yetu. Asante sana Bwana  Spika  wa Mda . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon. Muna then Hon. Gathuita in that order.  
Hon. David Muraya:  Asante sana Bwana. Spika  wa Mda  kwa kunipa hii nafasi ili niweze 
kuchan gia Mswada  huu ambao umeletwa na Mwenzangu  ambaye ni kiongozi wa pale Turi na pia 
ametumia hekima ya kuleta huu Mswada  kwa wakati unaofaa. Mimi naunga mkono asilimia  100% 
kwa sababu kulingana na Makadirio  ambayo huwa yanafanywa na wale ambao wameuliza 
kufanya Miradi katika maeneo yetu ya Bunge,  unakuta kuwa yale Makadirio ambayo yanahitajika 
ni yule ambaye yuko katika kiwango cha katikati kwa hivyo kuna fedha nyingi ambazo zinabaki 
.wakati hiyo Project  inapata mtu ambaye atakuwa akifanya. Kwa mfano kwa Ward  yangu tuko na 
Projec t moja ambayo ilikuwa ya Kshs . 4.5 Million  na aliyepata nafasi ya kufanya alipata na  Kshs. 
4.1 Million . Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika wa Mda ukiangali a unaona kuna zaidi ya Kshs. 400  000 
ambazo zilibaki pale. Maoni yangu ni kwamba wakati tunakadiria makadirio ya Bajeti ambayo 
inafuata, ningeomba ikuwe Roll Over to the other  Budget every year.    
Bwana Spika wa Mda,  niko na concern moja ambayo Mheshimiwa Virginia amesema hapa ya 
kwamba kuna  wakati ali raise  hiyo complain  na akauliza maswali katika Kikao kimoja cha Budget 
na yale majibu ambayo alipewa, amesema hayakuwa ya kuridhisha kamwe. Kwa hivyo pia 
tungeomba ya kwamba wakati Chairman  wa Budget anaongoza pale ka tika hi vyo vikao, awe 
akisikiza Members  wake vizuri kwa sababu hii issue n i ya muhimu sana kwa wananchi wetu pale 
Mashinani. Kwa hivyo mimi ninaunga mkono asilimia 100 % na ningeomba Mheshimiwa 
Macharia ambaye ameitwa “N juri” hapa kwa sababu wewe ndio uko kwa Implementation,  
tunakuomba h ayo mambo yatekelezwe kwa haraka sana. Asante Bwana  Spika  wa Mda . 
Hon. James Mwangi:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker, I rise to support the Motion. First, I 
want to recogni se the visitors from Kisumu . Hono urable  Members , you are welcome in Nakuru 
County.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, first, I want to support this Motion on the basis that the money is called 
“Savings”; it is the allocation for the Ward Projects , a share for allocated Projects within the 55 
Wards . I think it is not  in order to reallocate or wire that money elsewhere within the Budget, 
bearing in mind that Wananchi  want to see value for money in any approved Budget. I want to 
urge even the Motio n mover to have a target because , they need to come up with either approv ed 
or with a note where they would be saved so that Waheshimiwa or Wananchi  have access of that 
Budget.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, they should have something like Consolidated Savings so that they can 
be used. In Dundori Ward, in the last Financial Year, we h ad Kshs 2 Million in Savings and they 
just lost there in the forest. I want to support with amendments because we had the previous Budget  
and, in my  Ward , in the Department  of Education, I had two Classrooms that had been allocated 
Kshs 1.5 Million each. I even had a  Toilet which was allocated Kshs 600,000 during  the Public 
Participation and the Projects  were not done. Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he Contractor shied away 
from taking those Project s in Awarding , because there was no value for money, bearing in mind 
the cost of living is high and we have to upload that Budge t up to Kshs 1.8 Million. My take on 
supporting with amendments this Report  is that kama hizi pesa zitapotea kwa Wards  zetu, zile 
Mirad i ambazo tutakuwa tumeweka za pesa kidogo, the Executive will either support or add that 
money . Kama Classroom  tumeweka Kshs. 1.5 Million  na hazitoshi, hiyo pesa ya juu Executive  
wanaweza support  kama ni  Toilet nimeweka Kshs 500,000  na hazit oshi, kama zile zangu 
zitapote,. Saving s, watakuwa wana Supplement  hiyo ili h iyo Miradi ifanyike.  
Hon. Lear Serem:  Point  of order! Mr. Temporary Speaker  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): What is the order?  
Hon. Leah Serem:  [On a Point of Order]  I want to know if Mheshimiwa  is in order to mix 
Kiswahili and English at the same time.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Mheshimiwa kindly use one language 
during your presentation . 
Hon. James Mwangi:  Mr. Temporary Speaker, you see there are some issues we need to talk in 
a language that everybody can understand. I want Hon. Serem to explain to me what N juri means 
in English; thank you.  
(Laughter ) 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon . Rottok and then Hon. Mutai  
Hon. Isaac Rottok:  Asante sana Bw ana Spika kwa kunipatia hiyo fursa na kwanza kabisa, 
kulingana na lugha ambayo tunafaa kutumia kwa hii Bunge; tunatumia lugha ya Kiswahili na 
Kiingereza. Nafikiri Mheshimiwa  anapochanganya lugha zote mbili, inakubalika kwa sababu kuna 
matamshi ambayo huwezi k uyata mka kwa lugha ya Kiswahili . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon . Rottok, tunatumia lugha ya Kiswahili 
au ya Kiingereza wala sio Kiswahili na Kiingereza.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok:  Kiswahili … 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Au Kiingereza . 
Hon. Isaac Rottok:  Asante  Bwana Spika wa Mda.  Ningependa tu kuumrudishia shukrani 
Mheshimiwa Macharia  kwa kuleta  Mswad a ambao unatugusa sisi sote tukiwa wawakilishi Wadi . 
Kwa hakika ni  pesa nyingi sana sisi tumepoteza vile wenzangu wamesema, Contractor  akipatiwa 
kazi anafanya kazi kwa bei ambayo ni ya chini, Kandarasi  anafanya kwa kutumia njia ya biding  
kwa bei ya chini. Kwa hakika tukijumlisha hi zo pesa  hata kwa mfano wadi ambayo niko,  ni pesa 
zaidi ya Kshs 5 Milioni  ambayo sijui mahali iko. Na kwa kupitia Mswad a huu, ninakubaliana nao 
kabisa . Pesa hizo zirejeshwe katika akaunti ya Wadi ili tuweze kusaidia ama kusupport kazi 
ambazo pesa ha zikutosha. Kwa sababu ninaamini kwamba Waheshimi wa wote kwa j ambo hili 
wanakubaliana na Mswada  huu, uwekwe kwenye swali na tuweze kupitisha hu u Mswada  Asante  
Bwana Spika wa Mda.  
Hon. William Mutai:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker. I stand to support this Motion that the 
Roll-Over Money for the  Projects be used , and I am adding another term here that it should be 
used as soon as possible. The reason as to why I am saying so is because you see like in this 
Financial Year , the Development Money is about Kshs 5.7 Billion , and considering this amoun t 
of money, possibly the amount that will eventually be allocated to the Projects will be about Kshs. 
5 Billion leaving a balance of about Kshs. 700 Million .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he Report  that will be given by the Controller of Budget at the end of 
every Financial Year  means that there will be some money that will not have been spent amounting 
to Kshs. 700 Million . To the common mwananchi  and in the layman understanding, it means that 
Government was so weak to an extent that it could not spend that money whereas the demands in 
the Community  are very high .   
So according to me  Mr. Temporary Speaker , I would wish that this money be used and more 
clarification be given because I remember there was a Project  of several Million s in my Ward 
Keringet, there was a balance of Kshs. 276,000 and it was for drilling of a Borehole. The members  
of the community were asking me “You  want to tell us Mheshim iwa that Kshs. 270,000 will be 
enough to drill a borehole? ”' These are some of the questions I could not answer instantly because 
I had not known there was some money for the Roll-Over.   
To date  Mr. Temporary Speaker , one year down the line, we have used the same money. So, I want 
to support this Motion that has been brought by the Hon. Mwangi that this money should be 
consolidated and allocated to a certain  Department  so that it can benefit Wananch i in projects 
ident ified.  
So Mr. Temporary Speaker , I stand to support and I am very sure that we are going to do so and 
the Government will not be tainted. I remember way back in 2016 and this is one of the agendas 
that we used to kick out the former Government of , His Exc ellency Lee. There were some Report s 
that Millions  of monies had not been used and so we picked up from there and said that if Lee 
could not use such an amount of money , then he had  no business staying in the Office and this can 
also happen if we do not ta ke precautions. Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon. Anthony and then Hon. Representing 
Kamara  Ward in that order  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Thank you so much Mr. Temporary Speaker; may I stand to support this 
Motion  and say this exercise is being done elsewhere, in the National Government . Having  been 
in the NG -CDF during the previous regime , there is KERA and KURA, they have a Suspense 
Accoun t whereby whenever there are Savings, the Savings are deposited in the Suspended Account 
and towards the end of a Financial Year , the monies are redirected to other Projects .  
So Mr. Temporary Speaker , I want to support an d say that this thing is doable.  Also, to echo what 
other Members  are saying , we are losing a lot of money which has been appropriated to benefit 
our Wards . So, we should have a measure whereby the same money should come back to our 
Wards  and benefit our Project s. So, I want to support and  thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
Hon. John Maritim:  Mr. Temporary Speaker, I also rise to support my friend here CPAK. John 
Mwangi . But then what he did is that it is an eye opener for us that we left a lot of money which 
is residual from what is estimated to be the actual , such that in each Department , this money must 
be embezzled.  
So Mr. Temporary Speaker , before we do any Public Parti cipation, we should be furnished with a 
complete list of  Projects in our Wards  and the amount allocated. I believe we shall be waiting for 
Report s from External Auditors and Internal Auditors so that we can ascertain whether the correct 
amount of money was  there. Mr. Temporary Speaker c ome the next successive Financial Year , we 
need to be having these Report s. If for instance we are given Kshs 34 Million or there is a saving 
of Kshs. 4 Million , so that Kshs 2 Million plus Kshs. 4 Million can be Kshs. 36 Mil lion. This 
money is there , and I believe we are ready for it and eagerly waiting to see that everything is 
implemented.  
Finally Mr. Temporary Speaker , the mover of the Motion is the Chairperson  for the Committee on 
Implementation; I believe it is high tim e you start ed from there, regardless  of conflict of interest 
because we need to  fix this. Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon orable  Members  I know we had a 
question whether tumeruhusiwa kutumia  Kiswahili  na Kiingereza  au kuchanganya  Kiswahili  na 
Kiingereza.  According to a Third Edition of our Standing Orders, Standing Order no. 76 (2) says: 
- “A Member  who begins a speech in any of the languages provided for under Paragraph One may 
continue in an y other language provided for under the Standing Order 76(1) which provides that 
all proceedings of the Assembly shall be conducted in Kiswahili, English or Kenyan sign 
Language”. So, you can incorporate the Kenyan sign language. I now put the question  
(Question proposed that now therefore, this House resolves that as a Long -Term Strategy to 
enhance accountability of Public Resources, the County Government creates a Ward Projects 
Saving s Account after which the Fund s are rechanneled back to the respective Ward s in 
successive Budget Cycles. ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned until 2.30 in the evening  
The House rose at 11.25 AM 
 
 