COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 1st August 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03:10 PM  
[The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
STATEMENT  
WATER PIPING PROJECTS ACROSS LALWET AND MOGOON IN KAPKURES WARD.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Michael Gathanwa ): We have a Statement ; Pursuant to the 
provision of Standing Order 47 (2) ( c), the following request will be made . Honorable Robert Ruto 
to request for a Statement  from the Chairperson  of the Committe e on Energy, Environment, Water 
and Natural Resources concerning Water Piping Projects across Lalwe t and  Mogoon in Kapkures 
Ward . Honorable Robert.  
Hon. Robert Ruto: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker , pursuant to Standing Order  47 (2) (c) , I 
rise to request for a Statement  from the Chairperson  of the Committee  on Energy, Environment , 
Water  and Natural Resources concerning Water Piping Projects across  Lalwet and Mogoon  in 
Kapkures  Ward.  
Mr. Temporary S peaker , Lalwe t and Mugoon Water Piping Project was awarded Kshs 1.5 Million 
in the Financial Year 2022/2023 Budget . The amount was to be used in piping  of the same but was 
changed to Supply  of Water Pipes to Ingobor Water Project .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, i t is unfortunate to note that the Contracto r who was contracted to 
undertake the project changed the description of the project to supply thirty four  pipes and one, 10 
000 litres plastic tank to Ingobor Water Project  which had not been programed for the same. Upon 
inquiry 26 out of the 34 w ater pipes that were delivered for Ingobor Water Project  had already 
been used.  
The remaining eight  pipes and the one , 10,000 litres tank have been redirected to Lalwet a nd 
Mugon Project though the piping has not commenced since the pipes are not yet sufficient . Mr. 
Temporary Speaker, i n view of this , I request the Chairperson for the Committee of Energy, 
Environment, Water and Natural Resources to respond on the following.  
1. Whether the CECM is aware that the Lalw et/Mugo on Water Project was redirected to 
Ingobor Water Project . 
2. How the County  Government  will recover the mon ies spent on the  26 pipes that were 
supplied and used in Ingobor Project that was not budget ed for. 
3. The me asures that the Department  has put in place to curb such mix up in future , in terms 
of identification and implementation of project s in adherence to approved budget s. 
4. Why the project description was changed to supply instead of piping.  
5. Measures the Department  has put in place to ensure the project is completed within the 
minimum time possible.  
Thank you Mr.  Temporary  Speaker . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  Thank you I would wish to commit the 
request to the Chair Committe e of Energy, Environment, Water and Natural Resources. Kindly 
take up the matter and give a response in 14 days. We also have a response to a Statement. 
Honourable Njuguna Mwaura, Chairperson Committee on Health Services.  
STATEMENT  
DATABASE FOR HEALTH WORKER S IN NAKURU COUNTY  
Hon. John Mwangi : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker  Sir, I will give response to the Statement  
on behalf of Honorable Njuguna Mwaura who is my Chairman Health Committee.  
Response to the Statement  sought by Honorable Phillip Wanjo hi on database for Health Worker s 
in Nakuru County. O n Wednesday 19th April 2023 , Hon. Philip Wanjohi, MCA Lare Ward, 
requested for a Statement  from the Chairperson Committee on Health Services concerning the 
database of Health Worker s in Nakuru County . The Honourable Member requested for a detailed 
information on the following;  
1. List of  Health Worker s and their Job Cadres employed by the County  Government . 
2. The distribution across the Health Facilities  in the County . 
3. The Terms of Engagement of Health Worker s. 
The Committee while undertaking its Legislative, Oversight and Representation role, wrote to the 
County  Executive Committee Member, Department  of Health Services to get factual information 
on the question asked.  
On 4th May 2023, the Department  responded as follows;  
The County  Government  of Nakuru, Department  of Health Services has a total of 3,130 staff. The 
staff are distributed as follows;  
1. Permanent and Pensionable employees                                                                         1,701  
2. Contracted by the County  Government                                                                            735 
3. Hospital Contracted  through the Facility Improvement Fund                                          474 
4. Ministry  of Health Funded under the Universal Health Care                                                95 
5. Partner funded staff :  
( i ) Contracted by Global Fund  3 
(ii) By USAID Tujenge Jamii 121  
      (iii)World Vision 1  
Their Job Cadres and Terms of Engagements are captured as follows;  
1. Nurses  
2. Dental officers  
3. Pharmacists  
4. Medical Officers  
5. Nutritionists  
6. Occupational Therapists  
7. Orthopedic Technologists  
8. Orthopedic Trauma Technologists  
9. Pharmaceutical Technologists  
The Pharm Technologists are 84 in the County . Seventeen a re Permanent and Pensionable. 42 
County  Contracted, 3 under Universal Health Coverage (UHC), 17 Hospital Contracted and 5 
under USAID Tujenge Jamii.  
10. Physiotherapists  
11. Public Health Officers  
12. Radiographers  
13. Medical Engineering Technologist   
14. Medical Laborat ory Technologists  
15. Medical Physicist  
16. Medical Social Workers  
17. Community Health Assistants /Officers  
18. Clerical Officers  
19. Clinical Officers  
The County  takes pride in its 297 Clinical Officers . Out of the 297, 142 are permanent and 
pensionable,  70 County  contracted, 14 UHC Contracted, 2 under Global Fund Partner, 44 Hospital 
Contracted and 25 USAID Tujenge Jamii.   
20. Community Oral Health Officers  
21. Cooks  
22. Health Administrative Officers  
23. Health Records and Information Officers  
24. HTS Counsellors  
25. Accountants  
26. Procurement Officers  
27. ICT Officers  
 28. Secretaries  
The County  Department  of Health has 11 Secretaries who are Permanent and Pensionable   
29. Support Staff  
30. Drivers  
31. Telephone Operators  
The Department  has 6 Permanent and Pensionable Telephone Operators. It is worth noting that a 
comprehensive list of all staff including their names, I d no’s, employment no, Job Designation, 
Job Cadre, terms of re -employment and Duty Station in this Department  has been supplied to Hon. 
Philip Wanjohi , the Member of County  Assembly for Lare. I beg to give the response for the 
request of Statement . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Thank you so much, I see Hon. Wanjohi is 
in the House and probably you can comment on whether that was what you were looking for.  
The Minority Leader  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker , I wish to thank 
the Hon. Member for Turi and the Chair for Health Committee for the prompt res ponse they have 
made towards my Statement .  
However  Mr. Temporary Speaker , I am concerned after listening and of course reading because of 
cause they gave me the Statement ; my observation is that our Health Facilities  are under staffed 
and especially with Nurses and Health Worker s and some of our Health Facilities  in fact 60 percent 
of them across the County  are understaffed and in some of the Facilities, the Health Centres  have 
at least one Nurse which is very dangerou s; and therefore it means that when this Nurse or Health 
Worker  goes on leave or is sick or admitted, the Health Facility  has to be closed and you know 
Health Facility  is not a shop where you can leave someone to take care of it.  
Therefore, my recommendat ion to the Health Committee whose Members  are in this House that 
we have two staff in each of Health Facilities so that when one Health Worker  goes on leave or 
has to go for a meeting, that Health Facility  is not closed. Mr. Temporary Speaker  I am satisfied 
with the response of the Statement ; thank  you. 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Thank you so much . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Members , this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 9.am in the morning . 
The House rose at 3.25 PM 
 
 
 
 
 
 