COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 14th November  2023  
Assembly Building  
The House Met At 10: 30 AM  
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Mwaura): In the Chair].  
PRAYER  
MOTION  
NASHA AND WAKULIMA MARKETS  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): There is a Motion from Hon. Stanley Karanja, 
Chairperson Committee  on Trade.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Thank you  Mr. Temporary Speaker.  We have a Motion in our Committee . 
The Committee  has Members as indicated.  
Mr. Tempo rary Speaker, t he Committee , after sitting down decided to  visit the Markets. We 
decided to start with the Markets  around and we started with Nasha  Market. It is in the Nakuru 
Central Business District and it was opened by former President Daniel Arap Moi , primarily for 
the sale of Potatoes, Cabbages, Green Maize, and Bananas. Other Markets  within the County and 
beyond heavily depend on it for a varie ty of goods drawn from either Uganda or Tanzania. You 
can see that from the onset that this one is a very important Market . 
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  on the other hand, the idea of construction of Nasha  Square Market was 
arrived at as part of the County Gover nment's plan to decongest the Central Business District which 
involved relocating Small Traders and Hawkers  who were initially operating within the Central 
Business District. The Market houses Traders  who sell Second -Hand Clothing …  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): What is it Hon. Duale ? 
QUORUM  
Hon. Hassan Ali:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I am standing  on Order  38, on issue of 
Quorum. Mr. Temporary Speaker,  if you look keenly in this House, these Members do not meet 
the threshold of the  right procedure and proceedings of this House. Please, if you can order the 
count ing of Members and see if we have a quorum so that we can proceed with the Business of 
this House. Thank you  Mr. Temporary Speaker . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Ser jeant at Arms, can you confirm whether we 
have a quorum?  
(Serjeant at Arms  counts the Members in the House and  confirms there is no quorum)  
So, ring the bell for 5 minutes.  
(The bell was rang for 5 minutes)  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Karanja, you can proceed.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker. As I was saying, we made  a visit as 
a Committee  to two  Markets . We started with Nasha  Market. The groundbreaking for construction 
of the Market  was done in 2015 by the then Governor Hon. Kinuthia Mbugua who had initially 
planned to accommodate 800 hawkers but right now, it is 1,800 Traders who operate in that market.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  the Committee  made several Observations  at Nasha  Market. I think the 
Honorable  Member for the Town is around so that he can confirm whatever we are going to say. 
If he is not there, I know Hon. Kajwang' who is a senior Member will listen on behalf of him and 
raise an issue, if at all there is any.  
Committee  Observations  
i)  That Market  has two Public Toilets; for Male and for Female  which charges Kshs 10 per 
user and the fee is collected at the toilet entrance and is remitted to the designated 
Treasurer . I think that is what has been going on where the County builds a toilet and gives 
that toilet to an individual and they collect the money. That is what  we have been saying 
that it has been a misnomer because the money is being used by other people other than 
the well-being of the Market.  
ii) The Treasurer collects approximately Ksh. 600 to Kshs . 700 for Male  and Kshs. 500 to 
Kshs  600 for Female. If you divid e 600 by 10, you will see that there will be 60 users per 
day for Males. If you see that one, you will notice that Males use the toilet more regularly 
than Females.  
iii) That there was poor sanitation in the Male  toilet. Although they are the majority of users,  
the toilet is not well kept. I do not know why there is gender discrimination in terms of 
cleanliness.  
iv) The upper floor of the Nasha  Upper Mitumba Market was yet to be occupied and the reason 
for non -occupancy in that upper floor is that it is incomplete and is not Disability Friendly. 
When we visited Nasha  Market, we found that there was a lot of money that was used to 
build the Mitumba Mark et upper area but the Contractor  was paid and yet, the Market does 
not have a ramp  that disabled  people can use to go up . Therefore  Mr. Temporary Speaker, 
we said that it was not disability friendly. It was established on the upper floor to have a 
capacity  of 1,000 people but it cannot hold that number because it was poorly built.  
v) The Project was completed in 2020 and the Completion Certificate was issued. Here is 
where I want it to be followed because the Contractor  was paid and the Completion 
Certificate  was given out but the facility is not complete. We found that the money was not 
well utili sed. 
vi) The Department of Trade, Tourism and Co -Operatives failed in its obligation to safeguard 
the lives of Traders  by issuing a Completion Certificate for a substand ard and incomplete 
Project.  
vii) The Engineer  in charge of the project failed in his supervisory duty to ensure that the 
Design  and Bills of Quantity  were duly followed. That is why as a Committee , we ask that 
the Committee  on Justice and Legal Affairs also follow up because justice has not been 
done. Money has been used and yet  Traders are not occupying the building.  
viii) 411 Traders were not allocated slots in the Market  due to lack of space and these  
Traders went to Court  to compel the County Government to allocate them alternative Trade 
Areas. The Court ruled in their favour and an Order  was issued to allocate them an 
alternative space on the upper floor of Nasha  Market , which is not yet complete. You  can 
see how the County is  disobeying the Cour t Order because it was ordered to make sure that 
the Traders  occupy the upper floor but they cannot do so because it is not complete yet a 
lot of money was used.  
ix) That Water  is available though it flows at low pressure.  
x) That the market lacks Offloading Points . 
Committee  Recommendations  
i)  The Department of Trade, Tourism, Co -operative s and Planning  should supervise and hold 
the designated Washroom Treasurer accountable for the usage of Fees collected at the 
toilet.  I would like the Honorable Members who are elected to note that the County uses a 
lot of money. I think the Bill of Quantities lists that for you to construct a toilet, you must 
have at least Kshs 1 Million and over and yet, after the completion, you give to your friend 
the toilet to collect money. That is why there is a lot of war in towns because if you calculate 
the Kshs 700 per day, you will s ee that it has a lot of Cartels . The  Toilets should b e owned 
by the Market, not some other cartels from outside.  
ii) The Department of Trade, Tourism, Co -operatives and Planning should give guidelines on 
how Washroom Fees should be utili sed in the improvement of the Market . As we said, the 
Male s are the majorit y of users of our Washrooms  and yet, those Washroom s are poorly 
kept and people are running away with money. Any time you visit the Market , the Treasurer 
will see you as a user of a toilet other than a buyer because they collect a lot of money. The  
Departm ent should ensure that the Washrooms  are generally kept clean.  
iii) The Department of Trade should compel the Contracto r to redo the works at the Nasha  
building to make it strong and to hold the capacity so that it can comply with the Court 
Order.  
iv) The Department of Trade should compel the  Contractor to put up a ramp to enable persons 
living with disability to access the Market.  
v) The County Government should also take administrative action against the Engineer . That 
is why we are calling the Committee  on Legal Affairs and Public Accounts and Investment s 
Committee  to follow up so that they are able to see that money was not used properly and 
make sure that the Enginee r is compelled.  
vi) That the County Government of Nakuru should obey a Court Order that electri city should 
be restored. There is no electricity in the Market, which is very dangerous.  
vii) The County Government should drill a Borehole. There is no sufficient water. Therefore, 
a Borehole  is needed.  
viii) The Department of Trade should provide an Offloading Bay . 
That was Nasha  Market and I think the Members will confirm. We also visited Wakul ima Market 
and we made several O bservations.  
Committee  Observations  
i)  The picking and offloading bay in the Market  is being occupied by Traders  who had set 
up their stand at the spot. Therefore  Mr. Temporary Speaker,  the Bay has been converted 
into another Market.  
ii) The Market was originally a Wholesale  but for now, it is a mixed Market  where we have 
both the Retail and also the Wholesale . 
iii) That the Drainage  passing through the Market  has been blocked by wastage.  Mr. 
Temporary Speaker,  when  we visited Wakulima Market, there is a big Drainag e and we 
were concerned that when El Nino comes, there will be a lot of chaos. When we asked, we 
were to ld that the Roads Department is the one that is supposed to do the Drainage. 
Therefore, there is a mix -up between who should do the Drainage  between the Market and 
the Department of Roads.  Mr. Temporary Speaker,  I also ask the Chairperson to follow up 
on that issue because it can cause a lot of catastrophes.  
iv) The Market  has running water but at low pressure.  
v) The Revenue Officer at the entrance of the  Market receives Vehicles  ferrying farm 
produce. Canters are charged Ksh. 1,000 if  you want to offload. If you have a 2 -ton vehicle, 
you are charged Kshs 700, 7 tons at Kshs 7 000. Carts are charged Kshs 100 . This money 
is collected by the Revenue Officer.  
vi) The goods are offloaded at 4 :00 AM and the payment is done. Mr. Temporary Speaker , at 
this particular time, you cannot tell how much has been collected and that is how the 
County is losing a lot of money.  
vii) The data the Chairman was giving  is that, in  Wakulima  Market  there are 2  700 Traders  
who are registered. If you take that number, th ere are so many and there are  Traders  who 
pay a daily Market Fee of Kshs . 40 while others pay at Kshs 300. 
viii) The Market is overpopulated and congested . 
ix) The Officers  from the Department of Finance  are designated  at the Market  and do not have 
working  gear.  Every time we pass the Budget  we put some money that is meant to buy gear 
and if you check the  Budget properly, we  do allocate money  to make sure that we buy 
uniforms. Mr. Temporary Speaker it is disappointing, when we went to the Wakulima 
Market we found those Watchme n and Revenue Enforcers , one of them was wearing a 
Reflector  of the former Governor Lee Kinyanjui. We were so ashamed. We were arguing 
and I asked who this was. I asked for a Photo  of him to be taken and I think that Photo  will 
circulat e. We asked him which Government he is under and the guy is even not aware that 
there was a Regime change and yet he is a Revenue Officer .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, Members can confirm that.  I can see my Vice Chairperson . We were 
shocked that rather than giving the  Uniforms we are giving Reflectors  of a former  Governor who 
is a friend to some of the people here. I do not  know  whether they are g iving them the Uniforms , 
or a Reflecto r yet that person is an Enforcement Officer . The other thing Mr. Temporary Speaker 
is, and I do not know whether the Finance and the Budget Committee  Members are here. They 
should follow where the money that we appropr iate for uniforms go to. The person does not even 
have boots. The bigger toe is outside the shoe and you wonder whether he is an Enforcement 
Officer.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, the situation was so pathetic and I know  Members will sympathi se with 
that Officer . Members from the Department of Trade and Finance do not have a designation in the 
Market, especially uniforms and Identification Badges . When somebody has Lee Kinyanjui's 
uniform and does not have a Badge , then you cannot tell who they are. You might thi nk that they 
are in a campaign mood.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, the shared Market Office is small, and yet whatever they confiscate they 
put there. The situation there is as dire as that. There is a shortage of  Staff in the Marke t for 
Revenue Collection which is another thing that we did observe. Mr. Temporary Speaker, because 
you have this Report  you can check on page 8 .  
We did come up with several recommendations and one of them Mr. Temporary Speaker is:  
i)  The Department of Trade should reloca te Traders  from the Loading Bay because  they are 
occupying the Offloading Bay  
ii) The County Government through the Department of Trade should separate Wholesal e and 
Retail.  
iii)   The Department of Environment should ensure that drainage to Wakulima Market is 
unclogged and that should go to the Chairperson  Department of Roads. They should also 
visit and see.  
iv) The County Government of Nakuru should Budge t for the drilling of a Borehole  because 
there is no water.  
v) The County Government through the Department of Finance should automate all the 
revenue collected. Mr. Temporary Speaker this is something we have been saying. Other 
Counties  have done so. In Nakuru, we are still using the old receipts. You will think that 
somebody is collectin g money for a funeral. These are some of the things that we are saying 
they are old -fashioned.  
vi) The Department should also make sure that there is a data o f Traders. When we went there, 
we asked the Chairperson  in charge of the  Market , he was not aware of the number of 
Traders  in the Marke t. Even the  County has not done its due diligence to know how many 
Trader s occupy the Wakulima Market.  
vii) The County Government should ensure that the Officers  attached to the Market  have the 
Working Gea r and Tools  that we have said. They should also provide Badges . 
viii) The County Government of Nakuru should set up funds for the construction of 
bigger and well -equipped Officers' Offices.  
ix) The Department of Finance should increase the number of Revenue Officers  in the  Market . 
They were only Seven  and without Uniforms  and Shoes . How do you tell somebody who 
has no shoe s or uniform to collect money and bring it to the County ? Those were the 
shenanigans that we saw.  
x) The Department of Environment should ensure that the Market  is always clean. Mr. 
Temporary Speaker. You know that the Department of Trade is not the one that is in charge 
of the people who make sure that the  Markets are clean. They are under the Environmen t 
Department . This mix -up is the one that makes  Markets look like dumpsites. That should 
be known.  
xi) All the County Departments attached to the  Markets should have administrative action 
against Officers  who are absent from work as well as nonperformance.  
xii) The County Government of Nakuru should ensure that all Officers  sign a Performance 
Contract. That is where we are headed, even the Revenue Collectors should make sure that 
they have a Performance Contract because that is how our revenue is getting lost.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker  that is what we found in the Markets and I think that as of now that is our 
biggest Market ; Nasha  Market. We said that at Nasha Market people come from Uganda and 
Tanzania just to see our Officers with no shoes and with reflectors that re flect a gone 
Administration.  
Therefore Mr. Temporary Speaker  I call upon my able vice chairperson Hon. Dida who we were 
with so that he can second the Report .  We ask the House to look at this and all the Department s 
as I sit down, that is the Department of Environment, Department of Roads, and the Finance and 
the Members should make sure that what we appropriate d is bought. If we appropriate for 
Uniforms, can  we make sure that the Uniforms  are bought? We cannot have our Officers  as 
Monuments. When Ugandans come here they see our  Officers with torn shoes and yet we are 
relying on them to collect revenue. Hon. Dida can second the Report . 
Hon. Cyrus Dida:  Mr. Temporary Speaker Sir, I rise to second the Report  that our Chairperson 
has just taken us thro ugh. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): I propose the question  that this House adopt s the 
Report  of the Committee  on Trade, Tourism, Cooperatives and Planning on the Inspection Tour 
of Nasha and Wakulima Market in Nakuru East Sub County  laid on the table of this House on 
Wednesday,  8th November , 2023 during the Morning Sitting . The Motion is open for debate. Hon. 
Wathiai.  
Hon. David Wathiai:  Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker . I would like to commend the 
Committee  for the good work they ha ve done in the Wakulima Market, and for giving us a 
comprehensive Report  of the status of the Market. Mr. Temporary Speaker, in the 
recommendations I have seen that they said we need to dig  Boreholes for the Wakulima Market. 
This Market is in town, in fact it is in the Central Business District (CBD) where we do not have 
water problems. I will request instead of digging a Borehole , they change the piping or the 
NAWASCO Team come in to change the Pipes and the input of water into the Marke t so that it 
can be able to bring enough water that can accommodate the number of people who use the Market.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, regarding the staff at the Wakulima Market , I would like to recommend 
that the County Government take this issue with urgenc y and employ Clerks  to assist in the 
collection of revenue so that our revenue can go up. I stand to support the Report , Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage):  Hon. Talam.  
Hon. George Talam:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker for giving me th is opportunity. I do 
support our able Chair person  for Trade. What I want to say is that , it was a shame when we got to 
the place and found out the Enforcement Officers had no Shoes. I do request that we summon the 
Chief Officers and the CECs for the Depart ment for Finance and Water and Environment so that 
they can explain to this House why the Enforcement Officers do not have the gear and Shoes . It is 
very shameful considering that this is a City and if other Countie s come to the City and see 
Revenue Clerks  wearing worn -out SHOES , it will be shameful to this County.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, when we went there, we also found out that the way the Marke t was done 
to accommodate a huge number of Traders.  We found out tha t the Nasha  Market  was constructed 
not in a condition where it can accommodate those number of Traders. If we can be able to summon 
the COs and the CECs so they can be able to explain why and also the Engineers  who were 
supervising during the Former Governor's Kinuthia era and the Lee Kinyanjui era to explain to us 
why it was not done according to the Bill of Quantities (BQ). I do support , and I am also a Member 
of this Committee . I support the Report . Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Mura ge): The Hon. Ruto then I will cross to the other side.  
Hon. Robert Ruto:  Thank you so much Mr. Temporary Speaker for giving me this opportunity. 
I rise to support the Chairperson for Trade  and the Committee  for a job well done. Mr. Temporary 
Speaker, I wo uld only suggest that we put more emphasis, especially on the sector of sanitation.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, as we all know in the Wakulima Market food products are sold there and 
are consumed in our entire County . So, if anything goes wrong then the spread  of diseases might 
be very fast. I would like us to look at the sanitation at the Wakulima Market because It was so 
pathetic that you would not like entering the Market. I would like the Department of Water and 
Environment to keep an eye on sanitation more  so the drainages at Wakulima Market are clogged 
and dirty. The same Committee  should put more emphasis on that. Thank you and I support the 
Report .  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Kirui.  
Hon. Bernard Kirui:  Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker, I rise to support this Motion and thank 
the Committee  on Trade for the job well done. It was early this year when I met some Enforcement 
Officers and they were asking me if I can mobilize my colleagues to at least  to have  something in 
the Budget  to buy them Uniforms . Mr. Temporary Speaker, I agree with what Hon. Karanja has 
said. It is true that those  Officers are in a mess and I think as Hon . Talam has said, they have t he 
PSM . I think the Committee  on Trade should ask or invite th e Chief Officer  to explain why those 
Officers are  suffering. Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker  I rise to support.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Duale . 
Hon. Ali Abdi:  Thank you so much Mr. Temporary Speaker for catching your eye. I also wish to 
commend the Committee  on Trade and Tourism for a job well done. I want to comment on three 
issues; One, is the issue of Toilets  and how it is being run and managed. These  Toilet s are run by 
Cartels. This money that is being collected from these toilets is going to the pockets of individuals. 
Such kinds of  Projects should be given to young people so that they can manage these Public 
Toilets so that they can have something at the e nd of the day to put into their pockets. These young 
people do not have jobs so when you give them such opportunities and empower them, it will go 
a long way in making sure that they have the capital or something to do.  
The second thing is Revenue Automat ion; in this century if the  Market is not automated, the 
Chairperson said that someone sits there and collects money as if he is in a funeral or a shop. That 
is something that should be looked into very keenly. To the  Members of Finance Committee , that 
is very serious work and they need to get down and know why until this century there is no 
automation  of Revenue Collection in the Markets. There is a lot of money being lost here and it 
should get back to the Government and help in one way or another. There is an issue of  Officers 
who are not wearing Identification Badges and putting on their Uniforms. Publicity and Public 
Relation  is significant in any institution in this Countr y or the World. I always tell people when 
you come to this Assembly, I have gone to different Organizations  and when you have come to 
this Assembly of Nakuru, the  Staff of this Assembly are one of the best people they can handle 
anyone. They have nice barges on their neck and can direct you to the relevant  Office . That is a 
Public Institution and are not wearing gear, which tells you there is a problem. As I support , I wish 
to ask the  Committee  to summon these people and ask them why people are  sleeping at their jobs. 
I support the Report ; thank you.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): The Hon. Member from Malewa -West  
Hon. Francis Kuria:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker . First of all, I want to commend the good 
job the Committee  did and the  Observation s they came up with when the Committee  made a site 
visit. The Market was in a mess first in terms of hygiene, you find lots of piles of garbage 
emanating from Farm Produce. The service providers in that are a are few and you find the 
workload for the service providers versus the byproduct of farm produce, they h ave a lot of work. 
So, we need to also add the number of service providers in the Market.  
Also  Mr. Temporary Speaker,  maybe the Chairperson  will elaborate further, he talked about 
something to do with water. We have some Companies  like NAWASCO that supply water within 
the Town, I do not know whether the Chairperson  of the Committee  tried to confirm why there 
was a shortage of water within the  Market  or the flow of water that is being supplied within the 
Marke t is not sufficient to serve the people within the market. Also,  to unclog the drainage , we 
need to collabora te with the Department of Roads and  as a Chairperson, for that observation , I will 
take my Committee  of Roads we do a Site Visit so to apply some pressure  to unclog the Drainage 
System . I therefore rise to support this Motion  and thanks for the good job by the Committee . 
Thank you  Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. El ijah Murage): Hon. Maritim  
Hon. John Maritim:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker, I also rise to support the Motion and 
also to commend the good job the  Committee  did. That was a great eye -opener; I have seen where 
our own Source of Revenue is getting lost . By curbing this menace, I believe the majority of people 
who are here are from the Finance Committee , we should visit there to ascertain whether they are 
using those Machine s in collect ing revenue. Mr. Temporary Speaker,  I have also realis ed that we 
usuall y collect a lot of money in these Markets . For in a day, a Canter  we charge Kshs  1 000 and 
I believe many Canter s go there . A two  tons lorry is Kshs  700 and that shows in a given day, we 
can make almost Kshs  1 million in that Market . I believe the same mon ey can be raised  and it can 
go even to Kshs  2 million  and Kshs  4 million.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  I also urge on the issue of cleanliness, I think here we are dealing with 
food and I believe where food is, cleanliness should be a key thing. I urge the Comm ittee of 
Environment to visit that place s o that they can do the clean ing.  
Finally Mr. Temporary Speaker, we have been told that the Market is highly congested . We have 
like 800 peopl e who are doing business there and I am urging that out of this collection that is 
made from this Market, I believe there is a space either if this market is full, we can look for a 
different place, the land is bought  and we construct another Market  because that shows that there 
is a lot of mon ey in this business.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  I second Mheshimiwa  Duale in what he said about the toilets ; this toilet 
collection is something to be given to young people, a registered group . And by the way it is one 
of the best sources of people getting a bit of income. Why am I saying so, I own one in my  Ward 
which  I give it to young people and I make like Kshs . 700 to Kshs  1000 in a given day. So, they 
usually pay the Watchman , pay electricity  and water bills. So, I believe  this makes a lot of sense. 
We can get groups of ladies and groups of men to run these toilets. Thank you Mr. Temporary 
Speaker, and I thank the Committee  on Trade .  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): I will now call the mover to reply . 
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Asante sana Temporary Speaker.  Kwanza wacha niwapongeze Members 
kwa kuchangia Mswada  huu na Ripoti hii . Wamechangia vizuri na kuiboresha. kama vile nilikuwa 
nimesema hapo awali ya kwamba ningeuliza na ninaomba Kamati ambazo zinahusika kwa sababu 
hii Committee  ukienda kwa soko, ni  Idara nyingi ambazo ziko pale.  
Bwana Spika wa Mda, mimi ningesema kwamba watu wa Budget,  zile pesa ambazo tunaapropriate 
na kupitisha za  Budget  za uniform,  wahakikishe kwamba zinanunuliwa. Pia ningependa Kamati  
ambayo Mwenyekiti  ameongea juu yake ya Barabara iende pale na ihakikishe Drainage  iko. 
Kuhusu maji, kwa sababu Members  wameuliza , maji yako lakini ni kidogo. Bwana Spika wa Mda 
unaona hiyo mifereji iliwekwa kitambo wakati soko iliundwa. Kwa hivyo wale watu wanaokusudia 
kupa ta maji ni wengi kuliko wale watu wako kwa sasa.  
Bwana Spika wa Mda, k ulikuwa na huo mpango wa kuhakikisha ya kwamba kuna maji na 
wamechimba Kisima  lakini sasa hakuna. Hiyo pia ningeuliza Kamati  ambayo ni ya Environment  
na Maji ya Hon. Rose  pia watembee huko ili waweze kuhakikisha h ayo mamb o yamefanyika. Na 
mwisho Mr. Temportary Speaker , ningeuliza tu Kamati  ambayo inahusika na Uchunguzi  wa 
Ufisadi iende na iangalie ni kwa nini mjengo haukuwahi kukamilika .  
Tumesema ya kwamba Engineer  ambaye aliw eka Certificate ya kusema  ya kwamba mjengo 
umekamilika na kwa wale ambao wana ulemavu hawawezi kufika pale . Ukiingi a pale, mjengo 
wenyewe  haukuwa umejengwa vizuri na tayari pesa zililipwa. Hata kama ni Serikali iliyopita 
ningeuliza hiyo Kamati ihakikishe y a kwamba wafisadi wameshikwa na hizo pesa zimerejeshwe.  
Na Contractor  ahakikish we amerudishwa pale ili h uo mjengo uweze kukamilika. Kwa Hivyo mimi 
ni kushukuru  Members  kwa mchango wao na nihakishie ya kwamba sisi kama  Kamati 
tutahakikisha ya kwamb a hayo yote yamefanyika.  
Na mwisho Bwana Spika wa Mda, Kamati  ya Security  ambayo inaongozwa na  Mheshimiwa Duale 
kwa sababu wale Enforcermet Officers  ambao wako pale ndio wanalinda usalama, aende pale 
aone jinsi vidole vinatangulia viatu. Hawana Viatu na ni vibaya kuwa na watu ambao hawajavalia 
vizuri na wao wanatakikana kulinda  usalama . Pia ningependekeza Committee  hiyo ihakikishe ya 
kwamba watu wanahusika na usalama pia wawe na mavazi mazuri, na wasiwe kizuizi cha huo 
usalama. Members  nimeshukuru na asante kwa kuchangia na  mawazo  yenu na yatachukuliwa 
kama i navyotakikana . Asante ni sana Members . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Karanja, tutajuaje hawana viatu ? 
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Temporary Speaker , Mungu ni mzuri kwa sababu Clerk  wetu yuko 
hapa, tuna hizo picha ya huyo Afisa ambaye tuli mpata, ambaye alikuwa na nguo za Lee Kinyanjui  
na viatu amba vyo vimeraruka. Nafikiri next time  tutasambaza hiyo picha ; ni kama ya mtu ambaye 
hatakikan i; unwanted person in Nakuru County . Hiyo iko, it is evidence enough and we will 
forward to the  Committee  ya Duale ione jinsi Security  imedorora na kulemaa.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Thank you Hon. Karanja I now put it into 
question  
(Question  is proposed that this House adopts the Report  of the Committee  on Trade, Tourism, 
Cooperatives, and Planning on the Inspection Tour of Nasha and Wakulima Markets  in Nakuru 
East Sub-County laid on the table of the House on Wednesday 8 th November  2023 during t he 
Morning Sitting .) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned to today at 2.30 pm  
The House rose at 12.30 PM 