COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 2 nd  May 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03: 45  PM  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
BILL  
Second Reading  
THE NAKURU COUNTY SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION (NO.2) BILL OF 2023  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  There is a  Bill that was committed to the Committee  on Budget 
and Appropriation s  in the morning .  The  First Reading was done so the honorable Chairperson  to 
proceed with the Second Reading.  
Hon . Alex Mbugua:  Thank you Hono u rable Speaker , the Nakuru County Supplementary 
Appropriation s  (No.2) Bill o f 2023  be now  R ead  a S econd T ime.  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  A Member to second for the record.  
Hon . Ali Abdi: Thank you Honorable Speaker , I second.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  I move that the Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation s  
(No.2) Bill of 2023  be now Read a S econd T ime. The Chairperson  you need to tell the House  why 
you need the Bil l to be R ead a S econd T ime.  
Hon . Alex Mbugua: Hono u rable Speaker, as a ma tte r of procedure and working on how the 
Government  functions, I think this Bill  is due. This morning we moved in this Assembly , ready 
and geared to ensure that t he Appropriation s  Bill 2022/2023 Budget is appropriated well within 
this Assembly  and it has been passed.  
We cited different things that are affecting us. We said part of the things that are  affecting the 
County Government of Nakuru at the moment include s alaries that have not been paid, we have 
our c asual  s taff  who are still not assured whether they will get their payments at the end of this 
month and without the passage of this Bill  in such a timely manner, we wi ll not have these people 
paid; t his is a crisis .  We  also cited that most of the people who are Contr a ctors within the County 
Government of Nakuru have not been paid.  
At the beginning of the year, we started with wrangles at the County Government of Nakuru where 
we did not have the  Executive functioning well due to the  Court cases concerning the Chief 
Of ficers  (CO s ) and the County Executive Committee Members (CEC s) and that notwithstanding  
the Governo r has moved on very quickly to ensure that there is establishment of various 
functionalities hence a Committee  that checked on the pending bills was formulat ed. At the 
moment we have a tune of Kshs. 1.8 billion in the A ppropriation s  Bill  that will see to it that these 
Members  are well paid in time. Hono u rable Speaker, there are so many other things that need to 
be so rt ed  out and I know the Members  have gone through the Bill . They have gone through when 
we first debated it in the morning and in so doing justice to the people of Nakuru County and this 
Country  will go ahead to its full gear.  
At the moment ,  the  Country is suffering from financial short age, where the Governmen t has not 
relayed money to many people. Some of these people who have pending bills within the County 
Government of Nakuru face difficulties accessing money through banks, payment of  school fees 
to their kids and  so on. We also have  different A gents who have not been paid  and  with the passage 
of this Bill  all this will be sorted out. I know Member s have also have changed what they wanted 
to do within their W ards for those who wanted to do the changes. In so doing, we will ensure that  
Nakuru County is among the first  Counties to function very well in this period of D evolution. 
Thank you  Hono u rable Speaker .  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  Thank you ;  any other Member  who want to put across their 
contributions? Hono u rable Members I am going to put to question that the Nakuru County 
Supplementary Bill (No.2) of  2023 be now R ead a S econd T ime  
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Then)  
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
(Order for Committee read)  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) left the chair]  
IN THE COMMITTEE  
[The Chair perso n (Hon. William Mutai) took the  Chair ]  
The Chairperson (Hon. William Mutai):  Hono u rable Members we are now in the Committee of 
the Whole House and after reading the second proposal we are going straight to the Clauses  as 
stipulated and we shall be guided by the Standing Order Number 126 . In considering a  Bill in a 
Committe e the various parts therefore shall be considered in the following Sequence , Clauses as 
printed excluding the Clauses  provided for the c itation of the  Bill , the Commencement if any and 
the Interpretation , New Clauses, Schedules, New Schedules, Interpretation, Preambl e if any, Long 
Title, the Clauses provided for the c itation of t he  Bill and the Commencements.  Therefore,  le t us 
get into Clause s  without amendments.  
Clause 2  
(Question that Clause 2 be part of the Bill  put and agreed to)  
Clause 3  
(Question that Clause 3 as be part of the  Bill put and agreed to)  
Hon . Njuguna Mwaura:  P erhaps C hair I think it will be prudent to be taken through the 
amendments or there are no amendments?  
The Chairperson (Hon. William Mutai):  H onorable Njuguna  please there are no amendments. 
Once again since there are no amendments let me just go straight to the Clauses.  
 
Clause 4  
(Question that Clause 4 be part of the Bill  put and agreed to)  
First schedule  
(Questioned that the First Schedule be part of the Bil l  put and agreed to)  
Long Title  
(Question that the Long Title be part of the Bill  put and agreed to)  
Clause 1  
(Question that Claus e 1 be part of the Bil l put and agreed to)  
The Chairperson ( Hon . William Mutai ):  Honorable Members we are now through and I will call 
upon the mover to move the Motion  of the Nakuru County Appropriation Bill (No.2) of  2023.  
Hon . Alex Mbugu:  Honorable Chairperson I beg to move that the Committee  do r eport to the 
Assembly  its consideration of the Nakuru C ounty Supplementary Appropriation Bill (No.2) of 
2023 and its Approva l therefore without  Amendments  
The C hairperson (Hon. William Mutai):  I will now put the question that the Committee  do R eport 
to the House  its consideration  that the Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Bill (No.3) 
of 2023 and its approva l therefore without amendments .  
 ( Question put and agreed to )  
 
The Committee of the Whole House was adjourned  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) in the Chair  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Chairperson?  
Hon. William Mutai: Mr. Speaker sir, I beg to Report that the Committee of the Whole has 
considered the Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation No. 2 Bill of 2023 and its approval 
thereof without amendment . Thank you.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Mr. Speaker sir, I beg to move that the House do agree with the Committee 
on the said Report. I ask Hon. Karanja to second.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I second.  
( Question proposed that the House do agree  with the Committee in the said R eport ) .  
( Question put and agreed to ) .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mover  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I beg to move that the Nakuru County 
Supplementary Appropriation Bill number 2 Bill of 2023 be now Rea d a Third Time. I ask Hon. 
Macharia from Rhonda Ward to second.  
Hon. John Macharia: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to second.  
( Question proposed that the Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriations Bill number 2 of 
2023 be now R ead a Third T ime ) .  
( Question put and agreed to ) .  
The Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriations number 2 of 2023, a Bill of  an Act of the 
County Assembly of Nakuru to authori s e the issue of money out of the C onsolidated F und and its 
applications towards the service of the yea r ending on 30 th  June, 2023 and appropriate those sums 
and sums vote on account by the County Assembly for certain public services and purposes.  
Third R eading.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Bill will be taken to Her Excellency the 
Governor  for assent.  
MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Motion by the Leader of Majority. In his absence, the 
Minority Whip.  
The Minority Whip (Hon. Virginia Gichanga):  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. The Deputy Majority 
Whip has just entered. As per the rules of this House, she should move the Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Hon. Njuguna?  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Is shower cape allow ed in this House?  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Serem.  
Hon. Leah Serem: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I had just arrived and I have not gone through the 
Motion of today. I am sorry.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Point of order Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speak er (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Hon. Karanja.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): You see, you are putting the Minority Whip in a very precarious 
situation. She is going to stand there and then …  
Hon. Stanley  Karanja: Mr. Speaker sir that is why I was seeking for your indulgence.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Minority Whip, kindly allow the order from Hon. Karanja.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Mr. Speaker sir, I am somehow mesmerised. When a whole Party which 
is the Majority, with Members sited and a whole official of the Party claims that she has even no 
idea of the Motion and then gives the honour to the Minority to continue with the work of the 
Majority. We feel somehow let down and maybe what we …  
The  Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Karanja, Those are issues of the Party. That 
question should have been addressed before the commencement of this sitting.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Mr. Speaker sir that is why we want to lead others than giving our power s 
to a Minority. We better do it.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Minority Whip, proceed.  
Hon. Leah Serem: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I am now ready.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): You are overtaken by events. The Honourable Minority Whip, 
proceed.  
H on. Virginia Gichanga: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I move the Motion that pursuant to the 
provisions of the Standing Order 31 (4), this House resolves to alter its calendar on the adjournment 
date set for 3 rd  May, 2023 and further pursuant to the provisions  of Standing Order 31 (3), adjourns 
from today, 2 nd  May, 2023 and resumes on 6 th  June, 2023 in accordance with the Assembly 
Calendar.  
It is in order for the Assembly to adjourn its Sittings or alter the Calendar if something of Members’ 
or County Importan ce arises; like tomorrow the attendance of all the Members of this House. Also, 
it is high time that we adjourned, go back to the ground for one month so that we can supervise 
the ongoing projects which we believe by next week, contractors will be on the g round.  
I wish to move this Motion that we adjourn as from today up to 6 th  of June, according to the 
Assembly Calendar. I would like to ask Mheshimiwa Leah Serem who is the Deputy Majority 
Whip to support because she did not understand what was happening. I believe now she has 
understood what is happening.  
Also, I think sometimes we should allow a Member, and it is a wakeup call for the Majority Party 
to take your responsibility seriously. Otherwise, the Minority will take over. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon.  Joel Karuri): Hon. Minority Leader, the opportunity was to move the Motion, 
not to tell the Majority Party what to do. Proceed, Hon. Serem.  
Hon. Leah Serem: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I second that this House resolves to adjourn as 
from 3 rd  May, 2023.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Motion is seconded.  
The Motion is that pursuant to provisions of Standing Order 31 (4), this House resolves to alter its 
Calendar on the adjournment date set for 3 rd  May, 2023 and further, pursuant to provisio ns of 
Standing Order 31 (3) adjourn from today, 2 nd  May, 2023 and resumes on 6 th  June, 2023 in 
accordance with the Assembly Calendar.  
The Motion is open for Debate.  
Mheshimiwa from Murindat.  
Hon. Peter Njoroge: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. The break that has  been presented by the 
adjournment is quite necessary. Actually, I would want to say it is very necessary because one of 
the key roles of elected Members and also nominated is to maintain a close contact with the 
electorate. Therefore, we believe we have a n opportunity to go back to Mashinani  to listen to the 
grievances of the ordinary Mwananch i and their problems so that once we resume, our decisions 
here will have been informed by whatever we will have gathered from the common Mwananchi 
during this break.   
Therefore, I support the adjournment.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Honorable Member for Malewa West.  
Hon. Francis Kuria: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support, noting t hat we are facing heavy 
rains  within our areas. We have many disasters that are rising here and there and also it is good to 
interact with our electorates. I therefore find it necessary to be given time to go and still do the 
work that members elected us to do.  
I therefore second.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Ho n. Member for Shabaab Ward.  
Hon. David Wathiai: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion that we go for 
recess. It will give some of us time to go back “to do some reading” because some of the Senior 
Members in this House like Hon. Karanja have been bullying us.  
When we come back to this House, we are going to be well informed and ready to continue 
working for the great people of Nakuru.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Karanja, you have been mentioned. Have you been 
bullying Memb ers?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Mr. Speaker sir, I am wondering because the Member has just confirmed 
that he is going to read so that he should not be bullied. I have not bullied anybody.  
Mr. Speaker it is good when Members get some little bit of education to know how the House rules 
and regulations are but sometimes it takes time. I think we are in the sixth month. The Member 
should have known some of these things and we are not bullying h im. We also do know that if you 
are a slow learner we also concur that we teach you something. The cognitive ability of an 
individual is the prowess of the House and we are happy that he has confided to this House that he 
is coming on and welcome. He shoul d go to a good school and Hon. Peter Maina should tell him 
the type of school that he should go to because he is our Chair so that he will not go to the gutter 
type of schools.  
( Laughter )  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri ): The Hon. Member for Bahati then the Hon. Wanjiku.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I also wish to support this Motion of adjournment 
because as much as we want to interact with our electorate, it is also high time we be with our 
families and ch ildren just before they open schools next week. We need to sit with them, mentor 
them, talk to them and give them advice so that when they go back to school they would have had 
time with their parents. You know it has been hectic, we have been here and jus t the other day our 
children closed school, now they are ready to go back to school next week yet we have not had 
time with them. We should give priority to our families as much as we love our electorate. Thank 
you.  
 Hon. Mary Wanjiku:  I support this Motio n so that we can go back to the ground and mentor. 
For us nominated Members we do mentor some students so it is going to be a very good time for 
us to do that before they go back to school as well. The rains have done a lot of mess and the 
elected Members need to go back to the ground and at least work hand in hand with the electorate. 
Thank you. We have candidates upstairs I wish to welcome them.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you for that. The Hon. Member for Soin and then the 
Hon. Member for Kapku res.  
 Hon. Degaulle Naburuki : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I stand to support the Motion that this 
adjournment has come at the right time so that we go for this recess because we have contractors 
on ground and we need to play our role of oversight for the projec ts that are going on and make 
sure that the projects are done before the end of this Financial Year 2022 -  2023. The other thing is 
we have a lot of rains, Members could go plant more trees once the schools are open in their various 
Wards. Thank you.  
The Sp eaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Kapkures. Then I cross over to this other 
side.  
Hon. Robert Rutto : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the Motion. This will give us good 
time to be in contact with our electorate. As you know one of our r oles as the MCAs is to oversight 
over the projects done in our Wards so I rise to support it because it will give us that time to 
oversight over the projects. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Subukia. Then the Hon. Member for 
Lakeview.  
Hon. Isabella Makori : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the Motion. First of all let me 
take this opportunity to welcome my daughters who have come to see what we usually do here. 
Feel that you are in a good place. Before I go serve Subuki a people, as a mother my role is to stay 
with my kids before they go back to school. At least I will have some few days to stay with them, 
mentor them and counsel them because after my tenure I will just go stay with my family. The 
adjournment is timely an d thank you for giving me this chance.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I also would want to wish the candidates in the room 
well, considering that their mother is a very hard working lady and the society deserves better 
when it comes to people who  really mentor their kids and move with them. I rise to support this 
Motion because as many have said, part of the role of these Members is to integrate, to be people 
who can be holistic in the society. We have had incidences within this Country whereby th ere is 
no touch between Mwananchi and the leadership.  
For instance, when you go to the Coastal Region today there is a massacre that is happening there. 
We live in the same planet, the same Country the same region and hence it is good for the Members 
to b e vigilant in their own Wards over such things. I say so because most of the Members here are 
enlightened but it is sickening to see a Country where we can go dig out more than 100 people 
who have died in the name of religion. These are some of the things that we should address and as 
Nakuru County we are not exceptional, so Members should be having their eyes on the same. 
Organise community Barazas  and now the break that the Assembly has given us, we will see it 
through. It is also troubling that at the mo ment the Country and more so this region of ours, we are 
fighting alcoholism of the highest degree. Today we have information that the deputy president 
will be holding a caucus between the Members of county assembly within the larger Central 
Province happe ning in Naivasha at the moment. It is alarming that these are the things that are 
troubling our nation at the moment. This break is very well deserved by these Members, as much 
we shall follow up on projects a holistic approach while integrating with the M wananchi at the 
ground is very important. I support this Motion thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Doreen then the Hon from Naivasha East to close.  
Hon. Doreen Korir : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I also rise to support the Motion on 
adjournment for one month. It is very healthy to adjourn so as to allow Members, with the heavy 
down pour of rains you realize that we need to sensitize our farmers on food production in line 
with the National Government agenda. We allow these Members to also go oversight the issuance 
of fertilizer which is very important, the issue of planting trees, food production and also to 
discourage them on the issue of maandamano and encourage f ood production. Thank you.  
( Laughter )  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it the Hon. Okumu?  
Hon. Keziah Okumu : I stand to support the adjournment of the House but I also would like to tell 
my fellow MCA Hon. Doreen that as well as she is going to prep are for planting trees and tilling 
land, she should remind her people that Maandamano  will also continue as time goes so that we 
can reduce the cost of living for our people. Thank you.  
Hon. Doreen Korir : Mr. Speaker we need to discourage our people from M aandamano.  With 
Maandamano  we cannot even produce food for the future.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! If you need to discuss about Maandamano  then you need 
to bring a Motion here. The Hon. Karanja.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Thank you Mr. Speaker first for protecting the House.  You know Hon.  
Okumu came in a shower which was part of Maandamano  but that is well taken care of. Let me 
first of all start by congratulating you and your office for allowing us to move the calendar forward. 
That will not go unn oticed and we say thank you.  
Secondly, I will also like to take this opportunity to say thank you to Hon. Isabella for bringing the 
kids to this House and more so for sitting next to Hon. Nene who wanted to speak. You will also 
give him that chance becaus e they are neighbours. The issue of being a good mother and Hon. 
Nene being a good father is very good for the House. Therefore we congratulate them for that.  
Thirdly, which is more important and crucial is that this session starting tomorrow will be very  
instrumental for these Members and I know because the Hon. Minority has come, it is good for us 
when Members congregate and learn from different quarters; it encourages, it gives hope and as 
they say it is not always good to learn through your own book. S ometimes tunasema heri usome 
na kitabu cha mwenzio kuliko us o me na chako.   
Therefore I will also encourage Members that tomorrow we will be having an MCA Forum 
Nationwide and it is good for them to attend because it is the one that will shape lives and Mr.  
Speaker I do thank you for that. Lastly, Members of this County and this one is very crucial; we 
have been having some cases and examples of Hon. Members who are here in this House but are 
not living well. They are living a miserable life. It is good that  sometimes when we go out we try 
and see that it is not only good that you go for Wanjiku and the rest, it is also good for Members 
to take this time and do something else extra. Do a side hustle. It is important for Members to do 
that side hustle for tomo rrow. Before I welcome Hon. Wanjohi who in that morning had not shaved 
but now he is clean. He looked older in the morning but he now looks younger seated close to 
“ Madam Maandamano.”  So…  
( Laughter )  
The Speaker  (Hon.Joel Karuri): Hon. Karanja  you are diverting this House to some other theatrics. 
Honourable Member for Elburgon what is it?  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Mr. Speaker, Hon. Member Karanja  should withdraw that Statement. 
There is no Member in this House that carries the name Maandamano. And Mr. Speaker, these 
Members want to introduce a debate on top of another debate that does not exist and also the 
Members should be cognisant that when th ey introduce new names, we are going to be creating 
jokes in this House. Therefore, let us stick to the official names that the Members usually go by 
when we took our Oath of Office. If we start calling people names, we are going to be out of order 
and thi s House will no longer be a House of order and it will be chaotic like a market place.  
( Applause )  
Hon. Ali Abdi:  Mheshimiwa Speaker before…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Allow Hon. Is it on the same topic?  
Hon .  Ali Abdi:  Mheshimiwa Speaker you know in this House, Hon Karanja is a very Senior 
Member and also sometimes he talks too much and I usually ask him on things that happen in this 
House. He has mentioned that I do not know what is the relationship between Nene and the kids? 
I do  not know whether Nene is the father, Isabella is the mother?  
( Laughter )  
So, can he clarify what he meant when he brought Nene’s name inside and Hon. Nene was not a 
subject of discussion in this House. He should clarify and tell us because we have kids her e and 
also the candidates.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Speaker I was just saying that Nene is a good model that was what I 
meant.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member from Shaabab allow Hon. Karanja  to respond and 
close his case.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Mr. Speaker I never knew that Hon. Nene was in. You know Hon. Nene 
is the only MCA student in the university. That is true because he is here, that is why we are saying 
that it is good that Hon. Isabell a has brought the kids to this House and for them to know that they 
can also be Members of this House where they are also students. It is a motivating factor and 
instrumental and fundamental.  
( Laughter )  
It is really encouraging it is a morale boosting.  
( La ughter )  
So Mr. Speaker sir when I was talking, I was trying to explain that a revolutionary mind is made 
from the House and Hon. Nene is such a good example; he is not in the Machiavelli Principle of 
Destruction and that is why we are saying that when Hon.  Isabella brought the kids, that is where 
I mentioned the Hon. Nene and not any other because he is the only Member of this House and the 
youngest and still a student and more so doing teaching as a profession. Therefore Hon. Duale I 
was just juxtaposing.  
( Laughter )  
Educational acumen and the rules of this House, I never thought about anything else. Mr. Speaker 
I want to say to Hon. Njuguna thank you; we were not trivialising and we are not dealing with 
verbosity.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Mr. Speaker you direct ed him to respond to the House and not to me. 
Therefore, as a Senior Member as many are saying, he ought to have actually known better that he 
is responding to the House not to individual Members. Therefore, he stands to be guided so that 
he can also guide  the House because he claims he is the senior most.  
On the same issue, Hon Karanja is misleading this House. I am also a student pursuing a degree 
not PhD and we have Saint Paul’s University where Hon. Nene is my colleague at the University 
and we have so many Members who are currently in school pursuing different degrees, PHD and 
Masters Courses. Hon. Karanja should apologise for misleading the House.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : I never knew he is a student; I thought he is a father.  
( Laughter )  
The Hon. Member, the Hon. Member for Shabaab and later Hon. Nene will have time to contribute  
Hon. David Wathiai :  Mr. Speaker as I had earlier said that Hon. Karanja is a bully, you have seen 
what he has done. Actually, he has even started bullying instead of actin g as a Senior Member.  
Hon. Robert Rutto:  Hon. Wathiai this is a House of rules and regulations. It is not honorable to 
call a Member a bully nobody has been bullied in this honorable House. Hon. Wathiai should 
apologise and withdraw.  
( Laughter )  
Calling o ur Senior, a bully.  
Hon. David Wathiai :  He is the one to apologise; it should be Hon. Karanja  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Wathiai, kindly retract your word and apologise.  
I withdraw my statement .   
( Laughter )  
But Mr. Speaker Hon. Karanja should do the same because he is the one on the other side of this 
story.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Shabaab you have to be specific on which 
areas he needs to apologise because specifically the Hon. Me mber for Kapkures was able to point 
out what you have called a Member, a name which he is not and this is a House of Honourable 
Members and not any other name.  
Hon. David Wathiai :  Mr. Speaker I wanted him to apologise for calling Hon. Keziah, Madam 
Maandam ano .  
( Laughter )  
And again, even talking to the Senior Member from Elburgon, it seems like it is him who was in 
the last House more than Hon. Njuguna Mwaura. Maybe he has no experience on whatever he is 
doing in this House but I would like to request him to  apologise to Madam Keziah so that we can 
proceed for recess.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Elementaita. Hon. Nene  
Hon. George Nene : Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I was just informed 
when I was outside that H on. Member from Naivasha was discussing me .  
( Laughter )  
And therefore, I decided to come in and…  
( Laughter )  
But the kind of information that Hon. Karanja  has said is not the same information I have been 
told outside there .  
( Laughter )  
So, Mr. Speaker I am asking for your protection and I want Hon. Karanja to withdraw and 
apologise .  
( Laughter )  
Because I have been informed about what he said while I was not i n this House. I am asking for 
your protection .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member from Elementaita, you can only believe and trust 
what you have heard.  
( Laughter )  
Hon David Wathiai : Mr. Speaker you are protecting Hon. Karanja  
( Laughter )  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Wathiai have your seat. Hon. Nene the Member for 
Elementaita we are not able to discuss what was said outside this House and so what you have 
heard, it is what he has said but now because we are not able or maybe another Me mber would 
have arisen, the Hon. Hassan wanted that clarification. The clarification that has been given is 
essentially what he has said. Hon. Members we are through with the discussion and it looks like 
the Motion about the adjournment is over and so I wa nt to proceed to propose a question.  
( That pursuant to the provision of the Standing Order 31 ( iv )  this House resolves to alter its 
calendar on the adjournment date set for 3 rd  May, 2023 and further pursuant to the provision of 
Standing Order 31 ( iii )  adjo urns from today 2 nd  May, 2023 and resumes on 6 th  June, 2023 in 
accordance with the Assembly Calendar ) .  
( Question put and agreed to )  
ADJOURNMENT  
So Hon ourable  Members this House stands adjourned to 6 th  June 2023 at 9.30 am.  
The House rose at  4.45pm  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 