OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday, 19ST October 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3: 15pm 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
MEMBERSHIP OF THE BUDGET AND APPROPRIATION COMMITTEE  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Members, there is a ruling that I want to make. Honorable 
Members, yesterday you raised a number of concerns regarding the application of Constitution  in 
Our Standing Order s in considering Members  to the Committe e on Budget and Appropriation . 
You urged the Chairperso n to inter alia  
1. Make a ruling on whether in constituting a key Committee of this House, the Standing 
Orders were offended  
2. Make a ruling that the key Committee , Budget and Appropriation is sui generis  and 
therefore special attention must be granted while constituting its membership  
3. Clarify if the Constitutional provisions und er the bills of rights Chapter 4 , were offended  
4. Determine if the findings by the High Court in the Petition Number 1 of 2019 apply in 
the circumstances  
5. Make a finding if the capping of membership to the Budget  and Appropriation 
Committee by the Standing Orders is proper in light of the provisions of Chapter 4 of the 
Constitutio n and the finding s of the  High Court  
Honorable Members , I have with skill and care  to address my mind to the above weighty matters 
and therefore it is incumbent upon the  Speaker to render appropriate directions. I hasten to add 
the matters can vast on the floor of the House  were c orrectly referred to the Chair  for 
consideration  and adju dication. The findings of the Chai r must  be reasonable and within the 
realm of our Laws, Standing Orders, Practice, Norms and Precedents.  
The Chair , who is the  Speaker, is by virtue of Standing Order Number 1, empowered  to provide 
both policy and administrative directions on matters that have not conclusively been covered by 
the Standing Orders.  In this case therefore, falls within the matters contemplated by Standing 
Order Number 1. As a consequence of the aforementioned, I now wish to del ve into the issues 
you have raised.  
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 My reading of the Standing Orders particularly Standing Order Number 154 and 155 and the 
provisions of the bills of rights, I entertain no doubt  that in constituting any Committe e of the 
Assembly, membership must take into account gender representation, the political parties in the 
House, representation of the marginalized and independent Members.  
This cardinal rule is even more prominent when con sidering membership to the Budget and 
Appropriation Committee . This Committe e occupies a hallowed position in the Assembly and 
the reasons are not hard to desire. The mandate of the Committee  unlike other Committees  of 
this House emanates from the prov isions of Chapter 12 on the Public Finance on  the 
Constitution , Part 4 of the Public Finance Management Act of 2012 and the County Government 
Act 2012.  
The Committee, in a single word is sui generis  and therefore its membership must at all times be 
inclusive. This statement found judicial clothing in the High Court Petition Number 1  of 2019  in 
the matter of National Commission on Gender Equality Vs County Assembly of Nakuru. I need 
not to belabor furt her on the matter. Honorable Members, before delivering my final verdict on 
the matter at hand, let me draw your attention to provisions of Article 174 of the Constitutio n 
that deals with the objects of devolution.  
The Article  succinctly calls for the protection and promotion of interest, rights of the Minoritie s 
and the Marginalized. Our Standing Orders have echoed this constitutional provision. Honorable 
Members , upon the strictures imposed by the Constitutio n, Our Statutes , and the Assembly 
Standing Orders.  
I now wish to mak e the following determinations -  
a) In constituting the  Budget and Appropriation Committee , key considerations regarding 
gender, the marginalized, special groups like the nominated members and independent 
mem bers in the House were not take into account  
b) The dictates of the Constitution and the findings in High Court Petition Number 1 of 
2019 were not seriously considered  
c) The membership of the  Committee on Budge t and Appropriatio n must forthwi th 
incorporate the  
1. Marginalized  
2. Nominated Members taking into account gender representation   
3. Members  elected on Independent Ticket  
4. Principle of fairness in considering representation of Member s from Political 
Parties  
d) The provisions of Standing Order 182 and 189 (2)  of the Assembly Standing Orders is an 
affront of the Constitutio n since it limits the application of principles governing the 
constituting of the Committees, the capping of membership to the Committee is therefore 
rendered no t significant  
This point is even of greater importance bearing in mind that the Budge t and Appropriation 
Committee can be either  a departmental or a Select Committee. Membership to a Departmental 
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Committee cannot be limited and this is for a good reason. The  absence of membership capping 
allows Departmental Committees  the room to accommodate diverse representations and 
interest s. Accordingly, I hold the view that the  Budget and Appropriation Committee must b e 
allowed a similar latitude.  
In view of the above, it is hereby directed as follows - 
1. That the membership to the Committee  on Budget and Appropriation shall in line with 
practice and norms, relating to Departmental Committees be adjusted to twenty three (2 3) 
Member s 
2. That in view of the provisions of Standing Order number 1, latitude granted to the 
Speaker  per customs and practices and the guiding principles relating to fairness, equity ; 
the following Member s of the Assembly shall be deemed members  of the Committe e on 
Budget  and Appropriation.  
1. Hon. Hassan Ali Abdi  
2. Hon. Peter Palang’a  Mayonge  
3. Hon. Peter Njug una Mwaura  
4. Hon. Mary Wanjiku  Njoroge  
5. Hon. Virginia Wamaitha Gichanga  
6. Hon. Leah Wambui Nganga  
7. Hon. Fadhili Msuri  
8. Hon. Doreen Totona  
Honorable Members, for clarity and avoidance of doubt, membership to this  Committee on 
Budget  and Appropriatio n shall in addition to the  Members mention herein be as tabled on 18TH 
September  2022. This is by order of the  Speaker of the County Assembly of Nakuru Honorable 
Joel Karuri Maina . Next order . 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
HOUSE DEBATES THE NOMINATION OF MAJORITY AND MINORITY REPRESENTATIVES TO  
THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY SERVICE BOARD (CASB ) 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): We have  a Procedural Motion from the Leader of Majority 
Party  
Majority Leader (Hon. Alex Langat ): Thank you Honorable Speaker , I rise to move a 
Procedural Motion ; 
THAT , notwithstanding the provision of Standing Order 49 (Notices of Motion ); this House  
resolves to debate a  Motion on the nomination of the Majority and Minority party representatives 
to the County Assembly Service Board. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you, a Membe r to second.  
Hon. Cyrus Dida Ndegwa:  I rise to second the Motion . 
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  There is a Procedural Motion that notwithstanding the 
provision of Standing Order 49 (Notice s of Motion ); this House  resolves to debate a  Motion on 
the nomination of the Majority and Minority Party representatives to the County Assembly 
Service Board, so the  Motion is open for debate. I request the Members that we confine 
ourselves within  Standing Order number  eight for the Procedural Motion.  
(Questions proposed)  
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
MOTION  
HOUSE APPROVES THE NOMINATION OF CYRUS DIDA TO REPRESENT UDA  IN  
THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY SERVICE BOARD (CASB)  
The Majority Leader  (Hon Alex  Langat):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir. Again, I raise to move 
the Motion that pursuant to the provision of section 12 (3) (c ),  of the County Government Act, 
which is number 17 of 2012 , this House approves the nomination of honorable Cyrus Dida to 
represent the United Democratic Alliance (UDA) at the County Assembly Service Board. Thank 
you,  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you, the ML, a member to second.  
Hon…Mr. Speaker, I rise to second.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you. Now, the Motion is that pursuant to the provisions 
of section (3) (c ),  of the coun ty government act number 17 of 2012. This house approves the 
nomination of honorable Cyrus Dida Ndegwa to represent the United Democratic Alliance to the 
county assembly Service Board? The Motion is open for debate  
The Majority Whip (Hon. Fadhili Msuri):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker Sir, as you have correctly 
opened the motion for debate and seeing that the House is silent. I can only move so that you put 
the question . Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank Honorable Majority Whip. What is it Hon. Mach aria? 
Hon. John Gachiri:   I want to oppose the Motion Mr. Speaker according to a Standing Order in 
our prayers, this is what it says in the second paragraph ; -Let your blessing descend upon us here 
assembled and grant that we treat and consider all matters that shall come under our deliberation 
in so just and faithful, a manner to promote honor and glory.  
 Mr. Speaker, as we have seen that the name that is on th e Motion. And as we have said in this 
House, we need where we shall be able to consider all matters. I have an interest to the post of the 
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 board. It is my wish and the wish of these members of this House that we should do the election 
as just the way it sa ys in the county Government Act section 12.  
Sorry.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): And that part again?  
Hon. John Gachiri:  County Government Act, Section 12. That says and states that the members 
of the County Assembly shall do the election, from the Minority party and from the Majority party 
and present the names to the County Assembly because these seats represent the members of this 
House and it will be unjust. I do not know how this was done. I respect the party. And even my 
veins and my blood and the cells for UDA  and if it is so, then we need to train this manner and to 
treat this thing in honor and glory as it is stated in our prayer.  
 So I pray that this House, we may adjourn this Motion, or we consider this Motion for another 
time, so that we can b e able to sit as a UDA  party. I do not know … I respect the member who is 
in the Motion, but it is good to treat all manner as we have stated in our prayer  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Order, Hon. Fadhili  
The Majority Whip (Hon. Fadhili Msuri): Hon. Speaker, with all due respect to the Honourable 
member, and the way he is passionately pleading the case. I would wish through you, Mr. Speaker, 
the member to state if he has any interest within the same position. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you honorable Majority Whip. Hon Macharia it has come 
out clearly that you are stating your case passionately. Do you have any interest?  
Hon. John Gachiri:  I think the honourable member was not listening to me. I said I have an 
interest. And I have a right  even in the  Standing Order 89 states that if a member has an interest… 
Yeah, so I have a right in this house even to as he stated that I have that passion. It is true. And it 
is okay to deliberate. What I have just sa id, if I have an interest, I have a right to say. So I wish 
that this House do the right  thing  as it stated in our prayers. Thank you Mr Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Mheshimiwa from viwandani  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For this  chance. I want first of all to congratulate 
all members that have been elected. As you know, we have just come from elections. And we have 
gotten a very hard tie. So I do not think there is anybody here who is exceptional in seeking for 
votes.  
And I want  to acknowledge everyone here, who has just come from elections the other month. So, 
Mr. Speaker, it is not hard for any member in this house to ask for votes either to get the votes or 
not.  
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 So, I also seek your indulgence that we as the Majority party co alition , you also give us some 
times on this matter, because we want to continue and to work in harmony as we move forward. 
we would not like to bar anyone from gaining or getting whatever he or she is interested in. So Mr. 
Speaker I rise to oppose also a nd to seek whether we can adjourn  for a later date and I ask our 
Majority party leader to call us for a Kamukunji, Then we can come up with the name to represent 
the Majority party in the Service board, you see when we adjorned the first sitting the honour able 
whip who called us for a Kamukunji and we agreed on how to go…  
The Majority Whip (Hon. Fadhili Msuri):  Point of order!  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  what is it Hon Fadhili?  
The Majority Whip (Hon. Fadhili Msuri):  is the Member allowed to tell the House about some 
of the internal things we do between me and him  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  so are you  confirming that there was no Kamukunji or it was 
there?  
                                                                              (Laughter)  
 of course there was a Kamukunji  
                                                                       (Laughter)  
Mheshimiwa Mwangi proceed. So that you finish your submissions.  
Hon. Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Yeah, so if Mr. Speaker the whip has conf irmed before the House 
there was a Kamukunji, he is at liberty to call us for the same again and I am sure all members will 
come here smiling . So, I wish to seek your guidance whether we can revisit this matter on a later 
date. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon . Joel Karuri):  thank you so much Hon. Karanja!  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:   Mr. Speaker, you know when honorable Muraya was talking and I would 
imagine bedroom matters being brought to the table room. It is true what he is saying, when we 
went to our meeting, a nd we subjected some of us to voting, he was unable to garner enough votes.  
so immediately he did not require voters. When we went out to the whole committee, he cost the 
coup and he is now a vice chair. So whenever he  is talking about election, Mr. Speak er, I was just 
informing you that the person in the name of honorable Muraya is really, well first of all he was 
crying but now he is smiling. That is where the term terminologies smiling is coming at that level. 
But all the same Mr. Speaker I was just inf orming you that he is in order. And maybe the motion 
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 is in order in terms of whatever they have said. And I think it is always good that just ice to be done 
to everybody.  
The other information is that the person who is now the Bishop and you know when a bi shop cries, 
all these other people, all these honorable members you can bear with them, but now this is a 
bishop in charge of a parish we better take care that he should not put us before God, it is not good. 
when you see the eyes of a bishop crying, maybe  the majority and the whip. This is a man of God 
crying to you. So as the House Mr. Speaker, I do exonerate myself from any curse that the bishop 
may pour upon the House. So anyway, Mr. Speaker, I also urge you to wash your hands.  
                                                        (Laughter)  
Because if we do not do that, Mr. Speaker we do not know what this man of God may tell God.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Order Hon. Karanja. Hon. Karanja You want to propose that bad 
things may happen to this House, that is not part of our Standing Orders. And these House is 
blessed…  nothing will happen.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I was mesmerized when I heard a man of God 
crying. I was asking if the people of the earth hear the intermedia ry of God speaking.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Yes Hon. Macharia.  
Hon. John Gachiri : (On A point of information) Thank you Mr. Speaker sir , the only thing that 
moves me a lot as I have said is that I have an interest. This portion that is in that prayer. Only that. 
That the deliberation in so just and faithful a manner. Only that. We do the election and whoever 
will take the day, I will appre ciate. My heart is clean and I cannot curse anybody because we are 
told even to bless our enemies. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Mheshimiwa Wanjohi.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir , we have spent the last 15 minutes discussing 
issues of a party and us in the Azimio coalition are getting concerned. This is not our business. 
Our business.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): It is properly before the House. The Motion is properly on the 
Order Paper.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Mr. Speaker sir, we have no problem with that. My concern is that the party 
issue should be solved outside this House. If the UDA team has not fully decided on the person to 
put on the list, then you should give a ruling that they go and give a name later. Oth erwise, we are 
going to spend the next 1 hour. I must say that I am disappointed. This morning, we were supposed 
to go for committee meetings. We spent another 5 hours waiting for them they could be dragging 
us for the next 5 hours until midnight. Therefor e, if you can give a ruling they go and put their 
House in order, we are getting tired of listening.  
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Palang’a and then I will make a ruling.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. It is unfortunate that  we are dragged into matters 
of the party and that ought not to be the situation. What is coming up is that the Majority Party in 
it needs to wash and clean their dirty linen in the House. I want to just to confirm from the whip 
because the laws are very c lear in terms of how they conduct the elections. The whip of the House 
or the party must have communicated to the clerk in writing of the positions in regards to the 
appointment whether the elections were done and the minutes attached to this effect. Kindl y our 
dear friends, save us from this agony; save us from this kind of unnecessary debates. Can you wash 
and clean your dirty issues in your house, if any.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Palang’a, your sentiments are noted. There is a 
prayer b efore I direct how the House will move.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. when a senior Member who yesterday referred 
to himself as a senior co unsel , Hon. Palang’a, deliberately decides to misguide the House is not 
good. If you go to Standi ng Order number 19, the Whip of the largest party in the Assembly shall 
forthwith upon the decision being made under standing order communicate to the Speaker in 
writing the decision together with the minutes of the meeting of only 4 leadership. This one i s not 
his business. If you go to 19, it will tell you the work of the Whip. It is not communicated about 
the board member. The board member is the work of Honorable Members , after they have done 
that, give it to the Majority then it be communicated. It is either election or removal when the 
whips come in. Hon. Member is arrogating and siphoning powers not arrogated to the whips. That 
is why we are saying that it is against the Standing Orders because you see now Hon. Fadhili doing 
what is not right because it was said by the ‘Senior Counsel’ Hon. Palang’a.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! We do not have a senior co unsel . There is a general 
understanding from the listening of the issues that are being raised that there is a prayer that we 
adjourn this Debate so that we allow for more discussion about that but the order before the House 
is that it is a Motion. We cannot ad journ this debate without putting a Motion. I am going to put a 
question about the adjournment of this Debate.  
Question p roposed that  the House adjourns the Motion on the nomination of Hon. Cyrus Dida 
Ndegwa to represent the United Democratic Alliance par ty at the County Assembly Service 
Board.  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): I will give a ruling on that matter as we proceed.  
 
MOTION  
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 HOUSE APPROVES THE NOMINATION OF HON. BERNARD MAINA KARIUKI TO REPRESENT 
AZIMIO  COALITION IN THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY SERVICE BOARD (CASB)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Leader of Minority Party.  
The Leader of Minority (Hon. Philip Wanjohi ): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir , Pursuant to the 
provision of section 12, part C of the County Government Act number 17 of 2012, this House 
approves the nomination of Hon. Bernard  Maina Kariuki Gatuso to represent the Azimio coalition 
at the County Assembly Service Board. Unless my membe rs have changed their mind, that is what 
we agreed on. We took a vote and we agreed that Hon. Bernard  Maina Kariuki Gatuso to represent 
the Azimio Coalition at the Assembly Service Board. I request Hon. Palang’a to second that.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. For us, we have no issue. I think the Majority 
Party can also learn some of these few intelligent issues on how we handle issues. We have 
absolutely no problem in having Hon. Gatuso representing us on the board. For us, we had a 
meetin g when we were in Nairobi and we did a lot of consultation and we said let us allow each 
and every one  of us to try his luck and so we agreed collectively that Hon. Gatuso will represent 
us. I do second.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Mheshimiw a. The Motion is open for Debate.  
Mheshimiwa Njuguna Mwaura.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to congratulate Hon. Gatuso for being 
awarded that opportunity to serve in the board. He is a new Member and I know he is up to the 
task an d he is going to represent not only the Azimio coalition but also the interest of the whole 
house. The moment we took the oath, we ceased to come from different affiliations but we became 
the Members of this Assembly. therefore, I congratulate him and I re quest him to represent the 
welfare and the interest of these Members so that we can be able to progress. I want to tell him the 
kind of opportunity he has been accorded is that of the welfare and he has to have utmost good 
faith when doing so. If you look at these Members the way they are, these Members are anxious, 
they need a lot of support from the board; they need a lot of empowerments so that they can be 
able to conduct their business. Also, I would wish also to say that Hon. Palang’a is so excited 
because Hon. Kajwang’ is not in and therefore he should not be bashing the majority party. I wish 
to support and request Hon. Gatuso to do the best.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Karanja  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I also ta ke this opportunity to thank the 
Minority party but that does not mean that they go chest thumping, wanting to mean that they have 
the cleanest. You know what was happening last regime when Hon. Palang’a was crying foul that 
he has been overthrown by Hon. Kajwang’. It does not mean that we did wrong. It is that we need 
to correct something. The second thing is that a member who has been appointed by these Members 
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 that is why even when political parties do that, it must be brought to the House because that H on. 
Member represents not only that political party but the welfare of the Members. We want to tell 
the members before we congratulate them because it is us who will remove them. They should 
know that when things go wrong, we will not wait for your politic al party to remove you. You are 
now a property of this House. Therefore Hon. Gatuso, today we are here praising you and we will 
do so religiously to remove you when you fail to do what you were mandated to do, …  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it H on. Kanyere?  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere: (On a point of Order)  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. is the Hon. Member 
in order to threaten the other member? Those are threats.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Karanja, would you confine yourself within the 
debate, not necessarily having to seem combative or threats or some sort of. …In your cautioning, 
there is a language that you may need to use as you communicate, not necessarily being combative.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I was not used to sugarcoating but now I will 
try to do so. Hon. Gatuso, we thank you as a House, we wish you all the best. You represent the 
Members not  your own interest but on the interest of the Honorable Members; that your interest 
comes second. The interest of the Honorable Members come first. I would urge Hon. Gatuso not 
to remain mum when things go wrong there … Anytime you remain silent, the Members will talk 
and you should be your brother’s keeper. Therefore, Hon Gatuso  and the speaker as you take them 
for induction, let them know that it is the honorable Members who have sent them. Last time we 
had problems and that should be noted by the others. We took people there, they forgot that it was 
not them who took themselves  there, it was the honorable Members and you know that we were 
in hell, it is only that we are coming back to heaven. Hon Gatuso do not be a boat taking us to hell, 
please take us to heaven because that is where you got us.  
 The speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Hon Peter Njoroge then later Hon Mwangi  
Hon Peter Njoroge : Mr. Speaker allow me to pass my congratulations to Hon Gatuso. Hon Gatuso 
is a real gentleman, he is a very honest man, a person who keeps his word and says what he means 
and means what he says. I find him to be very selfless and also a very dedicated leader. I have no 
doubt whatsoever that he is going to deliver on his mandate in representing the entire House in the 
board not just the Minority. Therefore,  I want to wish you all the best and the peo ple from London 
must be very proud of you. Hongera Mheshimiwa . 
Hon Joseph Mwangi : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to first of all congratulate Hon Gatuso for 
the appointment by the minority party and I also want to remind Hon Palang’a  that it is not that 
they are very super in doing things, it is only that they were few so they did not have much quarrels. 
In agreement we could have agreed on things easily. When you see us fighting it is because the 
food is not enough for every one of us. We are not drugging t he House behind as Hon Wanjohi 
said. 
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon Peter Palang’a : Can you confirm to the House that you said you fight?  
The Speaker  [Hon Joel Karuri]: Point of order Hon Palang’a , you are allocating yourself time. 
You are grossly out of order. Proceed Hon Mwangi wi thout necessarily having to respond to his 
interruptions.  
Hon Joseph Mwangi : Thank you. Many of us here do not know the functions of the service board 
and for sure we needed to be informed of the service board as we were inducted in Nairobi. It is 
not tha t we hate anybody or in quarrel with anyone but what we want is the said just. Honorable 
Gatuso is now an adopted child to this honorable Members. He no longer belongs to the coalition 
of the Minority party;  he is our own child. Whoever will clinch the position of the majority will 
also be adopted even by Hon Njuguna who came here as an independent person. I want to 
congratulate honorable Gatuso in advance. Please make sure you work for us. Since we came here  
you have not said anything … 
                                             (Laughter ) 
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri ): Hon Abdi Hassan and then later Hon John Maritim, in that order.  
Hon Abdi Hassan : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to cong ratulate my friend 
and brother Hon Gatuso from London ward. I am very proud of you as a young person and I am 
sure the interest of the young people is going to be taken care of. Mimi ni mtetezi wa wanyonge  
that is how they call me na Mimi ni mnyonge. About  my party, yes we have washed our dirty linen 
in public as my senior Hon Palang’a  is saying but I am sure it is just a small misunderstanding. 
My party is strong and we are coming back with a bang. We promise you that we are going to sort 
ourselves. Thank  you. 
The speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Hon John Maritim  
 Hon John Maritim : Thank you Mr. Speaker. First I want to congratulate Mr. Gatuso and I believe 
where we are sitted as this is House is Gatuso’s ward. One character of Gatuso is that he is a cool 
man and  I believe he will not change.  What the Minority party has shown today is that, they are 
more organized in a manner than the ruling party. For our dirty linen, we need to use Jick and other 
wash detergents so that we also still move together. I believe also the nominee of Majority party 
should have been given time to express himself.  
 The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri ): order Hon John Maritim. We are debating on the order no. 10.  
Hon Jo hn Maritim : Before I sit, I believe we will learn more from the minority, not all but few 
of them like a ten we learn only three. Thank you very much.  
The speaker (Hon Joel Karuri): Hon John Macharia then later Hon Jane Githuku.  
Hon John Macharia : Thank yo u Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support the nomination of the one 
Bernard Maina Gatuso. We as a party sat down and democratically elected him and we are very 
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 proud of him. I believe that he is equal to the task and he is going to work for the betterment of th e 
entire Assembly of Nakuru. It is my prayer that the Kenya kwanza team will also fast track the 
process so that the two can join hands and work for the betterment of Nakuru County Assembly. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker .  
The speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri): Hon Jane Githuku  
Hon Jane Githuku : Hon . Speaker and Members, I want to thank the Azimio team for the good 
work. Our friend Gatuso, we congratulate you and I believe we are going to work together. We on 
the side of Kenya kwanza I believe we have done a good job and  knowing where we are coming 
from ,we should not actually verify this process that had appointed one of us. I believe during the 
election and all through, some of us were going through thick and thin trying to make sure they 
get a ticket through this party  so, this is just a small issue that the party can handle and even as we 
go out maybe or maybe not we will be able to understand one another. I want to stand here and 
say that the party of Kenya Kwanza has not washed its dirty linen in public, we only brou ght an 
issue that had a small hiccup and we are going to rectify it. I believe that our members  from both 
parties are here to learn from one another. Last time I also said that we are learning very fast. 
Congratulations to the party that has been able to g o through the process but trust me we are coming 
back as one of us has said and this shall go well. Thank you very much.  
The Speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri): Hon Francis then Hon Minority Whip. We are going to provide 
some time for  the nominee. I have heard some  Members say that he has not talked so we will allow 
him time so that he is able to address the House.  
Hon Francis Kuria : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am passing my regards to Hon Gatuso and his 
party. I know he is a leader and he will represent the Whole  House. Secondly allow me to 
congratulate all the elected Members in this House and from now onwards we are all equal. Let us 
put our differences aside. I being elected as the chair for infrastructure, whoever voted for me yes 
or no are all equal.   
The Speake r (Hon Joel Karuri): Hon Francis have your seat. Hon Stanley Karanja.  
Hon Stanley Karanja : Mr. Speaker I would like you to tell whether the Member is in order. Even 
before the names have been read and communicated through the chair that he has been elected , he 
is already showing the world that he is now the chairman of infrastructure even before the chair 
has announced? Is he in order to move out of the Motion of Gatuso and then fill the blank with his 
name ? We will congratulate him when time comes.  
The speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri): Hon Francis have your seat. Proceed Hon Kuria.  
Hon Francis Kuria :  Hon Karanja did not understand my point that I was congratulating Hon 
Gatuso and all the elected Members. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,  
The speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri): H on Minority Whip.  
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Minority Whip (Virginia Wamaitha): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I think it is ok if Hon Francis 
tells the House that he is now the chairman. It is always good to speak for yourself when you see 
nobody has recognized you. It is good to come  out and just say it loud. My issue is to support the 
election of Hon Bernard Gatuso as the Member of the board and somebody has said that he does 
not talk much and that he has never heard him talk but he did talk when he was been sworn in. 
Hon Gatuso you do not talk much but I expect your actions to speak on behalf of the silent you. 
Sometimes we say that whe re the river is silent that is wh ere it is the deepest, so, we expect much 
from you. It is a burden that has been put on your shoulders plus whoever i s coming in as the board 
Member from the United Democratic Alliance party, we expect one now because the board cannot 
run without both Members from the political divide being in place. All the best but know that the 
work ahead of you is the welfare of the seventy -five Members of this County Assembly. Thank 
you. 
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): We now allow Hon Bernard Maina Gatuso to address the House.  
Hon Bernard Gatuso : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for giving me this opportunity. First and 
foremost,  I take th is opportunity to thank God and people of London for according me this 
opportunity to come and represent people of London in this parliament and the entire Nakuru 
County. Secondly, I take this opportunity to thank Members especially those are from my coali tion 
for believing and trusting in me that I am up to task. I commit myself and confirm to the entire 
Membership of this House that I will work very hard and I will commit myself and ascertain them 
that I will be able to deliberate on their issues and to c onsider and work for their welfare in the 
position they have given unto me. The other thing that I want to request from the other party United 
Democratic Party, I believe they…  
The Speaker  [Hon Joel Karuri]: Order Hon Gatuso. Confine yourself with matters concerning 
your appointment.  
Hon Bernard Gatuso : I am still learning on these things but I believe I will catch up as we 
continue going. Mine is to say that whichever responsibility that w e are supposed to handle as 
board members... I believe I will offer and give my all so that we can be able to deliver as a board. 
I believe it has not been easy for MCAs after election and where they are today. I believe we will 
try to hasten and fast trac k all that is required so that we can be able to move the Assembly to the 
level best that we can. For me I believe there is no single individual either in this House has 
monopoly of knowledge; I will have a room to learn from you and also to give all the e xpertise on 
the specialization that I have to the Board and also to the parliament as we continue moving 
forward. So mimi nashukuru sana nasema Mungu awabariki na tutaendelea kufanya kazi kwa 
pamoja . Niko na imani kwamba yale mimi nitapewa nitaweza kutuii miza kusaidiana na wale 
tutafanya kwa  Board. Thank you and God bless you. Still we are learning and we will continue 
improving na mambo itakuwa sawa. Mubarikiwe sana  
                                                                   (Applause ) 
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri) Thank you. I now want to propose the question  
(Question proposed that pursuant to provisions of section 12 C  of the County Government Act 
no. 17 of  29012, this House approves the nomination of Hon. Bernard  Maina Kariuki Gatuso to 
represent the Azimio coalition at the County Assembly Service Board ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
What is it Hon. Karanja?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : I am requesting whether it i s in order we have one of us who was picked, 
may be this one will be the last and we do not want the statement that has come that. Somebody 
came and never talked in the House. I am requesting whether it is in order to give H on. Zipporah 
a chance to say som ething. I am just biting the bullet on her behalf to say something and maybe 
next we will be going to her office and if we did not give her a chance, she may be the one locking 
us outside and we start crying. Can she say something?  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Ka ruri): That is noted Hon. Karanja.  
MOTION  
HOUSE ADJOURNS FROM TODAY 19TH OCTOBER , 2022  TO RESUME ON 8TH NOVEMBER , 2022  IN 
ACCORDANCE WITH THE ASSEMBLY CALENDAR  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang’at): Thank you Mr. Speaker , I want to move a Motion ;  
THAT  pursuant to provision of Standing Order 31 (3) this House adjourns from today the 19th of 
October 2022 and to resume on 8th of November 2022 in accordance with the Assembly calendar. 
This is because of various reasons and other types of training that we are just about to go so that 
we can have time also to scrutinize on other duties now that we have all other committees in place. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Seconder  
Hon. George Nene : Thank you Mr. Speaker I second  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Nene. The Motion is open for debate. Hon. 
Palang’a  
Hon. Peter Palang’a : Mr. Speaker I want Hon. Members to save ourselves some time. We as the 
Assembly adopted t his calendar just yesterday. You may not have forgotten like I have not 
forgotten our calendar and therefore we have also been vigorously involved in campaigns and all 
that. I really urge members that it is we who adopted this calendar and are aligned to i t. I will 
wonder if there will be any other person who will discuss against our own calendar that we have 
adopted in this House. So, Mr. Speaker save us on this because it is very clear that we have adopted 
this and we know what is ahead of us. We are really energetic enough, we have also gotten tired 
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 please I wish to request that you put to a question on this matter so that we move out of this 
Assembly.  
(Applause ) 
Hon Elijah Macharia:  I arise to support our senior member Muga be  
(Laughter ) 
Hon. Elijah Macharia : I withdraw that  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): We do not have a member by that name; so kindly withdraw  
Hon. Elijah Macharia:  Okay I withdraw that. According to the mood of the House that you put 
it to question Mr. Speaker. Thank you  
The S peaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): We put it to Question  
                                                     (Question proposed)  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Hon. Members, two issues that are evident in this sitting. Hon. Zipporah Wambui special elect 
from Molo, Hon. Karanja did put a passionate appeal that you may need time to briefly address 
the House not on any matter but maybe something because you might not have a leeway to 
introduce new debate. Maybe say something and then it will be well so that we do  not risk what 
Hon. Karanja said  
Hon. Zipporah Wambui : Our Hon. Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity to address 
the House. Hon. Members, good evening  
Hon. Members : Good evening to you  
Hon. Zipporah Wambui:  I am a nominated member of this House  from Elburgon Ward Molo 
Sub-County. I would like to thank the almighty God for granting me the opportunity to serve in 
this House and to sit in this House that is a special one being the Third Assembly of this County. 
Mr. Speaker, allow me to thank my party, the UDA,  
(Applause ) 
For nominating me to this House in a bid to bring about gender balance  
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker, just like Dr Martin Luther King Junior said, I have a dream.  
(Applause ) 
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 I foresee a country and Count y where our women and girls shall sit either by being elected or being 
appointed to decision making spaces their gender notwithstanding whereas at the same time we as 
leaders protecting the boy child  
(Applause ) 
So that he doesn’t go to extinction. Thank yo u Mr. Speaker for seeing potential in me and 
appointing me to the Speaker’s panel. I do not take that for granted. I really appreciate. I would 
also want to thank Her Excellency the Governor. Hon. Susan Kihika for nominating  me…  
(Applause ) 
as CECM for Educ ation, Youth and ICT which is a very critical department in this County. Mr. 
Speaker sir and Hon. Members, if appointed, it is my intention to make this County proud and also 
to make this House proud as one of your own  
(Applause ) 
I will do that by actualiz ing your vision and that of our governor, Her Excellency  Susan Kihika in 
the said department. For the short stint I have done in this House. I am calling it a short stint 
because I am hopeful that when my name is presented to this House,  I shall  have the h onor and 
support of all of you  
(Applause ) 
I have studied and known the many problems and challenges faced by MCAs  
(Applause ) 
If and when appointed, I will not let you down, I am going to work hand in hand with you and I 
am going to be of support to the members of this House  
(Applause ) 
If vetted , approved and appointed, I shall cross over to the executive arm of this Government 
honored and privileged to have been a member of the Third Assembly of Nakuru County albeit for 
a short time. Hon. Members, Mr. Speaker sir, I applaud the members of this House for the passion 
and zeal they have shown to work for the people of this County. Service to humanity is service to 
God, so we shall all be blessed by everything and whatever we do for humanity. God bless you al l 
God bless Nakuru. Thank you very much.  
(Applause ) 
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Zipporah Wambui , we wish you the best. I have 
a direction to give that the United Democratic Alliance Party within the Assembly to hold their 
OCTOBER 19, 2022                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 election on the member of the County Assembly Service Board and present the nominee to this 
House on November 8th when the House resumes.  
                                                 ADJOURMENT  
This House stands adjourned until 8Th November 2022 at 9.30 am.  
(The House rose at 3.30pm ) 
 
 
 
 
    