NOVEMBER 9 , 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 9TH November  2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 9.30am  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri)  in the Chair]  
PRAYER  
 
PAPER  
REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENT OF NAKURU RURAL WATER 
AND SANITATION COMPANY LIMITED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2021  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There are Papers to be laid by the Leader of Majority Party , or 
may be the leader of the Minority Party . 
The Leader  of Minority  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi ): Thank you Honorable Speaker , on behalf of the 
Leader of Majority Party who is committed elsewhere and he will be here very soon , I wish to lay 
the following Paper, the Report of the Auditor General on the Financial Statement of Nakuru Rural 
Water and Sanitation Company Limited for the year ended 30TH June 2021.  I lay the Paper.  
                                                (The Report was laid on the table)   
PAPER  
AUDITOR GENERAL REPORT ON THE NAKURU COUNTY BURSARY FUND FOR  
THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2019  
The Leader  of Minority  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi ): Honorable Speaker there is another  Paper, the 
Report of the Auditor General on Nakuru County Bursary Fund for the year ended 30TH June 2019 , 
honorable  Speaker I lay the Paper.  
                                               (The Report was laid on the table)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you the Leader of the Minority Party. The Papers stand 
committed  to the Committee  on Public Accounts and Investment . The Chairperso n and the 
Committee Leadership to note that. Next Order.  
MOTION  
NOVEMBER 9 , 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 HOUSE APPROVES THE NOMINATION OF JOHN MACHARIA TO REPRESENT  UNITED DEMOCRATIC 
ALLIANCE (UDA ) PARTY  AT THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY SERVICE BOARD  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Motion  from the Leader of Majority Party but the 
leader of Minority Party will give it on behalf of the Majority Leader . What  is it honorable Wilson 
Mwangi?  
Hon. Wilson Mwangi: Honorable Speaker sorry for interruption, I  realize that the Microphone  
that the Leader of Majority  and Minorit y Leaders  are using are very low such that they have 
difficulty in reading the Papers. I think it needs to be adjusted, thank you  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Noted, I think proper action will be taken to rectify that.  
Th Leader  of Minority  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi):  Once again, on behalf of the Majority Leader who 
is on the way  and is committed elsewhere because of the affairs of the House . I want to move  a 
Motion ; 
THAT  Pursuan t to the provisions of Section 12(3) (C) of the County Government Act , No. 17 of 
2012 this House approves the nomination of Honorable  John Macharia Gachiri to represent the 
United Democratic Alliance (UDA) at the County Assembly Service Board . Thank Honorable 
Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you, a Membe r to second that  
Hon. Peter Kajwang:  Honorable Speaker I stand to second the Motion, thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you, the Motion  reads  that pursuant to the provisions of 
Section 12(3) (C) of the County Government Act, No. 17 of 2012 this House approves the 
nomination of Honorable  John Macharia Gachiri to represent the United Democratic Alliance 
(UDA) at the County Assembly Service Board.   
                                                (Question proposed)  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Thank you Honorable Speaker , I stand to support the Motion  having 
engaged with the honorable Member Honorable John Macharia and I think he is a person of 
integrity and I just want to echo my support to him. Thank you  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honorable Emmanuel from Sirikwa Ward.  
Hon. Emmanuel Langat : Thank you very much Honorable Speaker, I also take this opportunity 
to congratulate honorable  John Macharia for his appointment to represent the United Democratic 
Alliance (UDA) at the County Assembly Service Board . Indeed, Honorable Macharia is a very 
dedicated person who I have  strong  belief that he will represent the needs of the Members  at the 
County Assembly Service board  to the later. I support this  Motion . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you, honorable Hassan, and then Honorable Robert Ruto.  
Hon. Ali Hassan  Abdi : Thank you Honorable Speaker , I also wish to take this opportunity to 
support the Motion  and to ask our brother John Macharia, I have known him for a very long time 
NOVEMBER 9 , 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 to represent us full y. Last time we were here, we had small issues in our party, and we promised 
you we are going to come back in a bang. Therefore, I support the Motion.  
Hon. Robert Ruto: I rise to support the Motion  that Hon. John Macharia to represent us in the 
County Assembly Service Board . Honorable Macharia is a person of integrity  and he has all it 
takes to repre sent us. Taking into consideration is the fact that he is the bishop in the House  and I 
have  no doubt that he will represent t he House fully. I support the Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you, Honorable Dida from Mau Narok Ward  and then 
honorable Chemutai Megek  
Hon. Cyrus Ndegwa : Thank you Honorable Speaker , pengine Mheshimiwa Macharia ataingiwa 
na maji kidogo akifikiria nitapinga uteuzi wake . I support him and wish him all the best na wakati 
mwingine jina lake likiletwa hapa nitamuunga mkono. Asante sana.  
Hon. Helen Chemutai :  I represent the people of Visoi Ward, thank you Honorable Speaker and 
I rise to suppo rt the Motio n of appointment of Honorable John Macharia to represent the UDA  
Party . I know he is equal to the task, thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you, Honorable Isabela Makori and then Honorable 
Wathiai and honorable Virginia from Hells Gate  and then I will cross over to my left.  
Hon. Isabella Makori : Thank you Honorable Speaker, I am a servant of Subukia Ward . I rise to 
support this Motion . I take this opportunity to congratulate Honorable John Macharia and I wish 
him well as he starts  working for us. County Assembly Service Board is a very crucial body and 
very important to us and I urge him to work diligently to serve this County Assembly of Nakuru, 
thank you.  
Hon. David Macharia : Honorable Speaker , I rise to support this Motion  and congratulate my 
friend Honorable Macharia from Rhonda. At last umefika, umekuwa kazi ngumu sana na Mu ngu 
amekuongoza na ukafika bwana  tunaomba ukifika pale utusupport sisi wote?  Thank you and I  
Support.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you Mheshimiwa Virginia  from Karagita..  
The Minority Whip (Hon. Virginia Gichanga)  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like first of all, 
to correct you, there is no ward known as Karagita. It is known as Hells gate ward, K aragita is just 
a village, a slum in Hells gate ward. First of all, I would like to congratulate the UDA  party…  
                                    (Hon.  Bernard Gatuso  stood in his place)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  What is it Hon. Gatuso?  
Hon.  Bernard Gatuso:   (On a Point of Order) Is it in order that the member for Shabaab and 
Kaptembwa are not properly dressed?  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Mheshimiwa the Minority Whip? You were on the floor?  
NOVEMBER 9 , 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Minority Whip (Hon. Virginia Gichanga)  Yes, I was standing to contribute on the Motion. 
But I think it will be proper for the same members to walk out of the chamber and go get dressed 
properly, then come back onboard.  
Hon.  Peter Kajwang:  Honorable S peaker , I think I am properly dressed, I thi nk this is a proper 
dress code  
Hon. Wathiai:  Yeah, I do not have my jacket on but I have my tie and I have my decent shirt. 
This is a designer shirt.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): By which collection house.  
(Laughter)  
Minority leader you may proceed wit h your submission. And then later, the members that have 
been mentioned, need to be true to decorum as defined by this House. And in consultation with 
the Minority whip, you will be able to determine whether you are in decorum  
The Minority Whip (Hon. Virgi nia Gichanga)  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, but on the same…  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  what is it Hon.  Wilson?  
Hon. Wilson Wachira:  Mr. Speaker, I think we need to have proper communication on the way 
we need to come to this House because we realize that, in  the last Assembly on Wednesdays it was 
African attire. And I can see members who are in African attires that is member from Turi and 
member from Kuresoi North, so we need to have a proper communication from  the Speaker. 
Otherwise, you will even find the people coming here in their gowns. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you, proper communication, as to the extent of the 
decorum in the House will be communicated today. So, proceed Mheshimiwa Virginia.  
The Mino rity Whip (Hon. Virginia Gicanga)  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I was saying I will start by 
congratulating the UDA party for giving the board or nominating John Macharia to be a member 
of the current County Assembly service board. I think, from the County Assemb ly side is now 
fully composed. And can now continue with its work. I like the way they have conducted their 
elections in a peaceful way, in a way that they have agreed to disagree. That is the spirit of, of 
democracy.  
So now I hope John Macharia will not let you UDA party down. As it has been said he is a reverend. 
I do not know whether he is a reverend or a bishop. He has not yet declared his title as far as 
religion is concerned.  
I hope he is going to walk his talk and he will also be putting the County Assembly Service Board 
or leading from the front, thank  you UDA party . Now, I think we are good to go  because now we 
have all the members who are supposed to come from the County Assembly.  
NOVEMBER 9 , 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
  Mr. Speaker , of the c oncern  about decorum , I think it is  hi gh time we take these members for a 
retreat whereby the topic will be decorum and etiquette …  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Order Hon. Virginia  
The Minority Whip (Hon. Virginia Gicanga)  Mr. Speaker , you are the one who has told me, as I 
finish,  I should talk about decorum and agree with the said members, you know, I was not in 
yesterday, so I thought today was a Tuesday. So, we need to agree on the dress code for 
Wednesday. And on top of that, these members have not been inducted on the mode of dressing.  
They were taught about the Standing Orders, the Speakers’  rules , but they were never taught about 
decorum, so we should have a retreat for about five days, whereby the members will be taught on 
decorum and etiquette . Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you , Hon. Francis you  will be the last one on my right. 
And then I cross over to my left.  
Hon. Francis Kuria:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the Motion and to congratulate 
Hon. Macharia and compare him with a lamb that doe s not speak but it introduces itself, achievers  
never expose themselves, but achievements expose themselves. Thank you. We are ready to back 
you. Thank you Mr. Speaker, sir.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Yes, Mheshimiwa  John Maritim the chair for Finance  and then 
Mheshimkiwa Alex Bor who has been mentioned that is in the African attire and then Hon. N eto 
Sakwa  
Hon. John Maritim:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want also to support the Motion of the nomination 
of John Gachiri to represent the UDA party at the County Assembly Service Board. One character 
of Hon. Gachiri is that he is a man of God.  He is a very prayerful man. I believe he did a lot of 
fasting and supplication. So, Hon. Macharia, I know you will take care of the welfare of the 
members, and will represent UDA because you know a man close to God is also close to the heart 
of the people. So, I believe you do not change that attributed. Thank you very much.  
Hon. Alex Bo r: Asante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa nafasi hii, kwanza nimpongeze Mheshimiwa 
John Macharia kwa kuchaguliwa kama mwakilishi wa UDA. Naamini ya kwamba ataangalia 
matakwa yetu kwa kina. Nakumbuka kuna wakati Mheshimiwa Wamariamu alimtetea sana akidai 
mtu wa M ungu akilia.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Wamariamu ? Do we have such a name in the 
House?  
Hon. Alex Bor:  I am sorry, Mr. Speaker it is Mheshimiwa Karanja. Alisema ingekuwa vyema 
kama Mheshimiwa Macharia angepewa nafasi hiyo na kwavile amepat a hiyo nafasi ataangalia 
masilahi ya UDA. Nina imani na wewe kwa sababu siku ya  kwanza uliposimama mahali na 
NOVEMBER 9 , 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 ukaomba na ukaongea. Nikaona huyu ni mtu ambaye anaweza na atafanya. Kwa hivyo nakuunga 
mkono na pia naunga hoja hii mkono.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you, Hon. Neto Sakwa  
Hon.  Neto Alukutsa:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir. I rise to support the Motion. That means that 
Honorable John Macharia is up to the task. And I am sure he is going to give us a good 
representation at the County Assembly  Service Board. Lakini kwa nyumba yote nafikiri haendi 
kuserv e wana UDA kwa sababu waheshimiwa wote kwa hii nyumba wako na interest  na hii nafasi. 
Kwa hivyo, Mheshimiwa John Macharia, chukua hio jukumu utulinde kama nyumba ya tatu ya  
County Assembly of Nakuru so that we feel a good representation from you. Asante.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Gatuso from London Ward  
Hon. Benard Gatuso: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion and congratulate 
Hon. Macharia. Having interacted with him, I believe he has the ability and capacity and I believe 
since he had served this House as the first MCA for Rhonda Ward from 2013 to 2017, h e has the 
experience and I believe that as he joins me in the board, we will have a component whereby we 
will be able to serve this Assembly  to the higher level. I stand to support the Motion. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Muraya fr om Flamingo Ward.  
Hon. David Muraya: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to congratulate Hon. Macharia for being 
nominated to represent UDA. I have known him for a long time and he is a man of integrity. I 
know you are going to represent not only UDA but you  are going to represent the whole House. 
As independent candidates, we are very happy because we have a good friend that we believe in. 
We know he is going to do to the be st of his ability . Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Mheshimiwa Mu raya. Mheshimiwa Digaal from Soin 
Ward.  
Hon. D egaulle  Naburuki: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I hereby totally support the nomination of 
Hon. John Macharia Gachiri t as a board member of the County Assembly Service Board. For the 
few days I have interacted wi th him, he is a very good man and I know he is ready for the task. 
With the help of Hon. Gatuso, I know this House will be represented fully. I hereby support the 
Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa John Macharia Gachiri, so much support ha s been 
given to you. You could be having a different opinion. You have two minutes to address the House.  
Hon. John Gachiri: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir , first of all, I want to thank the House and to thank 
my party and the members of the UDA party for giving  me this greater opportunity to serve as 
they have nominated me to this County Assembly Service Board. I want to say that I am ready for 
it and as Moses took the rod to divide the red sea, I am ready to divide the red sea for the purpose 
NOVEMBER 9 , 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 of this County Ass embly. I want to thank the Majority Leader and the whole team that ensured 
that everything is going well and also, I want to thank Hon. Dida for giving me that opportunity. I 
respect him and I know we are going far with him and for this purpose, I want to thank all the 
Members and give my word that I am ready to represent you in the board and I am ready to 
represent the Members whenever they need me and I am so grateful. I receive this task with all 
respect and I will respect you all the time and I will ens ure each and everything that is needed for 
the members, I am ready to work on it. Also, I thank the almighty God for that opportunity. It was 
difficult but I thank you all for prayers. As it is written in our prayer that is on the Standing Orders , 
may the blessings of the holy God ascend upon this House. Amen. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Leader of Majority Party.  
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Alex Lang’at ): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir , today, I rise up with a 
smile to express my joy. Last time when I was presenting my candidate for Kenya Kwanza, it was 
not so easy and when my colleague from the other divide was presenting their candidate by the 
name Hon. Gatuso, I sat here as a jealous leader when I heard all the praises being given to Hon. 
Gatuso while mine was not approved by the House. Today, I have sat passively to listen and I am 
a proud leader today that Hon. Macharia has equally received the same praises in the same measure 
that H on. Gatuso received in the last sitting. I also thank our party, UDA for having such a peaceful 
understanding and awarding Hon. Macharia an opportunity to be able to represent this House. I 
am very much aware that the task of the board is enormous and the board is entrenched in the 
County Assembly Act section 12 of 2012 and has several mandates that touches on us directly. It 
is a foundation under which the County Assembly of Nakuru is going to be built. It includes 
directing and even supervising issues of the Assembly in terms of administration, the services and 
the facilities. The same board will be tasked with initiating programs for us. It takes forward the 
capacity building and the training for the Members of the Assembly and it has a huge task . So that  
is why we also gave it a serious look. I want to really congratulate Hon Macharia and the huge 
task, confidence and the trust Members have had in him. Across the divide today, I was looking at 
my colleague, the Minority Leader from Azimio coalition and I expected him to congratulate us 
today because we have now done a good job. Otherwise, mine is to wish Hon Macharia all the best 
as he represents the all House together with our colleague Hon Gatuso and the rest who are going 
to join the board. We are expec ting two other more members from the external to hold this House 
with all the integrity and the trust that they have given upon you to stand with the Members and 
deliver the mandate that is expected of you. Congratulations to Hon Macharia and by extension 
the whole  board including my brother Hon Gatuso. Represent us well. We shall be watching and 
you will get all our support. Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker ( Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you the Leader of the Majority party. Hon Kirui.  
  Hon Ben Kirui : Thank  you Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the nomination of Hon Macharia to 
represent Kenya Kwanza at the County Assembly Service Board. Finally, there is something I 
NOVEMBER 9 , 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 was expecting to hear from Hon Macharia. I have heard everyone praising bishop and I was 
expec ting him to confirm to us if he is real bishop or a fake one. Thank you.  
                                                                  (Laughter ) 
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri):  Hon. Kirui has raised a pertinent issue on your rank in as far as 
matters of faith is concerned. Hon Macharia you may have this time to confirm to the House 
your rank.  
 Hon John Gachiri : Mr. Speaker, I beg Hon Kirui not to be calling me a bishop because I have  
another bishop. It is a matter of insecurity to the other bishop but I am a bishop to other regions. 
You know there is no smaller and a greater bishop but I have a bishop who is called Bishop 
Jackson Maina who is the overall bishop of Victorious Community  Church. I am only a pastor 
and a servant of the community. That is the only name that I have. With those submissions I pray 
that this House call me pastor but not a bishop. A bishop is a great name which according to our 
religion ;- Victorious Community Church, the bishop holds the international seat.  Tafadhali 
waheshimiwa nisifutwe kazi kanisani kwa kuniita bisho p hapa. Wafikirie nimechukua kiti chake. 
Asante.  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri):  Thank you. It is well understood. Hon Doreen then I put it to 
question.  
Hon Doreen Korir : Thank you so much our Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I also rise 
to support the nomination of Hon Macharia Gachiri. He is equal to the task. As you can see our 
UDA party is a quite organized  party and we thank our leadership for the job well done. On the 
other hand, we can see the representation of the County Assembly Service Board comprises of 
men. We would really request that the rest of the members from th e external we consider women 
so that we can have the gender balance. Thankyou  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
MOTION  
THAT THANKS OF THE ASSEMBLY BE RECORDED FOR THE EXPOSITION OF PUBLIC POLICY 
CONTAINED IN THE GOVERNOR ’S ADDRESS DELIVERED ON 12TH OCTO BER 2022  
(RESUMPTION OF DEBATE INTERRUPTED ON 8.11.2022)  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri):  Resumption of debate by the leader of the majority party.  
The L eader  of Majority  (Hon Alex Langat):  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to move  the 
Motion;  
THAT  the thanks of the assembly be recorded for the exposition of public policy contained in the 
address offered on 12th October 2022.  
NOVEMBER 9 , 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
  The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri):  Thank you Hon Majority Leader. The re were members who 
wanted to address themselves and give their submissions and their input in the address of the 
governor because the Motion has been presented. We had Hon Neto Sakwa, Hon Keziah Okumu 
and Hon Muraya.who wanted to give their input to the d ebate so we start with Hon Neto Sakwa.  
Hon Neto Sakwa : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Ningependa kuzungumza kidogo kuhusu 
mpangilio wa gavana wakati alihutubia nyumba hii kwa Heshima tarehe12 October 2022. 
Kulingana na mpangilio na utaratibu ambao aliuweka, kw angu naunga mkono kwa dhati na 
ninaona ya kwamba ikifuatiliwa itaweza leta mabadiliko makubwa kwa kaunti mzima na kwa 
mwanchi wa chini kwa  kata zetu. Nimesimama kwa niaba ya wananchi wa Kivumbini. Kwanza 
kwa mambo ya barabara ambapo gavana alizungumzia ku husu 2000km access roads. Hali ya 
barabara Kivumbini iko chini na tuko na kaburi ambayo inatumika na kaunti mzima na kaburi 
hilo liko katika kata yangu na tuko na barabara tatu ambayo inaelekeza waombolezaji wakati 
wanaenda kupumzisha wapendwa wao. Hizo ba rabara ziko katika hali mbaya na hilo kaburi 
linaleta pesa katika kaunti kwa hivyo ningependa hiyo kata iangaliwe. Wakati tunakuja kwa 
maeneo ya 200kms ya lami pia ningeomba hata nikipata kilomita nne Kivumbini ishugulikiwe 
itakuwa ya manufaa. Kwa upande w a bursary niliona kwa mazungumzo yake, ameiwekea uzito 
na maeneo ya Kivumbini ndio maeneo ambayo hali ya usalama kwa kaunti mzima kulingana na 
saa hizi, ina shida kubwa maana jina la “confirm” inatoka Kivumbini labda ianze kusambaa kwa 
mtaa wa Ronda na Fla mingo. Ningesihi upande wa bursary ishugulikiwe kwa maana hapo ndio 
tunapata kusaidia vijana kulipa karo ya chuo. Tunaomba bursaries iwekwe mkazo na angalao 
pesa ziongezwe katika kitty ya bursaries ndio tusikuwe tunaimarisha bursary kupitia kwa 
ugawaji wa kata kwa sababu ugawaji wa kata huwa ni ndogo. Upande wa executive wazingatie 
upande wa bursary ya kwamba pia inatafakari tofauti na wale ambao wanasoma kwa sekondari. 
Mambo ya usalama inaanzia hapo wakati vijana wametoka kidato cha nne na hawana utaratibu  
na namna ya kusoma.Kwa upande wa street lights ambayo niliona gavana aliguzia kwamba 
ataweka uzito sana kwa mambo ya usalama.  Ningeomba pia maeneo ya Kivumbini kwa sababu 
ya suala ya usalama ipewe kipaumbele. Nikimalizia, nitazungumza kidogo kuhusu ECD. 
Kwanza naunga mkono mambo ya ECD kwamba feeding program iko kwa utaratibu kwa sababu 
hali ya vyakula kwa familia nyingi na watoto ambao wanaenda shule iko chini na wanateseka. 
Wakipata namna ya kusaidika kupata chakula shuleni na unajua kabisa msingi wa el imu inaanza 
na ECD , lakini wakati wanafika kwa upande wa kuajiriwa pia kunakuwa na masuala kidogo. 
Mara mingi kumekuwa na malalamishi kuwa kuna walimu ambao wamekuwa wakitusaidia 
kufunza watoto wetu katika hizo vituo vya ECD lakini wakati wa kuajiriwa hawa pewi fursa bali 
wanaajiri walimu wengine kutoka sehemu zingine.   
Wale walimu wamekaa kwa muda mrefu wakuwe wa kwanza kuwa considered because wanafeel 
wamekuwa shortchanged kwa muda mrefu. So kwa committee ambayo itakuwa inahudsika kwa 
upande wa elimu na o fisi kuu ya Governor, ningependa prority ipewe walimu ambao saa hizi ndio 
wanmekaa miaka mingi wakitulindia hao watoto shuleni. Ningeomba jameni kwa hio Mr Speaker 
sir ikifanywa kidogo kwa hio taratibu nitashukuru na nitaunga Governor mkono . Tukifuatilia h io 
NOVEMBER 9 , 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 utaratibu ambayo anajaribu kuweka then after five years tutakuwa tumesonga mahali pakubwa 
kama kaunti. Asante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Neto . Hon Keziah  
Hon. Keziah Okumu : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for giving me this opportunity; I just want to 
congratulate my Governor for her speech. As I was going through the speech, I realized that she 
touched a lot in what is my passion. When I went through the culture part of it, I realized that she  
talked a lot about culture and about the talents. As my fellow colleague said yesterday, that some 
of us if it was not for this Assembly, we could be out there singing and dancing to the cultural 
dances and the songs that we know in our mother tongue. Therefore,  when I went through this 
speech, I realized that she talked a lot about culture and she is going to support them. I am really 
happy because I have an organized group which recently performed during the culture day. When 
I also went through the voca tional training, I applaud my Governor because in my ward, I am 
Keziah Okumu special elect Kaptembwa Ward. I applaud my Governor on that because when you 
go around Kaptembwa ward, you get a lot of girls who have dropped out of school, they walk 
around with  their kids on their back, they have got nowhere to go, they have got no experience so 
whenever we are going to have this vocational training centers, our girls and then young people 
are going to gain a lot of experience so that they can start their own jo bs in the community. I also 
applaud my Governor on the gender policy; we have so many girls outside there who have been 
victims of rape, boys also have been sodomized but have nowhere to run to. So, if my Governor 
can have a place where we have such cases they can run to, I can really appreciate on that matter. 
I also support the Governor on the issue of markets. I can talk about a real story of my area, Nakuru 
Town West, we have a market which was built almost 30 years ago. It used government resources 
but it is not functional. We have tried to bring people into that market in 2020, during the Corona 
period and we realized we can raise a lot of revenue from that market, this is because within one 
month, the revenue we collected there was over Kshs 700,000. Therefore,  when the government 
talks about these markets , I really fe el they should consider Rhonda and Kaptembwa market which 
has not  been in use for many years and it was constructed using our money. Because of the now 
ongoing decongesting of the CBD, whe n we open these markets, I think the facilities will help our 
people and it will reduce poverty level and the security issues within Kaptembwa will be addressed. 
I stand to support the Governor’s speech. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you  Hon. Okumu; Hon. Muraya  
Hon. David Muraya:  Asante sansa Mmheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi kuchangia hu u 
Mjadala. Hii ni nyumba ya heshima; yangu ni machache tu. nataka kumpongeza Mheshimiwa 
Gavana wetu kwa mazungumzo ambayo alifanya hapa tarehe 12  mwezi  wa kumi , kuhusiana na 
program ya vile atafanya kazi katika kaunti yetu kwa muhula wa miakla tano. Ningetaka kughusia 
mambo matatu; ya kwanza ningetaka kughusia swala la afya katika Flamingo ward na ninafurahi 
kwamba wakati nilikuwa nafanya kampeni, niliku wa najaribu kughusia vile health care  iko and I 
am very happy  because  wakati alikuwa anaadress hii nyumba, alituahidi kwamba ataimprove 
NOVEMBER 9 , 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 facilities  ambazo zuinapatikana katika wadi zetu. Kulingana na venye kuko katika wadi yangu, 
tuko na hopspitali yetu ya Langa Langa, hii hospitali inaserve hii area yetu yote. Hon Machahria 
na Hon. Thiai na pia Hon. Sakwa tukiangalia hii hospitali, haina madawa ya kutosha and at the  
same time  haina daktari. Ukiangalia kwa  gate, imeandikwa itakuwa inaoperate for 24 hours but  
ukiingia ndani , unakuta inaopetrate for only 8 hours,  kuanzia asubuhi mpaka jioni. Nataka 
nipongeze Her Excelency the Governor Susan, atuletee madaktari wa kutosha kwa hii hospitali ili 
iweze kuoperate ,mpaka usiku kwa sababu unaweza kuta watu w engi wanateseka sana especialy 
watu kutoka Lakeview, Freehold huwa wanaenda PGH ambayo iko mbali kidogo . Usiku kama 
inawezekana iwe  inaoperate na tutafurahia sana , na nataka kumpongeza Gavasna kwa sababu 
alisema atajaribu kuweka equipment  na pia alisema a taendelea kuupgrade.  
Pili ningetaka kughusia maneno ya ECD katika wadi yangu. Ukiangalia eneo langu, tuko na mitaa 
ambayo hali ya security si nzuri sana, kama wewe Hon. Sakwa unasema niko na Flamingo estate 
na wewe uko na Lake View Estate na ukiangalia hi zo maeneo, ziko na vijana wengi ambao ni 
idlers. Kijanas anafika umri ya ku a ako na familia na pia hakuna kazi. Unakuta katika ile hali ya 
kuhusle kutafuta chakula chas kila siku, analemewa sana. Unakuta watoto wengi katika mtaa wetu 
hawasomi, hawaendi shu le kwa sababu ya karo ya shule. Therefore,  hii maneno ya feeding 
program ambayo Gavana alisema mimi naunga mkono na naona aliongea pia kuhusu walimu. Kwa 
hivyo vile Hon. Dida aliongea jana kwamba tuangalie maneno ya walimu , ningetaka kuuliza hii 
nyumba iku bali kwamba Gavana aendelee kusuport feeding program and at the same time 
tuangalie uajiri wa walimu katika shule zetu zote za ECD tujue nini tutafanya. Nashukuru kwa 
sababu naona amechukua hatua moja ama mbili ili tuweze kumwelezea kulingana na akili zetu  
venye ziko.  
 Pia Mheshimiwa  Spika ningependa kuongelea kuhuhusu mambo ya barabara; nimeona 
Mheshimiwa Gavana alikuwa anatuaddress hapa on the 12th October, 2022 , alikuwa amesema 
atatengeneza barabara 200km katika kaunti yetu yote. Na kulingana na venye wa di yangu iko, Bw 
Spika, iko katika CBD na sasa ni city, na ningetaka kumuuliza Gavana wakati anaendelea kujenga 
barabara, hizo feeder roads za  wadi yangu  hata mimi aniconsider kunifanyia kilomita kadhaa na 
sisi kama jamii, tutashukuru sana. Kwa hivyo nimea mka hapa kuunga mkono Gavana na 
kuhakikisha kazi imefanyika. Asante sana  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Muraya. I now want to propose a question \ 
(Question proposed that the thanks of the Assembly be recorded for exposition of public policy 
contained in the address of the Governor delivered on the 12th October 2022 ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Before we adjourn, I have a communication to make  
COMMUNICATION  FROM THE CHAIR  
NOVEMBER 9 , 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 THE CASA GAMES  
Honorable  Members you note that there are upcomin g games for the Assemblies. T his is one of 
the functions of County Assemblies Forum  (CAF) , preparation of the CASCA games and as 
such, members you are reminded to register with the S ergent -at-arms for at least two disciplines 
on the upcoming CASA games. The registration is that every member will be involved or 
participat e in at least two disciplines so that our Assembly can shine. Thank you, members.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Therefore,  the Assembly is adjourned until 2.30pm  
(The House rose at 11.45am ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 