 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday  28th February, 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:00AM 
 [Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  Just before we get into the next order. 
Honourable Members, let me officially welcome the pupils from Crater view Academy Ngata. So 
our pupils you are so much welcome to this honorable House. I am very sure that we are going to 
learn quite a lot. W e are so privileged to have you in this honorable House. Karibu ni sana.  
 
PETITIONS  
 
Petition by Mr. Kennedy Mugo, a resident of Gilgil Sub -County urging the County Assembly to 
intervene on Motorbike Sticker Revenue Generation System, payment of non-existing  
Firefighting Department and double taxation for business operating people.  
So Honourable Members want to commit this to the Finance Committee and you ought to give a 
Report within the next 60 days.  
 
PAPERS  
THE REPORT OF THE HEALTH SERVICES COMMITTEE ON THE VISIT TO NAKURU 
PROVINCIAL GENERAL HOSPITAL (PGH)  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  Honorable Members, we have some Papers to 
lay before the House and  I want to call upon  the Chair Health  to lay the Paper.  
 
Hon. Ben Langat:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker . I wish to table  a Report on Health Services 
Committee on the site visit to the Nakuru for Provincial  General Hospital.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  Thank you very much. The Vice Chair Health , 
hono urable Ben Langat.  
 
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 REPORT OF THE HEALTH SERVICES COMMITTEE ON THE VISIT TO NAKURU PROVINCIAL 
GENERAL HOSPITAL (PGH)  
 
Hon. Ben Lang ’at: Thank you very much Mr. Temporary Speaker. I  woul d like to give a Notice 
of Motion that this House adopt the Report of the Health Services Committee on the visit to the 
Nakuru Provincial General Hospital.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  Hono urable  Members, let  us get to the next 
order. Yes, what is it Honorable Karanja?  
 
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Temporary Speaker , I seek your indulgence in this matter where the 
Chair gives a Notice of Motion before we even get the R eport. The Report ought to be with us now 
he is giv ing a Notice and we do  not have  it. Even  the person who has the tabled  has nothing ; he 
only has the Order Paper.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  Thank you very much Honorable Karanja  I think 
it is a very good observation because for sure you do  not know what the Paper contains. So I beg 
that the Chair to make a step by circulating the Reports immediately after this Assembly after we 
adjourn so that the Members can have a look at it.  
Hon. Phillip Wanjohi:  Mr. Temporary Speaker  before you adjourn, to lay a Paper means that he 
comes with a Paper and then he gives the Clerk but  now he gave nothing. So we do  not know what 
has been laid. And again, we also need to have copies of the same before it is laid. It looks like the 
Clerk had  the Paper prior to it being laid  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  Thank you Mheshimiwa Wanjohi.  Just as we 
said, it is a very good observation. And I think the  honorable Chair for Health is going to make a 
deliberate effort to ensure that these  copies become available.  
 
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Temporary Speaker, we always repeat that this is a House of rules 
and procedure. Anytime one skips one of the procedures it means that it is null and void ab-initio.  
Therefore w hat Mr. Temporary Speaker ought to happen is that the Chair ought to direct that he 
lays the Paper. Y ou cannot give the clerk the Report then you come up with the Order Paper.  What 
are you laying?  Therefore  Mr. Temporary Speake r, I do request  from your Chair that the rules, 
regulations and the procedure of this House must be followed to the la tter without skipping ; 
without ignoran ce. Therefore Mr. Temporary Speaker, I urge you r Office through you that Chair 
of Health being  a honorable Chair to repeat the process as it should be.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  Thank you honorable Karanja,  I think your 
prayers have been  heard. And for the sake of harmony and the unpreparedness that has been 
observed , possibly I  will give  direction that immediately after we adjourn , the Chair make s an 
effort of circulating these Papers, les t the Members will not have information on what they are 
going to deliberate upon. I saw a copy just in front. Alright , sorry for that but I hope I have given 
the direction. Mr. Chair do the needful. Next order.  
 
Just before we get into the last order  honorable Members, I think it i s prudent enough to give an 
opportunity to the Ward Representative w here these honorable  pupils come from , these are our 
future leaders just to say something to welcome these young Kenyans. So karibu sana  the MCA 
from Ngata . That should be who?  
The Majorit y Leader (Hon. Alex Langat):  It ought to be Hon. Rottok but he is not present.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai ): Oh yes. But since honorable Rottok  is not 
around, let me invite the Majority Leader to welcome our kids.  
 
The Majority Leader (Hon. Alex La ngat): Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker  for this 
opportunity  that you have  given us . Actually  Crater View comes  after Ngata. These are my 
neighbo urs because  we are actually separated by the Nakuru  - Kericho  Highway. And may I take 
this great opportunity on behalf of the Honourable  Member who is not with us to welcome you 
Crater View students. I am the MCA for Mosop Ward just across Ngata so feel welcome . We feel 
encouraged that you have had a good opportunity to enter this House. And it is a process of 
mentorship where we are expecting you in the near future as we age. And as we proceed  to other 
issues that you also have the desires to be mentored so that one day you will also become 
Honorable  Members.  
So on behalf of the House, I want to thank the Head Teacher of the school and their management 
for having thought of bringing you to this honorable House so that you can have the real feel of 
what usually goes  on in the House.You are welcome another time and we want to wish you well. 
So go and work hard in your academics as you desire. Not e that politics is also all about academia ; 
work hard in class, do all the paperwork that needs to be done, pass your examin ations and in the 
near future  desire to be an Honorable  Member. So may God bless you as you go back , take our 
greetings  to other students who were not able to come to this Assembly. Thank you Mr. Temporary 
Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai ):  Thank you,  next order . What  is it Hon. Karanja?   
 
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker. Maybe before Mr. Temporary 
Speaker we adjourn, I have  a point of concern because  sometimes they do not have somebody to 
represent them other than the Members . Mr. Temporary Speaker, they are according to the 
procedures of the House, w e used to have a regalia  that is meant for the Speaker. I have been 
shocked that these  days the issue  of the regalia and you know that he ought to be there as a Speaker 
so that when the Clerk is we ll dressed and the Speaker is like … Mr. Temporary Speaker, maybe 
that one should be relooked . I can see Madam Shivatse…  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mut ai): Honourable  Karanja  you will withdraw the word 
they are well dressed and I  am not well dressed.  I am well dressed.  
 
Hon. (Stanley Karanja):  But you are not official . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  Thank you so much honorable Karanja . I think 
those are very good observation s. And we are going to take a look  into that. So that in the next 
round any Member from the Speakers Panel is in the right regalia.  We could even suggest a colo ur 
for the same . But we are going to put it in the next Motion. So thank you so much, and I  adjourn 
this sitting  until 2:30pm.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
The House rose at  10:25 AM 
 
 
 