COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 26 th July 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House  met at 03:10 PM 
[The Speaker ( Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There are Paper s to be laid by the Honourable  Majority Leader .  
PAPER (S) 
AUDITORS GENERAL REPORT ON THE NAKURU COUNTY PERSON WITH DISABILITY 
FUNDS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2022.  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang ’at): Thank you Honourable  Speaker , I rise on Order no. 
5; the Paper s are Auditor ’s General Report on the Nakuru County Person s with Disability Funds 
for the year ended 30th June 2022. I wish to lay the Paper  before the House . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you the Paper  is committed to the  Committee on Public 
Accounts and Investment s for action. There is another Paper  still to be laid by the Leader  of 
Majority Party . 
PAPER  
AUDITOR’S GENERAL REPORT ON COUNTY GOVERNMENT EXECUTIVE (VOLUME 1) FOR 
THE YEAR 2021/2022  
The Major ity Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang ’at): I want to lay a Paper  on the Auditor’s General Report 
on County Government Executive (Volume 1) for the Financial Year 2021/2022, I wish to lay the 
report before this Honourable  House . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you the Leader  of Majority Party , the Paper  is committed 
to the Committee on Public Accounts and Investment . Chairman and the Members  take note, next 
Order.  
STATEMENTS  
FEEDER ROADS IN KURESOI SOUTH SUB COUNTY  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Statement  request to be made before this Assembly , 
which is a request pursuant to Standing Order 47(2) ( c) and the Honourable  Mercy Kilel will be 
doing that request.  
Hon. Mercy Kilel: Thank you, Honourable  Speaker, pursuant to Standing Order  47(2) (c), I rise 
to request for a Statement  from the  Chairperson of the Committee  on Roads regarding the Status  
of County … 
AGNES  
…feeder roads in Kuresoi North Sub-County.   
Mr. Speaker  maintenance of County  roads including feeder roads is a Devolved function under the 
Fourth Schedule of the Constitution 2010. It is therefore the role of the County  Government  
Department  of Infrastructure to ensure regular maintenance of these roads to enhance ease of 
movement  of residents and goods.  
Mr. Speaker,  as you are aware, tree logging Kuresoi Sub-County  has been ongoing for a while and 
therefore the transportation of these heavy logs has resulted in destruction of most feeder roads. 
Most feeder in Kuresoi North , espec ially Kiptororo Ward  are in a dilapidated state. The Finance 
Act, 2019 provides for a cess charge by the transporters of s uch logs and other forest s and  the 
monies collected from this charge should be redirected to maintenance of these roads. But this has 
not been forthcoming hence the bad state of the feeder roads in this Ward .  
Mr. Speaker,  I therefore wish to request the Chairperson Committee  on Roads to explain whether 
the Department  of Infrastructure is aware of the sorry state of these feeder roads in  Kuresoi Sub-
County  as a result of logging and which measures are being taken by the Department  to put in 
place and to ensure maintenance of the same, to enhance ease of movement of people and goods. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you Hon. Mercy Kilel . The request is made to the 
Cairperson, Committee  on County  Roads Transport and Public Works. The Chairman or the Vice 
Chairs ? Okay Honourable  Vice Chair , take note that we need a Report  in response to that re quest 
after 14 days.  
There is a response to requests for Statements  that were done earlier. The first response is coming 
from the Honourable  Rose Chepkoech who is the Chairperson Committee  on Energy, Environment 
and Natural Resources. And of course, she is  responding to a Statement  that was requested by the 
Honourable  Antony Kanyere , the Member  for Nakuru East.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech:  Mr. Speaker  sir, I am responding to the Statement.  On 8th March, 2023 at 
2:30pm , Honourable  Anthony Kamau Kanyere  the MCA Nakuru East Ward  sought a Statement  
from the Chairperson Sectoral Committee  on Energy, Environment Water and Natural Resources 
concerning stalled Water Pans at Mzee Wanyama Estate Nakuru East Ward . The Statements  
sought a response in measures bein g taken by the Department  to ensure that stalled Water Pans 
Project does not pose any danger to resident s of Mzee Wanyama . 
ERICK  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: … in its response, the Department informed the Committee that it has 
visited the site together with Hon. Anthony Kamau Kanyere, the area MCA and decided that the 
said Pan will flatten the areas restored. This was because the Pan was not getting any water a nd 
was full of mud and poses danger to the residents and animals of the area.  
The Department is currently in the process of planning to flatten the Pan. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member for Nakuru East, you can have a brief session to  
say whether you are satisfied with the response.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. May I take this opportunity first and 
foremost to thank the Chairperson for Environment for the response and even the Department? 
Indeed, as it has been ment ioned, we visited the area together with the staff of the Department and 
the measures that were decided, I am satisfied and I think that will satisfy the residents of the area. 
Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. There is another response  that is arising from request 
that was made by Hon. John Macharia. The response was to be made by Hon. Rose Chepkoech, 
the Chairperson of Energy, Environment and Natural Resources.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Again, I rise to respond to  the second 
Statement.  
On 5th March, 2023 at 2:30 Pm, Hon. John Macharia Gachiri, MCA Rhonda Ward sought a 
Statement from the Chairperson Sectorial Committee on Environment, Energy, Water and Natural 
Resources on Njoro Waste Water Treatment Plant. The Sta tement sought response on the 
following issue;  
1. Whether the Department is aware of adverse effects caused by chemicals emanating from 
the Plant in the surrounding environment  
2. Whether any study has been carried out to ascertain the negative effects on Sewage  Plant 
to the surrounding environment, including the risk.  
3. The steps being taken to minimise the effect of chemicals emanating from Sewage 
Treatment Plant in the surrounding environment.  
The Committee wrote to the Department of Water, Environment, Energy a nd Natural Resources 
and received response. In the response, the Department noted that the Treatment Plant receive both 
industrial and domestic effluents from treatment. It cited that NAWASCO regularly tests effluents 
from trade premises to encourage compl iance to the National Discharge Standards set by NEMA.  
It is noted that despite challenges faced, the Plant is able to treat incoming waste to permissive 
levels as per attached monetary results. In addition, the Statement stated that NAWASSCO carried 
out annual Environment Audit and its operation as by the attached Report. Steps on the 
improvement of facilities were also stated …  
SHARON  
Hon Rose Chepkoech: … where the Government of Kenya was said to be in cooperation with the 
German Government Financial Co operation Bank (KFW) and the Nakuru County Government 
and formulated the Lake Nakuru Biodiversity Conservation Project (LNBCP) to ensure access to 
basic sanitation by the population in the City of Nakuru. The project focuses on improving the 
Waste Water In frastructure specifically the expansion and improvement of Njoro WWTPS 
capacity to handle the anticipated increase in waste water flows while improving its treatment 
capacity and technology. The Department has recommended the following to the Treatment Pla nt; 
1. A perimeter wall/ fence should be constructed around the facility to prevent unauthorised 
access into the facility.  
2. Repair of the main gate.  
3. A Safety and Health Risk Assessment of the workplace should be conducted in relation to 
the Safety and Health o f persons employed and on the basis of these results, adopt 
Preventive and Protective Measures to ensure that under all conditions of their intended 
use, all chemicals, machinery, equipment, tools and process under the control of the 
occupier are safe and without risk to health and comply with the requirements of Safety 
and Health Provisions in the Occupational Safety and Health Act.  
4. A Safety and Health Audit of the work place should be carried out at least once in every 
12 months by an approved Safety and Health Advisor.  
5. A Fire Safety Audit of the work place should be taken at least once every 12 months by an 
approved fire Safety Auditor.  
6. Establish and implement a written Fire Safety Policy, outlining the Organisation and 
arrangements for carrying out the Policy among others.  
Attached hereby is a Report of Nakuru Water and Sanitation Co. Ltd concerning the Njoro 
Waste Water Treatment Plant. Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The request was done by the Hon. John Gachir i. You 
have an opportunity to say whether you are satisfied with the response.  
Hon. John Gachiri : Thank you the Right Hon. Speaker. I want to agree with the Chair 
Environment concerning the Statement that I requested some months ago and I am so grateful th at 
immediately after I requested this Statement the NAWASCO began to treat the Treatment Plant 
because it was very bad and the some of the people from that area are growing old because of 
the….  
SIELE  
Hon. John Gachiri : …of what is going on down there and we are so grateful that since the Chair 
and the Committee begun following up about this issuer, I think there is a great change and when 
you go there  Mr.. Speaker, there is a great change. You know people of town there we re calling us 
tunaitagwa watu wa  Sewage; there is a very bad smell coming out of that Plant but I want to agree 
with Chair that we need a time frame also concerning the perimeter wall and concerning the gate 
because people are being killed and even thrown into those septic tanks that are down there.  
So, I believe according to what the Chair Environment has given today, I believe we shall continue 
to follow up and to ensure that even the projects coming up next year they are from German 
Investors and they w ill help us to ensure that this sewer will no longer continue to be a problem to 
that area. So, I am grateful for this Report. Thank you, Right Hon. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Member . What is it the Hon. Member for 
Shabaab ? 
Hon. David Macharia : Mr.  Speaker; asante kwa kunipatia hii nafasi;  Mr. Speaker nataka kusema 
hii Nyumba leo imekuwa na mabadiliko; sijui ni mimi sikuwa asubuhi ama nimeingia nikaona Mr. 
Speaker there is a change in the Mace nahii yenye imekuja  Mr. Speaker, ile Ofisi yenye ilifanya 
kazi ya kutafuta Mace ya hii Nyumba, imefanya kazi mzuri sana .  
Mr. Speaker hii Mace hata ikikaa hapo inaonyeshana nguvu ya hi cho Kiti chako na tunasema vile 
kuna h aya mambo ya maandamano, i kikuja haya mambo, watu wanaois hi huko chini ni uwizi 
wanafanya . Mr. Speaker I hope mumetengeneza pahali pazuri pa kufungia hii kitu wasikuje 
wakaenda nayo…  
(Laughter ) 
Turudi tena pale nyuma. Kwa hayo machache  Mr. Speaker, ninafurahia na ninashukuru sana kwa 
sababu ya hiyo  Mace and the new look  of the M ace. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Shabaab; that is a very positive comment 
only that I did  not know that i t was a follow up to a Member responding to a Report.  
(Laughter ) 
However, we have taken your kind comment s about the new equipment, the continuous 
improve ment of our equipment and infrastructure. Thank you for that comment.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable  Members , this House is adjourned to Tuesday next week 9.30am  
The House rose at  3.30pm  
 