NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 8TH November 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3: 10 pm 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
INVITATION TO THE PRESIDENTIAL WORKING PARTY ON EDUCATION REFORMS  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  We have a communication. Honorable members, we have 
received  an invitation from the office of the president ; specifically,  office of the county 
commissioner  and it is about the presidential working party on education reforms, county 
consultations. Pursuant to the provisions of article 10(2) (a) and 232(1) (d) of the Constitution, his 
Excellency  the President  through Gazette Notice number 1190 of 29TH September, 2022 a ppointed 
the Presidential Working Party on Education Reforms to among other issues carry out 
consultations with the public, education stakeholders and other institutions. To this end, the 
presidential working party on education reforms is  scheduled to conduct hearings and meeting in 
Nakuru County  on 11TH November 2022  at 8:00 am to 4: 00 pm at Nakuru Girls High School. The 
purpose of this letter therefore is to invite you to attend and Members take note and attend. The 
Chairperson  and lead ership of the Committee  on Education need to take note of this and there 
should be an orderly appearance before this party. Next order.  
PAPER  
AUDITOR GENERAL REPORT ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENT OF NAIVASHA WATER AND 
SANITATION COMPANY LIMITED FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 2021  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There are Papers to be laid by the Leader of the Majority Party 
Honorable Dr. Alex Langat . 
The Leader  of Majority  (Hon Alex Langat ): Thank you Honorable Speaker, pursuant to order 
number five , the report of the Auditor General on the Financial Statement of Naivasha Water and 
Sanitation Company limited for the year ended 30TH June 2021 . I beg to lay the report.  
                                             (The Report was laid on the table)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you, there is another report.  
PAPER  
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 AUDITOR GENERAL REPORT ON NAKURU COUNTY EXECUTIVE CAR LOAN AND MORTGAGE LOAN 
STAFF SCHEME FUND FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2021  
The Leader  of Majority  (Hon Alex Langat ): Thank you Honorable Speaker, pursuant to order 
number five, the report of the Auditor General on the Nakuru County Executive Car Loan and 
Mortgage Loan Staff Scheme Fund  for the year ended 30TH June 2021 . I beg to lay.  
                                              (The report was laid on the table)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you, the Reports  now stand committed to the Committee  
on Public Accounts and Investment , the Chairperson  and the Committee Leadership to take charge.  
Next Order.  
MOTION  
THAT THE THANKS OF THE ASSEMBLY BE RECOR DED FOR THE EXPOSITION OF PUBLIC  POLICY 
CONTAINED IN THE GOVERNORS ’ ADDRESS DELIVERED ON 12TH OCTOBER ,2022  
(Resumption of debate interrupted on 19.10.2022  Morning session ) 
The Leader  of Majority  (Hon Alex Langat ): We have Resumption of debate ;- that the Thanks of 
the Assembl y be recorded for the exposition of Public Policy contained in the address of the  
Governor delivered on 12TH October, 2022. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you, the Motion  is open for debate, it is resumption of 
debate from where we left in the Morning Plenary and there was an order, there were some 
Member s who had already expressed their will and desire to contribute starting with Honorable 
Wathiai then Honorable Kirui and Dida.  
Hon. Macharia Wathiai : Thank you Honorable Speaker , I want to commend the  Governor for 
the greatest speech this County  has ever had and in relations to the various sectors our  County . In 
the Education Sector on matters Early Childhood Education , I am eagerly waiting for the launch 
of the feeding program so that we can have an input  on the number of pupils who will be attending 
school due to the lunch program. In matters roads, tarmacking of the 200 kilometers, out of these 
200 kilometer s the peop le of Shabab Ward will get at least Eight Kilometers of tarmac . “Hiyo 
hapo mimi  nitakuwa sawa na watu wangu wa Shabab na hii kilomita mia mbili ”. 
We also have the harmonization of the Business Permits;  this will enable the county to  have one 
stop point for  permits. It will be easy to get, once you get your license,  and you will not have to 
go to t he different departments  to get permits for whatever you want to do. You will have just have 
one permit that  will comprise everything in that one service, it will be easier to get,  and thus we 
are going to have a business friendly environment.  
On markets and promoting  Brand Nakuru, that was in the Governors Speech , I am hoping that the 
Governor is going to bring in sports as a marketing tool for the County , where we can sponsor 
some of our teams and we can brand them with the County Government kits and do more on 
marketing with the Sports Department. With all these, these are the indicators the Governo r wishes 
well for our great Count y of Nakuru, thank you.  
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you Honorable Wathiai. Honorable Kirui.  
Hon. Ben Kirui: I stand to support the speech from our able Governo r. On the issue of Early 
Childhood Education (ECD), we heard our able Governor  saying she will employ  and train  more 
ECD Teachers . I believe this will apply to all the fifty-five wards in our County . Secondly,  on the 
issue of  Water , our able Governo r promised to complete and  solarize all the Borehole s within the 
County, which  I think it will help the people of Nakuru to access more clean water within our 
wards. On the issue concerning Health, we remember our able Governor promising that she will 
send drugs to our Dispensaries  and yesterday as I was visiting our dispensary within Barut Ward, 
we received drugs from the County Government . This showed that all the promises that our able 
governor promised would  be implemented. T here is something, which  the leader of majority talked 
about during the morning session concerning the 200 kilometers  tarmac road; Barut Ward is just 
five kilometers away from the city and we do not have a single inch of a tarmac road.  For us to see 
this k ind of road is either we visit honorable Wanjohi Ward in Pwani  or we come to the City of 
Nakuru. I am requesting....  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable Kirui you are saying if you want to see your people 
to have a feel of tarmac road is either to go  Hon.  Wanjohi Lari Ward or come to town.  
Hon. Ben Kirui : Yes; Honorable Speaker we do not have a tarmac  road in Barut Ward . “Ndio 
tuweze kuona lami ni lazima tuende Pwani kwa Mheshimiwa Wanjohi kule  Lare na kwa 
Mheshimiwa John Gachiri kule Rhonda. Hapa katikati tumekwama hatuna chochote.” That is why 
I am requesting the 200 kilometers at least to touch Barut Ward even for eleven Kilometers from 
the 200  Kilometers . I stand to support her Excellency the Governor  speech, thank  you. 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you Honorable Kirui, Honorable Dida  
Hon. Cyrus Ndegwa : Thank you Honorable Speaker; I am honorable Cyrus Dida Ndegwa 
representing Mau Narok Ward where agriculture is our main economic activity. Na 
tunapozungumza kuhuzu  mbolea  kwa kilimo it is important to know that the National Government 
is issuing us with fertilizers with a price of Kshs 3500 but the problem when the fertilize rs is 
delivered to the farmers the prices are already high due to the cartels or brokers who are in the 
middle. I want to bring this matter to your attention and the House so that we can assist the farmers 
in Mau Narok and other regions doing agriculture. There are laws that have been put in place, for 
one to get the subsidized fertilizer one must own a tittle deed. Yale mashamba tunayolima kule 
Mau Narok hazina vyeti y ia umuliki na imekuwa ni ngumu sana kwa wakulima kut oka sehemu ya 
Mau Narok kupata huduma  au mbolea.  
Mheshimiwa Karanja alisema kuwa kuna sharia ambazo ziliwekwa na wale viongozi wa awali ya 
kwamba zao la viazi lazima ipimwe kwa mifuko za kilo hamsini. Badala ya kusaidia  wakulima 
kutoka Mau Narok au eneo lolote ambao hukuza viazi imekuwa ni shida na ningependa bunge hili 
kusaidia au kutunga sharia nzuri ambo sitasaidia wakulima wote katika kaunti ya Nakuru.  
Tunapozungumzia mambo ya elimu, napongeza hotuba ya mheshim iwa Gavana likini niko na 
swali, haya mambo yote tunayozungumzia hapa ua haya mambo yote ambayo yamehaidiwa hapa 
na kuna mheshimwa vile vile alikuwa ameulizia, ni kweli yatatekelezwa ? Tukiangalia kwa undani 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 kabisa mambo ya kulisha watoto shuleni itakuwa ngumu kidogo. Hii ni kwasababu  kuna shule za 
chekechea ambazo zilijenwa na viongozi wa hapo awali lakini hadi sasa haijakamilika. Kuna 
baadhi ya madarasa ambazo zilijengwa mw aka wa 2014 na watangulizi wetu. Mimi nina maono 
tofauti, badala ya kuanzisha mradi wa kutoa vyakula kwa shule z a chekechea kwanza tukamilishe 
ujenzi ya madarasa yaliyo kwama na pia tuajiri walimu wa kutosha katika vituo vya shule ya 
chekechea.  
Tuko na mfumo  mpya ya elimu ya CBC mbele yetu na katika vikao tutakayoudhuria kuhusiana na 
mfumo huo ni lazima CBC iondolewe kabisa. Ya mwisho ni mambo ya Afya , tuko na vituo vingi ya 
Sahanati ambazo zilijengwa na watangulizi wetu lakini hadi wa sasa havijakamilika. Ni lazima 
tumalize ujenzi wa vituo hizo na pia kuajiri madaktari ile tuweze kusonga mbele. Mimi nitamal izia 
hapo na matarajio ya kupata mazungumzo kuhuzu vifaa vya kuzima moto ...  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  (On a Point of Information ) Mheshimiwa  Spika ningependa kutoa hoja 
ya taarifa au kumtaarifu mwenzangu hapa.....  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): What is it Honorable Njuguna? Already you have allocated 
yourself time.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Naomba kumtaarifu au kumpea taarifa mwenzangu hapa.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): So, either one of you has to be seated, Honorable Dida do you 
want to be informed.  
Hon. Cyrus Ndegwa: No, I will finish first and he may inform me later.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Proceed honorable Cyrus  Dida  
Hon. Cyrus Ndegwa : Asante , wengine wetu tunashika mambo polepole lakini tutaelewa 
tukisonga mbele. Nilikuwa namalizia kwa kusema ya kwamba nilitarajia kuskia mambo kuhusu 
vifaa vya kusima moto na vile tutashughulikia iwapo janga la moto litatokea katika eneo zetu. Zile 
magari ya kusima moto ambazo tuko nazo hazitoshi, k ama kule eneo ya Mau Narok tumekuwa na 
hiyo shida kwa muda mrefu. Unakuta janga la moto umetokea mahala fulani lakini magari ya 
kusima moto unaambiwa ziko kule Molo  na kable ifike mau narok wananchi tayari wamezima ule 
moto au lizababishe hasara mingi sana .Kwa hayo mafupi na machache, nashukuru sana . Sasa 
naweza kaarifiwa.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Honorable Ndegwa you cannot be informed after finishing your 
submission but you are well advised . Honorable Jane Gituku from Maiela Ward.  
Hon. Jane Gituku : Honorable Speaker , I am representing the good people of Maiela Ward . I want 
to appreciate this  House and say thank you because of the opportunity our Governo r coming inside 
here and tell ing us of what we expect for next five years.  One thing I would like to say is that the 
speech of Her Excellency  the Governo r was all-inclusive  and was talking about completion of 
projects that have stagnated for some time. We appreciate that and we know with  that completion 
some of our many problems will have been solved. On the issue on agriculture, we were talking 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 about Agriculture and she has given us some few instructions on what we are going to do with our 
Agriculture.  
I also want to request for the fertilizers especially the ones that were flagged off last week , the 
mode of distribution was very wanting, people called each other, and the people who were needy 
did not get this fertilizer. My request would be the County administration to put measures i n place 
that will allow the Member s of the County Assembly to also oversee how these fertilizers are 
distributed.    
On Early Childhood Education , like yesterday I spent the whole day on the ward and I had some 
few cases of Children  fainting and I was feeding some in the ECDs and I  am thinking that in the 
Supplementary Budget which is coming up in January, this because the long drought has been 
persistent  and we do not have enough food. Please let us consider first feeding the young Children  
because some will get malnourished. On the Youth Docket, when I look at my online page and I 
saw a page pleading our governor that, we the promises that you gave to the youths during the 
campa igns have now taking effect. I would request that we be informed that there are some people 
taking advantage of this situation , they are asking our youths one thousand and if this is true, let 
be informed as the Members  of the County Assembly so that we can know whether this project 
has been rolled on.  
On the issue touching on Health , those who are in the Health Department have got very good issues 
and the issues are here in the Governors Manifesto but there is a group tha t has been forgotten, the 
people living with HIV and Aids. These people are in our community, they are our brothers and 
sisters, and we surely need to allocate something for them  so that they are catered for because they 
are vulnerable and the situation of  the econom y is not favorable and I urge that we consider and 
factor them  up. When it comes to land issues ... 
                                            (Hon. Stanley Karanja stood in his place)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  What is it honorable Member, which point of order?   
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Honorable Speaker , there is a statement and the Hansard  is on, there is an 
alarmist. The honorable Member  talked about the Governors What sApp  page  that there are some 
people demanding for money... I think that one ought to be clarified because it cannot just go like 
that. It is a scaring statement . It ought to be clarified so that we know or the evidence be tabled. It 
is not just a m ere statement.  
Hon. Jane Gituku: I have that evidence;  I have it is on Screen Shot and I will be able to provide 
for it later because that is why I am raising concern because our accounts can be hacked and I have 
no problem for I know many things do happen. When it comes to land issues, there are lan d issues 
that are national  and land issues that are county related. Because the two are supposed to work 
together complementarily, it is just a request that this House to come up with a formula that will 
allow us to know our boundaries when it comes to dealing with land. There is the issue of planning 
and then there is the national issue of titling . We had a report that was prepared by this County 
Assembly last time and when it was challenged in Court... it just remained that, that it was not very 
effective , so that the finances we use in all these activities, especially on matters land, does not 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 just go to waste, my people of Maiela who were evict ed, we have gone back to square one, because 
that ad hoc committee  report  was challenged in court  and we have to start again. And what is most 
interesting is one of the stakeholders who is Ken Gen when it was  called in an open forum, stated 
that clearly, all through that ad hoc committee, they were not aware that the y were the  subject of 
discussion.  
 So, what I would like to request is that even as we proceed with issues that touch really our people, 
we should be able to be merciful enough so that whatever we do in this House does not just come 
out like that without having any ef fect on the ground. When it comes to tarmac , Maiela  ward is the 
only ward in this county of Nakuru that has never seen the light of tarmac and … so I would 
appreciate very much the 200 kilometers and out of those 200 kilometers, some 50 kilometers. I 
know they will be coming to Maiela. 
When we come to issues that are related to women and gender. We appreciate because in our 
societies, we are having children who are being molested. We have mothers who do not know 
where to run to. So as soon as possible, make  this a manifesto be implemented to the great good  
of the people of Nakuru. Honorable Speaker sir, we thank you and we appreciate we are learning , 
we have never been in any  county assembly and we know that everything we say here should be 
well documented, we should be able to have proof and that is we have talked about issue because 
I know some young men who are now ready to give 1000…  
                                    (Hon. Stanley Karanja stood in his place)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Hon. Karanja?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Speaker I am standing on point of order no 8 before the members sits 
down, you cannot continue while you have not substantiated.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Karanja, that one is overtaken by events  
Hon. Stan ley Karanja:  No, it has not been overtaken because it has been captured by the Hansard  
and you know Mr. Speaker, when…  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Karanja Mheshimiwa Jane Gituku said that she has it in 
screenshot…  
 Hon. Stanley Karanja:  let us hav e it. 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  that one will be supplied to the Whip and then the Whip will 
now know how to supply it to the members with that information.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: I was saying that because we cannot have thieves in the Governors 
What sApp  
                                                                 (Laughter)  
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Jane Gituku:  I said Facebook page. I think you should understand me I said in the Facebook 
page not WhatsApp . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Order! Order! The member sa id that she saw a screenshot in the 
Facebook. so Mheshimiwa Doreen.  
Hon. Doreen Korir:  Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to support the Governor's 
speech, first and foremost, I would like to start by congratulating the governor HE Susan Kihika 
for being elected as the third Governor of Nakuru County. Let me also take this opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker to congratulate you and the Honourable members for being elected as such.  
I also want to talk about the issue of ECDE you realize that our kids require to be taken care when 
they are in the formative stage. As we build as a builder builds a house you realize that he 
concentrates so much on the foundation stage. So, it is important rather than finishing foundation 
is very important and the issue of ECDE ha s been mentioned so much by the honorable governor 
on the issue of feeding programs and also the employment of ECDE teachers.  
 It is so crucial, in areas like in Solai you realize that most of the kids go to school without food. 
So, it is very important and I really support our honorable governor for that, let us give her support 
to introduce this feeding program to the kids and al so let us increase the number of teachers in the 
ECDE.  
That being said, Mr. Speaker, sir, I also support the issue of the vocational training centers. The 
governor talked about a promotion of partnerships with universities and industries for the 
commercia lization of youth innovation, progressive establishment of vocational centers, there is 
need to encourage our youths to undertake vocational  courses, that are basically regardless as 
technical courses, you realize that a lot of youths are moving from the i nformal to the formal 
sectors which is a good thing. But also, there is need for people to be trained in other sectors like 
plumbers , mechanics, which is very important. It cannot be overlooked so we encourage our youth 
to join the Vocational Training Cent ers. And also, the governor has mentioned that it will be 
increased in numbers.  
On the issue of water , our governor in her speech mentioned that she will focus on achieving clean 
and safe water supplies. It is unfortunate that in this 21st century, our mo thers and girls are still 
carrying water on their backs.  
Most of the schools in the remote areas do not access clean water. And most of the pupils in 
mashinani  go to school carrying jerrycans of water especially on Fridays in our wards like in Solai. 
We have a lot of hopes in the leadership of the governor. Soon, we hope that all these mothers and 
grandmothers will stop carrying water on their backs.  
On the iss ue of the girlchild and women, there is this issue of GBV , establishment of GBV centers, 
which is very important, you realize that most of the cases in the Mashinani they are so rampant 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 we need to establish these GBV centers as soon as possible, so that th ey can be able to rescue our 
girls who are suffering in the mashinani, we need these centers and I encourage honourable 
members that we support this. And we also allocate more resources to the construction of GBV 
centers so that we can be able to rescue th e survivors and give them the guide and counseling and 
also the medical treatment that they require. Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker, I support.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you, Mheshimiwa Kamau from Maai Mahiu then 
Mheshimiwa Alex from Lake View . And then I will be now crossing over to my left and see 
whether we are going to have enough time to come back to my right, in that order.  
Hon. Eliud Chege:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank our governor for giving us a 
such a good speech. Bec ause when I look at the speech, it is touching every area. I think during 
the campaign Madam Governor went through all our wards , all our sub counties, and I think is a 
comprehensive report of problem s facing  our people that she came up with.  
I would like  to look agriculture, because one, our county is among the counties that other counties 
depend mostly for food. And it is very unfortunate that today, our county also is among the counties 
that are affected by hunger. I think we should come up with a formu la and a method that can help 
our agriculture sector.  
When we look at our areas, right now, people are starving. And yet other counties are looking at 
Nakuru as a county that has ability to produce maize.  
 The other day, I think, was it yesterday or the o ther day? I had breaking news that we had some 
people feeding on the chameleon from Nakuru, I dissociate myself with that information, because 
it is very ashaming, not in order at all to hear that there are people from Nakuru…  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  Mheshimiwa Kamau was that from the mainstream media or 
from gutter press, sort of?  
Hon. Eliud Chege:  It was from our newspaper everywhere from social media in short,  all media.  
What is it Hon. Karanja?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Maybe he gets to sit first.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  You will proceed later. Hon. Kamau and I want to believe that 
if you wanted to debate then you have spent your time on informing the House and pointing out 
on points of order. So this is the last chance for you to speak.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: there are  members from Kuresoi here and  they are sitting pretty when 
Hon. Kam au is saying that they are feeding on Chameleons, if they are still seated, it may be true, 
because they are not waking up. So, Mr. Speaker, that is why I wanted   Hon. Kamau to clarify 
whether he really saw or he just heard and believed. And those from Kuresoi  is it true or you are 
uncomfortable eating chameleons? That is what I wanted to know  
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
                                                                                (Loud consultations ) 
Hon. Eliud Chege:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was just giving it as an e xample, because if at all, 
that can happen or can be associated to Nakuru , that is some thing  that is ashaming our county and 
that is why I am saying in our agriculture sector, I wonder where  are those cereals , what is 
happening? Because if you got the national government, you hear them saying we have a plan to 
plant 5000 trees, as a county, we should be in a position to say, how many acres of maize are we 
intending to plant, how are we going to empower  farmers,  we should have that number so that we 
can understand how prepared are we to cope with such a situation.  
 the Governor's speech was very good, because she talked about food security. And this can be just 
like a poem, if not implemented, it sounds very swee t. But we must have a formula on what to do, 
on what order , what should be done first, second, and whatever. We must have that program, 
because as a member of this House, we are the ones who are supposed maybe to guide and to give 
our governor, maybe the f ormula or the areas that we need first , because I believe our governor is 
somebody who listen s to people.  
I would like also to touch about water. My ward is a semi -arid area. Right now, we are seriously 
in need of water. It is very unfortunate that nowada ys, in some schools, we have a program called 
Water fetching day, because learning cannot go on normally without water. So, we have set a 
certain day where students go to fetch water for school.  
Now we have developed another issue we have ascertain Health  Center in Longonot where the 
community is fetching water to feed the health center because one, I can hear some people saying 
that if you have a program called fetching water, we are misusing the school timetable, but can we 
stop learning because there is  no water? What can we do? what you're saying is this in terms of 
water, let us come up with a good formula because I can see in the Governor's speech, she is talking 
about Malewa  where she is going to  have water for the sub-county . Mr. Speaker, I am for t hat, let 
us try and see what we can do so that we can save our people.  
With that, I would like to thank our governor for coming up with such a good speech and which I 
know if implemented  can solve the problem s of Nakuru. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speake r (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you, Mheshimiwa Alex from Lake View. And then I will 
cross over to my right  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the speech and the address by Her 
Excellency, our governor Susan Kihika . Indeed, this is a master plan, a masterpiece and a blueprint 
that will see this county go into the future.  
The points that have been addressed here, the pertinent issues that have been addressed very well 
and critically, when you go and look at a part of what has been pres ented here, and more so  
education, we all know that education is the equalizer of all the societies and people within this 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 world that we stay in , were it not for education, some of us will not be here. Some of the people 
here will not be in the office. In so saying the foundation of all this, is the ECDE. Where I come 
from, Naivasha , we are having pupils going to school without meals day in day out. T his morning 
I had  go to a school whereby we are doing a fundraiser to build a kitchen, because these students 
are staying without food from their homes. Flower farms are closing within Naivasha and when 
we have a governor who is coming up with a master plan of having a fee ding program within the 
county government,  I think she is a mother, and a person who really knows, where it pinches most.  
Within the same education, you find that she intends to see to it that we have vocational institution 
and transition of these students  to that state of education.  
When you look at the bursaries, this is a key issue that is affecting each and every person where 
we come from. Indeed, it was an issue that was taken by many during the campaign s. So many  
people got  votes  because of it , it al so made some members go  home . It is the same issue that is 
being used by the members of National Assembly to return the CDF and being used as the tool to 
bring the CDF back  and anchor it  to the Constitution. And it will go through.  
We cannot underate such a speech and I say that Mheshimiwa governor has addressed education 
in a very good  way.  
In Naivasha we have so many land disputes. In fact, in my own ward, I do not know whether it 
can reach around 10,000 title deeds, we have government land that has been  wasted, government 
land that has been taken by people in one particular area. Mr. Speaker, you might know Kihoto 
area, I have land that has not been used for the last, I think 50 years, it stands at the Kenyatta 
Garden , this land has so many court cases, but this is public land. Within her address, she states 
very well that we shall have alternative dispute resolution methods and I think th is is a governor 
that has seen the future because within the same speech , she has said that she will do digitalization  
of all the land registries. And I think with that we shall have things going on very well. If this land 
disputes are resolved the county will own this land. And we shall hence go to the master plan on 
affordable housing. And I think, Mr. Speaker with that  the county government and the national 
government will conjoin very well to providing mwananchi of Lake View ward and all the other 
sub counties within Nakuru County with a good and clear way of housing.  
We have complained of health facilities within our  Ward. When you come to a hospital like 
Naivasha level 5, you find that it is serving all the other sub -counties that are surrounding us; th us 
parts of Gilgil, parts of Nyandarua, Narok and with Mheshimiwa Governor stating that we shall 
enhance the local d ispensaries and health care centers. I think she has seen where it pinches 
because most of the people who surround these dispensaries and health centers, and especially the 
health centers, they are not served well. When we have digitalization of medication , we shall have 
captured  how drugs come in and how they are dispensed to the people. Within Naivasha, you will 
find that most of the people have been affected by the fluoride nature of our water. You will find 
that the teeth are either brown or the bones a re weak and hence these people are eliminated from 
the military training, police training and other things. You will find that the people who serve 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 mainly within the taskforce within Naivasha have been recruited  from elsewhere. We must own 
our town as a pe ople and as a nation, and more so  as Naivasha and hence we state that with the 
Governor coming up with a plan on how to bring clean affordable water back to the people of 
Naivasha, I think I will die for this Governor.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mhes himiwa Peter Njoroge from Murindat then we come to 
Mheshimiwa Koros from Mauche, Mheshimiwa Gathanwa and Mheshimiwa Mwangi in that 
order.  
Hon. Peter Maina : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. As the Chair for Education, I must admit that I 
am impressed by the vision she has for the education sector. For the first time in history, we are 
going to have a feeding program and this is a welcome news to our little ones because it is going 
to increase and add value to the nutrition, considering that many children are coming from very 
humble backgrounds. This feeding program is also going to increase enrolment in our ECD 
centers. It is quite encouraging to see that the Governor, in her vision, also intends to expand the 
ECD centers. If you walk around the County, you wi ll realize that many ECD centers are 
dilapidated and are in bad shape. Therefore, coming up with new centers will not only improve the 
face of the County but will also increase the quality of education that we provide to the little ones. 
She also showed he r concern in wanting to enhance the digital capabilities in the ECD centers. 
That means we will be providing laptops which is part of the Big 4 agenda. I also noticed that in 
her speech, she has the intention of acquiring modern equipment and also tools fo r vocational 
training which is quite important for our youthful people because as much as we need to give them 
the technical skills, we have to have the right equipment to do that. Lastly, the Governor has the 
intention of coming up with vocational centers  of excellence in every sub -county. This is what I 
want to commit as the Chairman of Education Committee; I commit to engage the executive to 
ensure that all the MCAs from different sub -counties have been engaged in this discussion of 
wanting to identify w hich wards we are going to have these centers of excellence. Having said 
that, thank you.  
Hon. Moses Koros: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I stand to support and applaud the speech by H.E 
Governor. She took time to assess our needs as a County and I can see as far as health sector is 
concerned, she is committed to reforming the health sector so as the population to receive health 
services. According to her speech, she is ready to improve and even to promote the healthcare 
service including supporting the working personnel in the County. We have a number of workers 
who should also be promoted and motivated. In the Cou nty, a number of our staff are engaged on 
contract basis and for them to be motivated, especially the nurses, I hope the Governor would 
consider taking them on permanent basis, more especially those who have been renewing their 
contracts for several years so that they can be motivated and provide the services that we require 
as a County. Agriculture is the backbone of our economy. Recently, there was an introduction of 
cheap fertilizer and it appears as if the cheap fertilizer is benefiting those living aro und the town 
or those living around the stores where the distribution is taking place. Where possible, there needs 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 to be an organized manner so that our farmers can receive the fertilizer near their doorsteps so that 
they can benefit so that if it is the p rice that has been set, all the farmers receive those fertilizers at 
that rate. Otherwise, the way things are now, the cartels will take the center stage and farmers will 
be disadvantaged, therefore lowering the production. We need to do production so that  the nation 
can feed itself. Nakuru is an agriculturally rich County and the farmers need to be supported, 
especially the potato farmers. Potato farmers are really facing a lot of challenges because we have 
middle men who are buying the potatoes cheaply. T he production cost is very high but when you 
see the kind of sack used, they have an extra bag at the top, fleecing our farmers. Our farmers 
should be supported at all times, including even the maize farmers.  
I am happy to note that even our governor has indicated that there will be routine maintenance of 
roads across the County up to 2000 kilometers. It is good that the roads should be maintained but 
there are areas where roads need to be opened. Maintenance can only take place only in areas that 
have got  existing roads but in some Wards like mine, there are some areas that have never been 
opened. The roads are impassable during rainy season and we would also like to have funds to 
open up new roads so that our farmers can access the markets easily without much challenge.  
As far as water is concerned, there is an acute shortage of water across the County and in my Ward, 
Mauche, there are some people who have never seen or even tasted tap water. They use rain water 
and dam water and the water is not very cle an. At the end of the period, I would be happy to see 
our people having clean water drinkable water. While we are waiting for flagship Itaare and 
Chemasusu dam project to be complete, I would be happy to see a number of boreholes being 
drilled in my Ward. There are some boreholes that have stalled. As much as possible, I would like 
to utilize those boreholes so that our people can have clean water as envision in vision 2030. I am 
also happy that our Governor has talked on issues concerning vocational traini ng. We have serious 
unemployment in the County and if we can have many of our youth having training in various 
vocational training centers that will be established, we shall solve the problem of unemployment 
because somebody who has undergone some skills t raining can self -employ himself. To reduce 
the number of unemployed youths , we encourage that vocational training centers will be equipped 
and supplied with tutors so that those who have undergone the training can come around and be 
funded so that they can  employ themselves and once they employ themselves, they will also 
employ other youths around the county therefore solving the problem of unemployment.  
Land is an important factor of production. In our County, we have fertile land and once we have 
that la nd, agricultural activities can continue but where there is no proper ownership, production 
may not be as maximum. In a number of areas, including my Ward, we have land caveat that is 
really affecting production because people are not very sure of the next  move. We support the 
Governor in her effort to lift the caveat in those areas that are affected. Once proper titling is done, 
the farmers will do best and the production will go up. I would like to encourage that as we lift the 
caveat, the Government shou ld sit down properly because in some areas, there are some tittles that 
have been issued out. Finally, I want to say that we support the Government of H.E Governor and 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 we hope that very soon, the caveat will be lifted so that our people can enjoy their sta y there. Thank 
you. 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Hon. Philip Wanjohi.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I wish if you can provoke Standing Order 104. 
This deals with the reputation. Since morning, the Members have actually deli berated and I am 
sure the next member who would be given a chance to speak will talk about health, ECD, Land 
and Water. If you look at the Members here, they are already getting fatigued and time is running 
out. Kindly provoke Standing Order 104. We have r epeated the same issues since morning. Thank 
you. 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is another angle to that. There are Members who have 
been lining to talk and now we need to agree amongst ourselves that when you have the floor, you 
have a maximum of two minutes so that the other Members who have been lining to contribute to 
the Governor’s address can only be fair.  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. As much as we are talking about the same 
things, we are all talking on behalf of differen t people. I have not talked on behalf of Eburu 
Mbaruk. Let me start on the matter’s  health. I would wish to commend the Governor because she 
really touched on that area. There is this issue on youth friendly services. The youth are going 
through a lot and they are unable to go to the mainstream health centers to be able to focus on the 
issue of reproductive health and mental health. Establishing youth friendly centers is a welcome 
move from the Governor. On the issue of supporting the support group for chro nically ill patients, 
people in our County are really going through a lot in terms of cancer treatment and other chronic 
diseases and having a support group can really go a long way. I would wish to talk on matters 
health financing; both in terms of NHIF a nd waivers; specifically let me focus on waivers. I want 
to believe that for a patient to get a waiver, it should depend on their need, their background and 
the situation that they are in and not necessarily the relationship between the Member of the County 
Assembly and the officers in the health facilities. It should be about the patients and hence, we 
should have a framework whereby when someone has finan cial challenges, there is a proper way 
of accessing waivers and not just based on whether you are able  to have a good relation with the 
officers in charge. I wish to commend the Governor for medical supplies that she flagged just the 
other day. It is our wish and hope that they will be able to reach every corner in the County. On 
matters water, Eburu Mbaru k is semi -arid. It is my great hope that in this government we will be 
able to sort out the issue of water in areas like Eburu, Kongasis and Echariria as Hon Alex from 
Lakeview stated, they end up affecting the future careers of people. One may miss out be ing in 
discipline forces because of missing classes because when they were young,  they were busy 
fetching water. Water affects  other areas like general hygiene. On the matter of land which is 
emotive, we are unable to do fruit farming or tree planting in m y area because lot of people do not 
have titles and they are afraid of investing in long term projects. The titling program is welcome, 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 the earliest is the best and we also hope that the register is going to be well kept because we have 
so many cases of do uble titling.  
On Roads, I believe Eburu Mbaruk has the biggest road network. I welcome our governor’s plan 
of having 2000kms of roads being maintained and 200 Kms being upgraded to bitumen. I also 
wish to note that this can only be helpful if we are able to do the procurement in a timely manner. 
We have had tenders being awarded towards the end of March when the rainy season are starting 
and so the works are not really done to proper standards. Within a month or two it is time for 
payment and we move on to  the next finical year. If we can be able to change this time around, 
have procurement done as early as possible and also have timely payment to contractors, this will 
have a direct impact on the standards of work that they are doing.  
 Last but not least l et me touch on bursaries. We have a problem currently because in my area a 
lot of people depend on farming and we have not been able to get enough rains so without products 
from the farm, they have no source of income. As at now we are depending on food ai d. In January 
we will be depending on aid in terms of fertilizer and farm inputs. The parents will have a hard 
time accumulating money enough for school fees. I would support that we really focus on helping 
them in terms of bursaries. Last but least I supp ort the governor’s speech. Thank you very much.  
                                                                 (Laughter )  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri): Hon Gathanwa, you have said last but not least for more than two 
times. This is the order so that we can fast track on Members submissions. Hon Mwangi, Hon from 
Elburgon then Hon from Ronda and then Hon Hassan in that order.  
Hon Joseph Mwangi : Asante sana  Mr. Spika. Kwanza nishukuru kwa sababu ya nafasi hii 
ambayo nimepata ili niweze kuchangia hotuba ya g avana  wa jimbo la Nakuru. Nimeamini kwamba 
tulikuwa na mawazo mazuri tulipo hairisha kuiongelelea hii hotuba wakati uliopita kwa sababu ya 
umuhimu na uzit o ulioko. Kwanza Mheshimiwa Spika nikiongelelea kuhusu kiwanda cha 
uchukuzi, alipo tuambia gavana in kwamba anafanya juhudi kuhakikisha watu hawa wanafanya 
kazi kwa amani. Ile kitu ningeomba ni ukiwa na gari kama ya matatu, ukija Nakuru unalipishwa 
stika y a elfu moja mia saba. Ukiwa Naivasha pia unakata stika nyingine. Ningeomba ili  tutimize 
haya tuwe na stika moja ambayo ni ya Nakuru kaunti kama maeneo mengine kama vile Laikipia 
na Nairobi, ambapo wako na stika moja tu kwa sababu iko kwenye hiyo kaunti, n dio akitoka kaunti 
ya Nakuru analipa hiyo ya kaunti nyingine. Kwa mambo ya barabara gavana wetu aliongelea vizuri 
na kutuahidi kilomita 200 za lami ni jambo la busara. Niliposkia Mheshimiwa Dida akiongelea 
kuhusu ukulima, mimi kwangu niko kwenye CBD kwa hi vyo chakula cha kwangu ni lami. 
Tutaunga mkono Mheshimiwa Dida apate ukulima, nami waniunge mkono nipate lami juu hiyo 
ndio watu wangu wataweza kufurahia pekee yake. Kwangu hatuwezi lima wala kuweka vikundi 
walishe kondoo ama kuku. In tarmacking of my ward  I think I will be the first. There is this issue 
on Early Childhood Development (ECD). In my area the ECD that are public are just four. Private 
ECD  centers s are more than 20 . Wakati ninaskia watu wakiongea kuhusu feeding program,  
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 ninataka kuelewa vile tutaweza kufanya kwanza kwa sababu hawa watoto wote wanafaa kupata 
chakula. Ile kitu ningeomba na kusuhi gavana wetu kwanza tumalize madarasa ya hawa watoto, 
tuajiri walimu kwa sababu kuna huhaba. Shule moja ya chekechea kwa ward yan gu iko na 
mwalimu mmoja pekee ambayo anafunza wanafuzi sabini na tatu. sioni msingi ulioko pale na 
Mheshimiwa Doreen alisema kwamba nyumba ni msingi kwa hivyo hao watoto hawapati msingi. 
Kwanza tuajiri walimu na tuweze kumaliza na kuongezea ECD katika publi c utilities  ili tuweze 
kumaliza na si kufunga Biashara za watu lakini ni kutaka kuwaleta watoto mahali 
watafaidika.Kuna suala ambayo gavana aliongelea sana kuhusu the governor’s kitty  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri): Hon Mwangi kindly be finalizing.  
Hon Jos eph Mwangi : Mheshimiwa Spika naomba kwa sababu asubuhi sikuwa na Mheshimiwa 
Njuguna najua alikuwa na wengine waniruhusu tu niseme haya.  
                                                      (Laughter ) 
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri):  Hakuwa. You have gotten that wrong. He was not there. Hon 
kindly summarize your submissions.  
Hon Joseph Mwangi : I will be summarizing, just two issues then have my seat.  Kwa hiyo kitty 
Mheshimiwa Spika imekuwa gumzo ya mtaa kwamba pesa zilitoka watu hawajapewa na ni kweli 
hatuja pata kwa sababu the county is not functional  juu kuna kesi. Nagadhabika sana kwa sababu 
ya hao watu ambao wanatuchelewesha kwa hii maendeleo ambao wamepeleka gavana kotini. Ni 
vibaya sana kwa sababu uzito wa hati hauwezi kuwa tu amefanya uteuzi wake kama h ajui anataka 
kutekeleza haya mambo. kwa hivyo ni nagadhabika na hao sana na ninaomba wajue vile 
wanaendelea kututesa wakati tuko hapa na mashinani.  
Swala ya hatimiliki ambayo walituhaidi ya kwamba tutapata, kuna shida sana kwa sababu 
ukiangalia mwenye sah i analipa viwango vya ardhi alinunua hiyo ploti kwa mtu wa tatu.Sio 
kwamba hatuwezi kupata title deeds  bali ni kwamba jina lenye liko kwenye mgao wa awali aliaga 
kitambo kwa hivyo mtu wa tatu anayemiliki shamba anaogopa kutoa title deed kwa sababu itatoka 
na jina ya mtu aliye ahaga. Ikitolewa na jina la baba yangu na ploti iko na maendeleo hakika 
sitakubali  kukubadilishia. Hiyo ndio uoga ambao iko na watu pale. I beseech  the governor, now 
that this issue has been devolved , the county to revoke that original allotment and issue another 
allotment to that person who pays the rates so that we can fasten the proc ess of getting title deeds.  
Kwa hivyo nashukuru sana kwa wakati huu na nafasi hiyo nimepata na ninaunga mkono na kupigia 
kongole hotuba ya gavana wetu wa jimbo la Nakuru. Asante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Hon Njuguna Mwaura : Shukrani sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri): There is an issue of precedence in the House. So, Hon Deputy 
Speaker then immediately after the Deputy Speaker now Hon Njuguna and Hon for Ronda ward.  
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon Joseph Ng’ang’a):  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker sir . I want to 
reiterate the speech from the governor and bring to light that there is this issue that she talked about 
Itare dam. Members I would want to share some information about the Itare dam because wengi 
wenu huwa mnaskia kuhusu Itare dam na inaweza k uwa hamkujua ni nini ilikuwa inaendelea . Itare 
dam was a very big project that was aimed at bringing water to Nakuru but haikuwa ilete maji 
Nakuru, hiyo maji ilikuwa ipelekwe Gichia  farm ili avocado ziweze kukuwa vizuri. Ningependa 
kusema hivi kwa wale amba o tumetoka upande wa  Kuresoi North na Molo, tunaweza penda mradi  
huo ufikiriwe tena kuhusu mpangilio wake na vile ambavyo ilikuwa imepangwa itengenezwe kwa 
sababu ni vibaya sana maji itoke Kuresoi North pale juu halafu watu wa Molo wakose kupata hiyo 
maji. Hiyo maji iteremke hadi Rongai pale Gichia farm iende kusaidia m abwanyenye kadha katika 
hizo farms ambazo ziko hapo. We come from Molo where it is an agricultural sub county and I 
would request Madam governor, hii mambo ya farm inputs tunaweza penda zipangwe mapema 
ndio kama ni farmers wanapatiwa subsidies ziweze kuja before the farming periods ndio tuweze 
kujipanga vizuri pale mashinani. Kitu kingine ambacho ningependa kusema ni suala ya 
municipality. Tuko na municipality ya Molo na ya Gilgil na ningependa watu wa Gilgil na sisi wa 
Molo tuweze kushikana vizuri ndio tuw eze kuhakikisha ya kwamba hizi sheria ambazo zinastahili 
kufanywa zimekuja kwa wakati mwafaka ndio tuweze kupata fursa ya kufikia zile pesa ambazo 
zinatoka World bank katika municipalities.For instance a town like Molo is now a municipality by 
name but not  by the social amenities it requires. Ukiangalia Molo, barabara zimeharibika, ile 
sewerage system ni ile ya zamani. So we need to do some good planning and for us to do that we 
must pass this legislation through this Assembly. Nitaomba waheshimiwa wa Gilgi l na wa Molo 
tuweze kushikana pamoja ili tuweze kuharakisha hii mchakato ya kufanya hizo mji mbili ziwe 
municipality. Asante sana.  
Hon Njuguna Mwaura : Shukrani sana kwa kunitunuku fursa hii niweze kuchangia hotuba hii ya 
mstahiki gavana wetu. Kwanza nikuse ma ya kwamba hotuba hii ni ramani ya mheshimiwa gavana 
ya miaka kumi kama si miaka mitano na tuna huhakika ya kwamba mheshimiwa gavana wetu 
atahudumu kwa muda ya miaka kumi na hili kaunti yetu iweze kupata maendeleo.Idara ya afya 
imeguziwa kwa kina haswa k atika ile hali ya kuhakikisha kwamba tutakuwa wauguzi wa kutosha. 
Hali ya kuhakikisha kuna kwamba kuna riba na bima ya kulipia wagonjwa wetu katika kaunti 
nzima. Ningependa kuwaomba waheshimiwa kutoka wadi zao tofauti waweze kuwekeza pesa 
katika ile huduma  yetu ya NHIF ili wagonjwa na wasio na Uwezo waweze kupata huduma za 
matibabu bila kutoa pesa kwa mifuko yao. Vile vile mstahiki gavana wetu aliguzia hali ya uongozi 
katika hospitali zetu. Kumekuwa na hali kutokuwa na uongozi bora katika hospitali zetu na ndio 
maana kuna vizingizio za kupotea kwa pesa na ile hali ya kukosa uadilifu. Mheshimiwa gavana 
alizungumzia kwa kina hayo maneno tunajua ya kwamba hospitali zetu zitakuwa sawa na huduma 
zitaweza kupatikana vizuri.Katika hali ya kilimo, tunamshukuru mhesh imiwa gavana wetu kwa 
sababu amesema ya kwamba atakuwa na ushirika na zile idara zingine za kiserikali na mashirika 
mengine ambayo yanakuja hapa kwetu haswa tukizingatia chuo chetu kikuu cha Egerton. Wale 
wametoka sehemu za Molo wanajua ya kwamba sisi hutu pa viazi ovyo ovyo na uvumbuzi ambao 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 hivi karibuni yaonyesha ya kwamba viazi utoa mvinyo tamu zaidi katika dunia. Tuko na hivyo 
viazi hapa kwetu na twajua ya kwamba kukiwa na ule ushirikiano wa chuo kikuu cha Egerton na 
sisi kama serikali ya county tunajua  ya kwamba mambo yatakuwa sawa, viazi vyetu vitapata soko 
na wakulima wetu watapata pesa.kumekuwa  hali ya kuzungumziwa kuhusu mambo ya  kijinsia 
na kuna wahadhiriwa wengi hapa katika kaunti yetu. Kuna zile hifadhi ambazo zinafaa kuundwa 
katika kaunti yetu  na tunajua ya kwamba ng’atuzi yetu itakuwa ya kwanza kwa kuongoza katika 
hali ya hifadhi hizi na ili vijana wetu ambao wanadhulumiwa wapate pahali watapata hifadhi 
kidogo na ili waweze kujisimamia mpaka wafikishe miaka ya mtu mzima. Mwaka huu na wakati 
huu kuna hali ya tabia ya nchi na kuna kongamano amba lo unaendelea kule mjini Msiri. Tunafaa 
kuhakikisha ya kwamba tumeekeza pesa za kutosha kuhakikisha kwamba tunaangalia mazingira 
yetu yasiharibike na gavana wetu alizungumzia kwa kina kuhusu haya mazingara  na tunajua ya 
kwamba hii tabia nchi ambayo imetukumba sasa hivi  itakuwa ikizingatiwa katika hii miaka mitano 
tutakuwa katika hii jumba, tukihakikisha kwamba tuna pesa za kutosha. Nataka kukoma na kwa 
kusema ya kwamba tuna mwito ambayo tumeitwa sisi zote k ama viongozi siku ya leo kuhakikisha 
ya kwamba tutaifuata hii ramani na hata kama mheshimiwa Governor wetu atatoka kidogo nje ya 
hii ramani, ni wajibu wetu kama jumba hili letu kuhakisha kwamba tumerudisha hii ramani pahali 
inafaa na ili tuweze kupata yale  maendeleo yanayofaa.  
Mheshimiwa spika naomba kuunga na kusema ya kwamba nitakuwa muangalifu sana na kuhakiki 
ya kwamba bajeti yoyote italetwa katika bunge hili itazingatia hii ramani na ili tuweze kupata 
kusonga mbele na hi i kaunti yetu isonge mbele.  La mwisho kabisa Mheshjimiwa Spika, Nakuru 
yetu ilikuwa mji ambao ulijulikasna katika Afrika nzima kama mji msafi zaidi, twaonmba 
Mheshimiwa Spika kwa sababu Gavana wetu amesema atahakikishe kwamba ule usafi 
utazingatiwa na utarudi hapa kwetu kama njia moja a ma kitengo kimoja cha kuuza Nakuru yetu 
iolikuwa  kama mji ambao ni mpya ambao itajulikana katika nchi nzima na dunia nzima na ili 
watalii waweze kuja hapa kwetu tuweze kupata kiinua mgongo tuweze kusonga mbele. Naomba 
kuunga n a kushukuru Mheshimiwa G avana .  
Hon. John Gachiri: Asante Mheshiwimwa Spika kwa nafasi ambayo umenipatia.  Naitwa John 
Macharia na ni mheshimiwa ambaye anawakilisha watu wa Rhonda. Kwanza nikushukuru kwa 
sababu ya mswada uliyoletwa masaaa ya asubuhi na kiranja wa wengi wa Kaunti ya bun ge hili 
Mheshimiwa Alex. Nasema asante kwa kunifanya mmoja wa wale watawakilisha wahueshimiwa 
katika County  Assembly  Service Board. Pia kushukuru wale wazee wa kiama lakini ni wazee 
waliweka kwamba  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon member, is that part of this ama ni  your preliminary 
observation  
Hon. John Gachiri : Nasema hivyo kwa sababu ni continuation  ya yale mambo yaliyokuwa 
asubuhi  
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Okay pia nimesikia kwamba kuna wazee wa kiama sasa 
nikashangaa,  they were not part of the Governor’s address.  
Hon. John Gachiri : Nasema nashukuru kwa sababu ya wale wazee ambao wanafanya kila juhudi 
kuhakikisha ya kwamba, unajua hata kama mzee kama Alex, si mzee lakini ni kijana. Anaweza 
kufanya  kazi kama ya wazee na wengine kama akina Duale wanaonekana wachanga lakini ni 
wazee  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa unatupoteza  
Hon. John Gachiri : Naendelea kwa mswada  
(Laughter ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Unapoteza nyumba, kindly confine  yourself to the Governors 
address unless there is another substantive issue you want to introduce  
Hon. John Gachiri : Nilitaka tu kushukuru kwa hiyo kwa sababu ilikuwa sababu ilikuwa 
mojawapo ya mswada na nilisimama sikupata nafasi so kwa sababu ulipokuwa ukiadjorn kutoka 
asubuhi, ulisema ya kwamba mswada yote itaendelea wakati wa  saa nane. Kwa hiyo nashukuru 
kwa sababu ya nyumba hii kwa nafasi hiyo na pia nataka nirudi kwa yale mazungumzo ama ile 
jambo ambalo alileta kutoka kwa speech yake nikishukuru sana  kwa sababu nimeona ya kwamba 
katika jambo moja tu nataka kuzungumza na ninaona chairman wetu Njuguna amezungumza 
kuhusu jambo hilo. Bw ana Spika, katika kaunti hii yetu kuna areas zikle za slums nyingi sana hapa 
kwetu kama vile Rhonda na watu wanapitia shi da kubwa sana kwa sababu unapata ya kwamba 
kila siku mtu hata akipewa ruhusa pale PGH, hawezi kupata hata pesa za kulipa bill za hospitali 
maana kwa siku ada ya kulazwa ni Kshs  1,000 na ukihesabu mtu atalazwa siku 15 ama zaidi, 
unapata kwamba yule mgonjwa hawezi kuaford kujilipia bill ya hospitali. Kwa hivyo ni ombi 
langu tunapopata yale mambo ambayo Mhesahimiwa Governor wetu ambaye tuinasupport mambo 
ambayo aliyaleta katika bunge hili, ya kwamba ni ombi langu tuungane pamo js na especially 
karika hali ya health katika kaunti yetu, committee wale members wako hapa wa health, tunaomba 
ya kwamba zile bills na zile mswada zote mtakazoleta hapa, please naomba ya kwamba tuweze 
kushirikiana pamoja tuweze kusaidia watu wetu. Wanaumi a na hii hospitali ya PGH naona ya 
kwamba mheshimiwa Gavana ameahidi na amesema ya kwamba ata streamline kila jambo ambalo 
haliendi vizuri katika PGH. Watu wetu wamefungiwa pale hawawezi kujilipia bill na kila siku 
tunaletewa bills zaidi ya Kshs 30,000   n a yule mtu hata ameshindwa kulipa kodi yake ya Kshs  
1,500. Kwa hivyo ni ombi langu nyumba hii tunapofanya mambo hayo ya NHIF, tuweze 
kuwasaidia wapendwa wetu na tuweze kuwainua na kuhakikisha ya kwamba hawatafungiwa 
kwenye mahospitali kwa sababu ya bills. As we are talking saa hizi, kuna zaidi ya watu 300 ambao 
wamefungiwa hapo na tunashukuru wakati Gavana alipokwenda pale, alitoa waiver ya Kshs  5 
million na kuhakikisha ya kwamba kuna watu waliachiliwa kwenda  nyumbani. Kati ya watu 
ambao walipewa waiver hi yo ya Kshs  5 millioni, kulikuwa watu wa Rhonda zaidi ya watu 100. So 
tunashukuru sana kwa mambo kama yale naweza kuongeza mambo mengi lakini kwa sababu 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 yamezungumzwa, hata kwenye mambo haya ya 200 km, tunashukuru kwa sababu committee ya 
Roads ikiongozwa na  chairman K.K, utaangalia maslahi ya watu wote na uwatoshanishe, kama 
vile mmoja wetu amesema, k wake kunahitaji lami tu na unajua kwamba wewe una nguvu ya 
kutimiza mambo hayo. Mungu aibariki nyumba  hii kwa matendo yao mema wanayotenda. Thank 
you very much Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Member. Hon. Hassan  
Hon. Ali Abdi : Thank you Mr Speaker, allow me also to join other  members in congratulating 
and also thanking Her Excellency the Governor and also the third Governor and first woman to 
become Governor of Nakuru. Your Excellency I am not good in Kiswahili and you know I am 
shocked that someone from Molo can speak very wonderful swahili. I also told myself that people 
from Mombasa are the only people who speak Kiswahili sanifu but  I am very happy. I am not 
going to speak about land, health or whichever but I want to speak about young people because I 
am here to represent them. On the Governor’s address, she mentioned that she wants to establish 
ICT hubs in every sub county. It is v ery important to have these ICT hubs because nowadays 
everything is about technology and through establishment of these ICT hubs, our youth will get 
job opportunities from such investments. Today in the morning I had a privilege to attend County 
security m eeting with the Hon. Deputy Speaker at Milimani area where we had a very wonderful 
meeting with the regional Commissioner, the County Commissioner and representative from the 
ministry of Interior and also the National Anti - Terrorism Centre. Mr. Speaker th e agenda of that 
meeting was about radicalization, you find out that young people have been radicalized, back at 
our homes such as Kaptembwo, Rhonda where you find illegal groups calling themselves confirm. 
They have no work to do, wanakaa mahali kutoka as ubuhi mpaka jiooni they just go through their 
phones and they are conning people. Mr. Speaker when we have these ICT hubs, these are places 
that the youth will engage themselves positively, get job opportunities from every part of this 
country. I have also  picked something from Her Excellency Governor’s speech about the access 
to Government procurement opportunities. It is known as AGPO and nowadays, we have people 
referring themselves as young people but in actual sense they are elderly. I mean they form 
companies with young people and give them 10 percent shares and when they do work wakati 
wanalipwa  these money inaenda kwa wazee ; We want that issue to be streamlined , its young 
people aged 18 -35, hatutaki wazee wakule ya vijana, wazee wakule pesa za wazee na wakae 
nyumbani watosheke na hiyo.  The most important thing and the last issue because I said I am going 
to talk about young people, the Governor talked about creating Arts Fund and the nurturing of 
talents. Mr. Speaker in this House many of us have tale nts but most of them have not gone outside 
and used those talents very well and that is why wakiamua kwenda kutafuta kura kuja kwa hii 
nyumba.  If some of us like myself I can play football very well . However, I did not get that chance 
to go and play football. Today I was speaking to the Deputy Speaker and he told me he is a very 
good pool player. I don’t know alikuwa  captain  ya Kenya mzima ya pool so Mr. Speaker kama saa  
hizi hangekuwa hapa angekuwa a nacheza pool wapi ? China. So, we need to support the Governor 
and make sure that some of these policies when they are going to be brought in this House we 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 make sure that they are fast tracked  so that we can create these sports and arts funds for nurturing 
young people. Mr. Speaker mimi sina mambo mingi  I just wish that when these policies are brought 
to this House we are going to fast track them. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, I need to give some direction but already Hon Kuria 
is up. What will happen is that we will adjourn this debate but for clarity, the Governor’s address 
enjoys up to four plenary sittings. So, we are going to adjourn this sitting for a session tomorrow, 
However Hon. Francis has really  put up his case h e has been standing through this session but then 
there is going to be Hon. Keziah tomorrow, then Hon. Noto Sakwa tomorrow and then Hon. 
Murage in that order. You will kick start the debate tomorrow and of course I am seeing Hon. 
Gatuso from London and H on. Hellen Chemutai. The last Hon orable  Member this evening to 
submit points for the Governors address is Hon. Francis Kuria  
Hon. Francis Kuria : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir , I am supporting the address  of our Governor 
and I will be very short and brief. On mat ters of constructing robust integrated county transport 
infrastructure master plan , covering roads and transport connectivity, I would like us to support 
the Governor by; one, we want to have the surveyors of the Nakuru County to do site visit so that 
we can identify those people who have encroached some of our roads, because s ome of the roads 
are impassable and you find that once the contractor is on the ground, they do very shoddy job 
because for one , the roads are very narrow, maybe people have grabbed p art of the road and have 
fenced on such designated road network. We let the surveyors during site visits with local 
administration, with law enforcers so that those who have encroached the road can pave way for 
such infrastructure. Secondly,  we want to ide ntify the drainage system, you find the contractor 
once in the field, he just comes maybe during dry season comes does marram and leaves the site 
but when the rains start, the marram is washed away. We want if possible,  identify where culverts 
and bridges can be installed . We have this issue of land subdivision and if it is possible if for 
example is a 10 acre and the owner has identified, let us have a Bill so that those doing such 
subdivisions give access to such property so that those who come to buy the  plots do not experience 
issues of roads  impassability dur ing rainy season. We want areas where roads are being tarmacked 
once the bitumen is being laid, if you go right now you find the cyber cables being installed 
underneath the road, you find the road contractors drilling some tunnels. If it is possible let us have 
the sleeves being put under the road so that once there is any road construction going on, the 
contractors can access the areas through such sleeves may be to pass their cables and we ar e not 
going to have issues such as interference of the roads hence blocking of their accessibility. I 
support this speech of the Governor, there is a member who commented that those in rural -urban, 
people need the tarmac and in fact those in rural feed tho se in urban and rely on each other. Let 
those in rural areas be recognized that they too need the tarmacs roads because we are the source 
of the raw materials, we feed the people who are in urban center s and therefore we do not want 
that discrimination , we all need that inclusivity and equality. With those few remarks Mr. Speaker, 
I support the speech of the Governor. Thank you.  
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Francis the chairman Committee on Roads and 
Infrastructure. So, Honorable  members t he debate is adjourned to tomorrow 9.30 in the morning.  
ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 9.30am  
(The House rose at 4.50pm ) 
 
    
 
 