COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 1ST March, 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03:05 PM 
[Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS . 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
DECORUM  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honorable Members , in the Morning I said that I will be giving 
a detailed Communication  about Decorum in as far as all Members are supposed to be dressed in 
this House. I am in communication with the Chairperson of the Committee on Powers and 
Privileges and he will be able to table a Report in the House.  
Meanwhile , there was an agreement we made  in a Kamukunj i set up in a certain training in Kisumu , 
and for that matter th e Kamukunji  Agreement stands. We had said that in the Plenary , the 
gentlemen are expected to be in a suit , a shirt and a tie . For the ladies it was debatable ; they said it 
has to be official so that decorum of the House  is upheld. As such, honorable Members we will be 
expecting the Committee on Powers and Privileges to table that Report sometime  later,  but for 
purposes of  Decorum meanwhile , the decisions and th e declarations of that Kamukunji  stand . So 
Members stand guided. Next order.  
STATEMENTS.  
FIREFIGHTING DEPARTMENT . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  There are Statements and the first Statement is from honorable 
Leah Wambui Ng’ang’a from  Kabatini Ward . 
Hon. Paul Warege: [On behalf of Hon. Leah Ng ’ang’a]. Thank you Honorable Speaker.  Pursuant 
to the provision of Standing Order 47(2) (C), I rise to request for a Statement from the Chairperson 
of the C ommittee on Disaster Management concerning the status of the Firefighting 
Department……  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  The Honorabl e Memb er for Kiamaina, w here is t he Order of the 
Statemen t from,  the Honorable Member from Kabatini ? 
(Laughter)  
. 
Hon. Paul Warege:  Mr. Speak er Sir, my name is Paul Waweru W arege representing the people 
of Kiamaina Ward. I was requested by honourable Leah to table this Statement on her behalf 
because she is in a function somewhere but she is late. So I beg to proceed.  
Thank you;  honorable Speaker , pursuant to Standing Order 47(2) (c) , I rise to request for a 
Statemen t from the Chairperson of the Committee of Disaster Management concerning the status 
of the Firefighting Department at the County Government of Nakuru . 
Honourable Speaker , despite having a Firefighting Station within the County . Nakuru Disaster 
Preparedness and Mitigation measures  remains wanting. In the recent past, Nakuru Boys High 
School was up in flames and efforts of the members of the public to get assistance from the Nakuru 
County firefighting Department were futile. It is worth noting that  whenever major fires erupt, 
people die and property worth of millions of shillings is destroyed leaving an uncountable losses.  
Therefore  Mr. Speaker , the D isaster Preparedness, Mitigation and Management should be taken 
with the seriousness it deserves to ensure lives and properties are protected. Mr. Speaker This is a 
very sensitive matter that touches on people's lives and properties. This House should therefore 
task the Disaster  Department to instigate proper and efficiency mitigation measures to curb future 
incidences.  
 I therefore request the Chairperson Committee on Disaster Management to issue a Statement on 
the following.  
1. How many Firefighting Engines and other fire equipmen t the County has and their 
distribution.  
2. The staff establishment in the Department on firefighting and whether they have the 
requisite skills and knowledge to handle disasters in case of any eventuality.  
3. The status of the C ounty Department in Disaster prep aredness and mitigation. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker, sir.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you The Honourable Member for Kaimaina ; now that 
Statement has been requested to the Chairperson Committee on Disaster Management. And you 
are expected to give a co mprehensive Report in this House after 14 days starting today.  
The next Honourable Member to request for a Statement is Honorable Simon Kamau Karanja . 
Hon. Simon Karanja:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, sir. Honorable Speaker pursuant to Standing Order 
41 (2) ( c). I hereby request for a Statement from the Chairperson of Sectoral Committee on 
Environment, Energy, Water and Natural Resources concerning the smoke emission emanating 
from the ongoing fires at Gioto d ump site in London Ward. Hono urable Speaker owing to  the 
ongoing fires ranging from Gioto d ump site, t he dark smoke originating from the burning garbage 
is posing a risk to the health of the residents of London Ward and the neighbouring Wards due to 
toxic emissions. It is disturbing that as a County we are not giving our residents clean and healthy 
environment that they deserve. All human beings depend on the environment in which we live. A 
safe, clean, healthy and sustainable environment is integral to the full enjoyment of a wide range 
of human rights, inc luding the right to life, health, food, water and sanitation. To this end, I wish 
to request the Chairperson Committee on Environment, Energy, Water and Natural Resources to 
issue a comprehensive Statement on the following;  
1. Whether the County Government is  aware of the of the fire burning damage at Gioto dump 
site. 
2. The plans the County Government is undertaking to protect the rights of the residents to a 
clean environment.  
3. The short and long term measures the Department has put in place to curb the spread o f 
smoke to the environment.  
Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Member for Kihingo. Hon. Majority Leader.  
Hon. Alex Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise on Standing Order 79. I know our House is 
still learning and this is not t o discourage the Members but to help us as we continue learning and 
demystifying the issues of Standing Order. Standing Order 79 talks of no Member shall read a 
speech but a Member may read short extracts from written or printed paper in support of an 
argument and may need to refresh the memories. I was looking at our two colleagues as far much 
as we continue learning and for the sake of trying to demystify this Standing Order which makes 
us afraid standing on this floor. I know  Standing Order 79 (2) gives authority for Members to be 
able to read the speeches. I was just rising to ask if the two Members are in order after presenting 
a written speech in pursuant to what they were presenting for the sake of learning of the House. 
Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. J oel Karuri): Hon. Majority Leader, thank you for that observation. This being 
that they are seeking for Statements, a Statement has to be very clear in a way that was requested 
and in a manner that the Hon. Member requesting for it has to be clear so that as the Chairperson 
would be responding, it would be very clear and they are going to confine themselves within the 
areas that the Hon. Member requesting had indicated in the Statement. Where the written speech 
is not allowed, it is when now the Members who  would be debating about specific issues and even 
when the Chairperson will be responding to the Report, the Speaker will allow two or three 
Members to comment on the said response. In such a situation no Honorable Member is allowed 
to read his or her submission, address, views and perspective to the Honorable House but for the 
sake of a Statement it could be allowed so that the Chairperson is able to get the content. Thank 
you for that observation. The Hon. Chairperson for Environment.  
Hon. Rose Chepko ech: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Hon. Member Majority Leader we do not 
understand what you are talking about.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Honorable Chair. Request number two by the 
Hon. Member for Kihingo is committed to your Committee. Ta ke note of that. You are expected 
to bring a Report to this honorable House after fourteen days starting today. The third request for 
Statement comes from Hon. Joseph Muraya. Member for Viwandani.  
Hon. J oseph Muraya : Thank you Mr. Speaker for protecting us  from the intimidation from our 
Majority Leader.  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Order! Order! Hon. Muraya. That is a serious allegation before 
this Honorable House. Are there any intimidations in the House? Maybe the Speaker does not see. 
I have not seen t hat. Kindly substantiate.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Hon.Speaker, when the Hon. Majority Leader stood on a point of order, he 
had not sought advice from the Clerk’s office whether the Statement must be escorted with some 
argument. He was the one who was out of or der trying to tell us that we must do what we are not 
supposed to do. Well requesting for Statements was a kind of intimidation to the Members in one 
way or the other but since you have protected us, noted that as a concern and elaborated further, I 
rest m y case.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Muraya proceed with the Statements but the Hon. Majority 
Leader will have his time to say whether he is intimidating Members.  
Hon. J oseph Muraya : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Pursuant to Standing Order 47(2) (c), I ri se to 
request for a Statement from the Chairperson of the Committee on Culture Sports and Community 
Services concerning the impact of Sports Fund among the youth. T his House appropriates Kshs 
500 every Financial Year per Wards towards Sports Fund. It is im portant to note that the aim of 
this fund is to nurture sport s talents among the youth and to build a cohesive County, devoid of 
divisions of whatever nature. Hon. Speaker, while we appreciate this noble idea, it is important 
that we review the program wit h an intention to establishing whether it is serving its intended 
meaning.  
We are aware Nakuru County Youth are immensely talented in various sporting fields. In fact the 
County Government has not fully created an enabling environment to afford the youth an 
opportunity to reali se their full potential in term s of their talent. I therefore request the Chairperson, 
to issue a comprehensive Statement on the impact of the sports among youth, in terms of nurturing 
talents and supporting the youth to earn a living from sports. Thank you Hon. Speaker  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon . Member from Viwandani Ward. The 
Chairperson  Committee on Culture, Sports and Community Services take note and you are 
expected to give a comprehensive Report to be tabled 14 days starting today. The hon. Majority 
Leader  
Hon. Alex Lang’at : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I want to thank my good friend Hon. Muraya I 
think we are becoming more good friends because we must mention each other in this House but 
in very good faith. I think when I stood, I actually made my intentions known that it is actually for 
learning process which is a continuous process. Some  of us , like me I am a slow learner but when 
I learn something and more so when it is done practically it helps me and sticks more to more types 
of debate. Therefore Mr. Speaker sir and my friend, I have no reason to intimidate this great House 
that I lead  but I have very good intentions to let this House learn so that when you hear of Standing 
Order, and Hon. Muraya is a victim be cause yesterday while we had a T emporary Speaker the 
Hon. Member stood on a point of order, when asked which order, he could not  substantiate. He 
only said it is on the order of wearing clothes . 
(Laugher)  
And yet there is no such order. Therefore what we are doing here today, is just but a learning 
process and to help him also be able to understand the Standing Orders. This is just  where I am 
also keen and keep on to understand them. So there is no intimidation; but it is just a learning 
process and to keep the House lively so that we keep on learning. Thank you Mr. Speaker sir . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Maj ority Leader. Next Order  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hono urable Members This Honorable House stands adjourned until Tuesday next week at 9.30am  
The House rose at 3.30pm  
  
 
   