COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 1ST March, 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:30 AM  
 [Speaker ( Hon. Joel Karuri ) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
PAPER (S) 
COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF NAKURU FISCAL STRATEGY PAPER (CFSP), 2023.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  There is a Pape r to be laid by the Leader of Majority honorable 
Alex Langat.  
The Deputy Majority Leader (Hon. Rose Njoroge ): Thank you honorable Speaker , I rise to lay 
the County Government of Nakuru Fiscal Strategy Paper (CFSP), 2023 . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you Deputy Majority Leader. Now the County Fiscal 
Strategy Paper has been laid and  Honorable Members, note that according to Standing Orders 209, 
the Chai rpersons of the Sectorial Committees to take note that it is deemed to be laid to all the 
Sectorial Committees and all the Chairperson s of the Sectorial Committees need to consult with 
the Chairperson for the Committee on Budget and Appropriation s so that the needs of your 
Departments are taken care of when the Committee on Budget and Appropriation s will be bringing 
the final Report before this Honorable House. Next order. What is it Honorable Karanja ? 
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Honorable Speaker , I have two concerns and it is good that we put them 
to your Office for consideration. There is the Speaker ’s Panel, and according to the Standing 
Order s they assist you in terms of business but from two days ago and yesterday we raised this 
when Honorabl e Mutai was seated on your seat and there were students here and the Speaker ’s 
regalia is one ; the Speaker ’s Panel do not have one. Honorable Speaker we are concerned that you 
cannot tell the difference other than the seating position between the Chair who  is the Speaker  and 
the Members. You should also put in mind that when the panel is assisting when we have the 
Committee of the whole. There has to be a difference between when that Member  is seated as a 
Chai r of the whole House  and when that Member is seated as the Speaker . I would urge your Office 
to motivate the Speaker ’s Panel by having a regalia so that even when they have a photo , there is 
a difference. So that is one concern. And I said that there it is to you and because Hon. Mutai 
cannot rais e because definitely he is your employee that is number one.  
Number two Mr. Speaker and that one goes to juxtapose that one with when you said that we 
should not come in a Kitenge, as you ruled that let them have a good one and we be asked the 
colour as Members such that it will not be dull… you know Hon. Mutai is dark so he cannot wear 
something black.  
The other thing and this I  said I will raise, whenever a P aper is being laid…  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Hon. Karanja, now that y ou are the styl ist or a fashion designer, 
proceed, execute your case as Hon. Palang ;a comes in later. So, allow the Hono urable Karanja 
to… 
Hon. Stanley Karanja:   Hon. Palang ’a allow me, Chairs have no regalia. So Mr. Speaker, the 
second point I was trying to raise is that whenever we are laying Papers, you know there was a 
tradition that when we come in  when there is a Paper and it is supposed to be c ommitted elsewhere, 
Mr. Speaker we be given the duration when t o pick. So for example now the Paper  that has been 
laid we be told where to collect that Paper; Members will have it.  Those are my two concern s Mr. 
Speaker and I think I have laid in my case and I do not want any advice.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Hon. Palang ’a. 
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I was only concerned that Hono urable 
my friend , a learned friend and a former teacher Hon. Stanley Karanja has repeated on this floor 
several  times  that this is a House of rules and procedur e. Mr. S peaker, we are guided by the O rder 
Paper for any given session  and his submission Mr. Speaker does not feature anywhere on today's 
Order Paper. I feel strongly that when we are in official discussion like this Mr. Speaker, you need 
to guide this House that any other matter that should be introduced should also be in line and in 
tandem to what the Standing Orders provide.  
So Mr. Speaker , that particular concerns which are genuine anyway, but they are not legal, they 
are not necessary as of now becaus e this is a form of discussion that is guided by the Standing 
Orders and of course by the Order Paper. So, his concerns are very genuine. But again, we may 
not …those are housekeeping rules from your office. Mr. Speaker,  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honourable Palang ’a Do you want to be informed?  
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: I think, unless it is quoted and referred to the Standing Order, because here 
we are only talking about what is provided by the law. So unless he is quoting any Standing Order. 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honorable Karanja . 
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Speaker, you know very well when there are  personal S tatements, 
you know when to talk about it when there are concerns, Mr. Speaker you do not put any concerns 
on the Order Paper and he knows that . He has been here for 20 years unless he is fo rgetting  and 
you know, also age  is also a concern. It is known that wherever there is a concern and the House 
has a concern it ought not to be in the Order Paper because it was not an order. It was not the 
business of the House.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Or der! Both of you resume your seats. What is it Hon. Palang’a?  
Hon. Peter Palang’a: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. The point of Order number 36 clearly provides 
for matters of County Importance. Should it be that very important, then the Hon. Member is well 
conversant with this provision of the Standing Order where it provides the provision and writing 
to the Clerk for that. Therefore, we discuss that matter as a County Importance matter. In this case, 
this is not a matter of County importance and even if that i t is, then there is a procedure to do that 
because this is a House of rules and procedure. That is my submission.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. We let that matter rest. Hon. Karanja, have your seat.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Mr. Speaker sir, do w e allow him to mislead the House?  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Have your seat, Hon. Karanja, you know there is a Statement 
and the thing about personal Statement; unless it is an issue bordering the welfare of the House 
and the Membership of this House  and maybe some Members are in danger and then there is some 
urgency in it that is when you can raise. The issue about the Speaker’s Panel, uniform and regalia; 
that one can wait and maybe the issue that could have sufficed for this discussion is the issue  about 
the Report; when to pick the Report. That is properly before the House.  
The issue about advocating for Hon. Mutai who sits in the Speaker’s Panel about what sort of 
colour that his garment should look like, that is a good proposal but we leave it t o the people who 
design for the County Assemblies because there is a standard on how the Clerks and the Chair’s 
garment, that is the Speaker, should look like.  
What is it Hon. Mwangi?  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I have a concern also because Hon. Karanja 
has said that you gave a ruling on decorum and the dressing code and if that is so, last Wednesday 
I was here to ask a Member of the Speaker’s Panel that there was an Honorable Member se ated 
just there without a proper dress and a tie and the Majority Leader said that you have never given 
a ruling on our dress code. That is a concern from me because I was then misled by the Maj ority 
Leader.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Majority Le ader you misled the House.  
(Laughter )! 
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Langat): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Since he has mentioned 
me, I would like to respond to my answer that I gave a concern because he was concerned about 
the issue of decorum. I remember from this very Honorable House that this issue has kept on 
recurring every now and then. The last time I was seated in this House, there was that concern and 
you gave a direction that you are going to set up a small Committee so that this Committee can 
agree. If my memory serves me well and the Hansards are there, the Committee is going to sit and 
agree on what type of garments, regalia or what is decorum and what is not decorum in the course 
of a sitting like this.  
I am informed because I followed up from  that day that there was such a discussion while we were 
away somewhere in Kisumu as a full House and such a discussion was done.  I am learning the 
game from my seniors Hon. Karanja and Hon Palang’a that this is a House of rules and once a 
decision is mad e outside this House, it means that it has not been adopted. Mr. Speaker I do not 
know maybe I missed a section. If such a Committee sat and a decision was made, I would wish 
that maybe such a decision is also brought before the floor of the House for adop tion so that it 
becomes part of the rules and regulations of this House. I am not aware and maybe I should seek 
for information. If whatever was agreed outside was ever brought to the floor of the House for 
Members to be able to adopt and now become one of  our guiding principles as per Standing Orders 
as far as decorum is concerned. I rest my case as far as that is concerned.  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): thank you. What is it Hon. Hon. Palanga? This is your last time 
to speak during this session.  
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: Yes sir.  And of course Mr. Speaker you know very well that the Standing 
Order well provides that you cannot speak twice on a same matter but this is a different matter 
altogether. I think the House stands informed. This House has got two app roaches on how we 
resolve on issues. One we can formally meet in this House and agree on a matter. On the other side 
we can meet informally in a Kamukunji  and liberate on some issues which does not necessarily 
need to come to this floor. It remains binding  at that level. What I am gathering on that particular 
day, I think Hon. Majority Leader if what I am being whispered to by my colleague here that that 
Hon. Member had worn only a plain shirt minus a tie then I think your submission was misplaced 
because a gain the decorum states that you may not necessarily have a coat but a tie is mandato ry 
when you are in a plain shirt constitute in terms of being in decorum and so for that reason Mr. 
Speaker, we had a meeting in Kisumu and sealed the Member’s concerns ve ry well; when we had 
a Kamukunji  discussion during which we agreed on how we will have to be dressing, when it 
comes to the Plenary Sessions. I remember there was a hot debate where Members were like, tuvae 
kitenge ama nini?  However, we said and even I remember challenging, Hon. Karanja, that all these 
different clothing, we have so many other days that you Members can wear.  
Therefore we agreed that to remain in decorum, Mr. Speaker, you will have to affirm the decision 
and discussion that we had then for us to be abiding to this regulation. This also gets us back to 
the Whips; it is not even the role of the Majority Leader and not even the Speaker but the Whips 
from different fronts to make sure and ensure that Hon. Members coming here are in decorum. So 
again I want to like remind you especially the Whips to be equal to task in ensuring that Honorable 
Members are in decorum whenever they are coming to the Assembly. That is my humble 
submission. But I think again if it requir es to adopt these rules here, if you say so. But that 
particular matter was put to rest informally and all of us were there and agreed on the way forward. 
Therefore, I do not think it was necessary for it to be brought again to this Assembly for us to 
discuss when the Leaders have sat down and agreed on the way forward.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): That has been deliberated enough, unless the Hon. Muraya you 
raised the issue  
Hon. David Muraya : Thank you Mr. Speaker, what I would ask from you Mr. Speaker is that 
before we leave this session, from what I understand, anything to do with the decorum lies in your 
ruling. Therefore kindly with all due respect for us now to raise that concern again, make your 
ruling because the Speaker who was seated in your Cha ir had asked the Majority Leader to confirm 
whether the Member was in decorum but the Majority Leader stood and never even turned his 
head to look at the Member.  
So Mr. Speaker kindly do your ruling because we do not want to repeat that here again. I was so 
much humiliated because I had a general concern that we were all not in decorum.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): That matter has to come to rest; I will be giving a Communication 
this afternoon and that will be at rest and now Members will be guided. Ne xt order.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable Members, this House stands adjourned to today at 2.30pm.  
The House rose at 10:50AM  
 
 
 
 