COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 8th November, 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House Met at 03:00 PM 
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): In the Chair).  
PRAYERS  
QUORUM  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  We have a Statement  from Hon. Geru . 
Hon. Antony Kanyere:  Mr. Temporary Speaker , before we proceed, let us first confirm if  we 
have a quorum.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  Okay. Honourable Geru, take your s eat. Let me 
call upon  the Ser jeant to confirm  whether we have a quorum.  
(Serjeant at Arms  counts the Members in the House and  confirms there is no quorum)  
Okay. I request the Serjeant at Arms to ring the bell for 10 minutes.  
 (The Bell was rang for 10 minutes ) 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  Honourable Members, o n behalf of the Whips, 
let me request  Honorable Deputy Majority Leader , Hon. Rose  to confirm whether we have 
achieved the quorum.  
The Deputy Majority Leader  (Hon. Rose Chepkoech): Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker , we 
now have  the quorum.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  Thank you, l et us proceed.  We have some 
Statement s to be made ; and pursuant to the provisions of Standing Orders 47 (2) ( c) let me request 
Honorable Geru to make the Statements . 
 
 
 
STATEMENT (S) 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  Pursuant to Standing Order 47(2) 
(c), I rise to request for a Statement  from the Chair person  Committee on Lands, Housing and 
Physical Planning , concerning the construction of Affordable Housing Project at the selected 
County Estates , especially Nakuru Town East and West. Mr. Temporary Speaker, s ome of the 
County Estates were identified for demolition, to pave way for the construction of Low Cost 
Houses under the Affordable Housing Program by the National Government.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, while  we are not opposed to the idea, it is imperative that the County 
Government comes  up with an elaborate plan that involves all  Stakeholders , detailing how such a 
Program will be executed.   
Mr. Temporary Speaker, a  few weeks ago,  the tenants occupying the County Houses were served 
with Notices to vacate the premises , and of  great concern  is that  the Notices did not give sufficient 
time to enable occupants to seek alternative accommodation. Mr. Temporary Speaker, i t should be 
noted  that Shelter is a basic human need and as such, no one should be denied such rights without 
lawful reason and this is provided for in our Constitution.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, as we all know, the Country is currently experiencing heavy rains. 
Therefore, su ch intended actions are likely to bring harm which would be  more devastating to the 
affected families. Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he County Government has a responsibility to protect 
the residents, including coming up with elaborate strategies to ensure the affected  families get 
alternative houses.  I request the Chairperson  for the  Committee on Lands, Housing and Physical 
Planning to i ssue a Statement  and comprehensively to report on;  
1. Why the County Government did not issue enough time to enable the County Estate 
occupants to arrange for alternative accommodation?  
2. Was there sufficient Public Participation with affected Stakeholder s before deciding to 
issue such N otices to the occupants?  
3. What plans does the County Government have to assure the current occupants that they 
will be accorded priority when allocating the Affordable Houses upon completion?  
Mr. Temporary Speaker that  is my reque st. I beg to move.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Thank you very much Hon. Anthony. The 
request is well stated and I want to request the Chair person for the Committee on  Lands, Housing 
and Physical Planning to give a response to this within 14 days.  Chair?  
Hon. Eliud Chege:  On behalf of the Chair, I am the Vice Chair  of the Committee  and the request 
is well received.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): It is in or der, thank  you. There was also a request 
that was made by Hon. Rose  the Membe r for Gilgil  and Hon. Isabella, Subukia concerning the 
Bursary Award . Let me call upon the respondent, Hon. Peter Njoroge Maina to give the response.  
 
STATEMENT  
BURSARY ENHANCEMENT  
Hon. Hellen Megek:  Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker, I am here to give a response concerning 
the Statement  of Bursary Enhancement for Subukia and Gilgil Wards amounting to Kshs. 1 197 
000.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he Children's Act  2001 requires the Government  to undertake all the 
necessary steps to make available Free Basic Education to every Child . The County Government 
has actuali sed this through the award of Bursaries to needy Students  to enhance access to 
Educati on and this serves a critical responsibility of making children well prepared for their future 
education.  
 Mr. Temporary Speaker, o n 18th October 2023, Hon. Isabella Makori , Member of the County 
Assembly for Subukia Ward , and Hon. Rose Gathoni Njoroge from  Gilgil Ward , sought a 
Statement  from the Chairperson of the Sectoral Committee on Early Childhood Education and 
Vocational Training concerning the status of  Bursary enhancement amounting to Kshs. 500 000 
and Kshs. 697  000 for Gilgil and Subukia Ward  respectively , which had been enhanced in 
Supplementary Two Budget for the Financial Year 2022 -2023 . Specifically, the Hon. Members 
wanted answers to the following queries.  
i)  Status of Bursary Enhancement amounting to Kshs.500, 000 and Kshs.697 000 for Gilg il 
and Subukia Wards respectively.  
ii) The plans the County Government is undertaking to unlock the stalemate in the release of 
the above funds.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , in the response the Department  observed that they were aware of Subukia 
and Gilgil Wards  issue, concerning the enhancement of Subukia and Gilgil Wards  amounting to 
Kshs .1 197 000. The Departmen t also highlighted that the two Wards ' monies had been processed 
at the  Department level and that they had been submitted to Finance for onward payment. The 
Departmen t also highlighted that the payment failed to be effected at the I nternet Banking (IB)  
level due to IFMIS System challenges. Mr. Temporary Speaker, the Department also stated that 
they had already factored in enhancement for the two Wards  in the Supplementary 1 Budget . Mr.  
Temporary Speaker, c oncerning the plans  the County Government  is undertaking to unlock the 
stalemate in the release of the above Funds, the Department  stated that t hey had the intention to 
unlock the stalemate immediately after the Supplementary Budget is approved and then initiate the 
payment process.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I hope that the Honorable  Members who requested the Statement  have 
been duly answered. Thank you  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): I can see Hon orable  Rose ; are you conten ted 
with the response?  
Hon. Rose Njoroge:  Yes Mr. Temporary Speaker , I am contented . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Thank y ou. Is Hon. Isabella around? She is not 
around. Okay, thank you. Next Order.  
 
MOTION  
NASHA AND WAKULIMA MARKET  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): There is a Motio n THAT  the House adopt s the 
Report o f the Committee on  Trade Tourism and Cooperatives and Planning on the Inspection Tour 
of Nasha and Wakulima Market in Nakuru East Sub -County . I call upon the Mover of the Motion ; 
any Member from Trade Committee?   
Honorable  Members , there is no Mover  and I therefore invoke Standing Order 52(3).  Next Order.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable  Members, this House stands adjourned until Tuesday next week at 9.30  AM 
The House rose at 3.40 PM 