OCTOBER 18, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tues day, 18TH October 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3: 45 pm 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri)  in the Chair]  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
OMISSION OF HON. ZIPPORAH WAMBUI IN PLACEMENT IN CATERING AND WELFARE COMMITTEE 
AND JUSTICE AND LEGAL AFFAIRS COMMITTEE  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Honorable Members there is  Communication to be made;  there 
was an omission for Honorable Zipporah Wambui in the placement and nomination to the 
Committee  on Catering  and Welfare  and the committee on Justic e and Legal Affairs. Kindly take 
note. Next order.  
MESSAGES  
NOMINEES TO VARIOUS DEPARTMENTS  
  
The Speak er (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Honorable Members , I have received a message from her 
Excellency  the Governor Honorable Susan Kihika and I read;- Pursuant  to the provisions of Article 
179(2) ( b) of the Constitution  as read together with Section 35 of the County Government Act 
2012 . My office is in receipt of a Message nominating the following persons to the respective 
Departments.  
1. Dr. Nelson Tanui Mara - Water, Environment, Climate Change,  and Energy.  
2. Dr. Samuel Mwangi Mwaura – Health Services  
3. Hon. Stephen Muiruri Kuria -  Trade, Culture And Tourism  
4. Hon. John Karanja Kihagi – Lands, Physical Planning, Housing And Urban Development  
5. Mr. Leonard  Kipkoech Bor – Agriculture , Fisheries And Cooperatives  
6. Mrs. Rosaline Wanjiru Munagi (HSC) -  Public Service Management  
7. Mrs. Josephine Atieno Achieng – Sports, Gender And Social Services  
8. Hon. Zipporah Wambui – Education, Youth And  ICT 
9. Mr. Stephen Iribe Njogu – Finance And Economic Planning  
10. Eg. Michael Kamau Karanja – Infrastructure  
OCTOBER 18, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 This list of the Nominees  stands Committe d to the Committee  on Appointmen t for further action. 
Next order.  
MOTION  
HOUSE ADOPTS SELECTION COMMITTEE REPORT ON NOMINATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORIAL 
AND SELECT COMMITTEES  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  We have a  Motion from the Leader of Majority Party.  
Majority Leader (Hon. Alex Lang ’at): Thank you Honorable Speaker sir, I wish to move a 
Motion  on the adoption of the  Committee on Selection  Report on the nomination of Member s to 
Sectorial  and Select Committee s.  
I want first to thank the Committee  on Selection  for the tedious work, the great effort they put and 
the long ho urs they sat in considering their time to be able to place Members  in the various 
Committees  of this House. The Committee  put into cognis ance many  things. We reali se Nakuru 
as a County has a lot of diversities, we come from various Wards and regions with various needs 
in placing the Members, we were able to try and give some balancing and ensure the political 
divides within the House are well taken care of.  
As we, all know this is a House  of rules and order, governed and guided by Article 232 of the 
Constitution  where diversity is usually considered and every Member  is actually placed in a 
manner such that it will be pleasing and they will be able to perform . We were also able to look at 
the experience  of an individual as a Membe r and I want to say that there was no other better way 
of placing Members than actually t he way it was done. Sometimes not everyone may  be able to fit 
in a committee of his or her own choice but we tried as much as possible so that the functionality 
of members are able to deliver and add values in those specific Committee s which you are in.  
Honorable Speaker , having considered the regional balancing and considering the Standing 
Orders , the numbers within the Parties and it superiority of numbers within the Parties, the 
proportionate numbers we had to place, we had to consider the diversity and the various areas a 
Sub-Counties which we come from and our Wards, we were able to do this gre at job.  
I wish therefore to place before this honorable Hous e the great work that has been done for the 
purposes of adoption and in that respect,  there was one  Committee , which  I want to seek help and 
direction from the  Chair having considered the first interest the Members  had. The heat t hat it  
generate d and th at is the Committee  on Budget  and Appropriation s and the capping of the number 
which is only 15. We  tried all other avenues to try to accommodate as much as various interest to 
be able to reflect the face of Nakuru as a County because we want to make a benchmark.  
I request that we adopt all the other  Committees and I will request for an additional two Members  
on the Committee  of Budget and Appropriation to enable us one or two characteristics  in our own 
opinion that we were not able to capture because the numbers limits us . With those remarks I wish 
to lay the list for adoption before the honorable Hous e, I beg to move .   
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you, a seconder .  
OCTOBER 18, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Peter Maina: Thank you Honorable Speaker , I am a  Member for Murindat,  and I want to 
second the Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you, the Motions  reads that,  Pursuant to the provisions of 
Standing Order Number 156, this House adopts the  Report of the Committee on Selection  on the 
nomination of Member s to Sectorial  and Select Committees . The  Motion is open for debate . 
Honorable Karanja.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Thank you Honorable Speaker , I want to support the Motio n by the Leader 
of Majority  and thank the Committee  lead by Honorable Speaker . I want to tell the Membe rs that 
the Committee  really worked to a point where we forgot to take lunch because of the enormous 
work. I take this opportunity to say that this great work now, I urge the members to adopt and the 
Members can now be able to work to their fullest. This is because without Committees , the  
Assemblies or any Institution that make laws cannot work.  
The issue of Legislation, Oversight, and the issue  of Representation is done at the Committee s. 
Even the works of making sure the Members are orderly and making sure that  Members ’ behavior 
is regulated are  also in the Committees. Therefore,  each aspect  has been considered ... the three -
cardinal  objective of any Assembly is Oversight , Legisl ation and Representation do occur in 
Committees and therefore, now Members can work to their fullest. I will now urge  Members that 
have been placed in these different Committees, now it is upon the Members to work and make 
sure that Nakuru remains great. I  finish by saying, that the point that has also been said by the 
Majority also be considered . Mr. Speaker because you are here a nd you were a Member here you 
know that the Budget ’s is to make sure that the resources are appropriated adequately . Therefore 
Mr. Speaker, you may consider that.  
 Lastly,  I urge Members that those that belong to the Trade C ommittee to consider me for the 
Chair, Mr. Speaker . Thank you Mr. Speaker.   
(Laughter)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Order! That is gross ! 
It is not an avenue for exposing your candidature . That one is not registered ! 
Hon. Njuguna  Mwaura : Point of order  Mr. Speaker?   
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   Yes Hon. Mwaura.  
Hon. Njuguna  Mwaura : Mr. Speaker. I rise on  a point of order 189. Reference to what the 
Majority Leader has said , and Mr. Speaker  we cannot assert or we cannot actually say conclu sively 
that is in order that a C ommittee of this House sat, they went ahead to stamp on  an illegality. Mr. 
Speaker, b ut based on what you have said, because of many in terests and such kind of things, I 
would call this case as our Clerk would say a  sui generis  case, a unique case in this House, that  
has never been heard  before . 
OCTOBER 18, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 But because this is a background case that we really need to dwell on,  so that we can come out 
conclusively on various issues that are supposed to be relooked at when passing any sort of 
Committee and what should be also be considered. Mr. Speaker, if you  relook at our Bill of Rights, 
and if you look at even the way the Select Committee should be conducting itself, you reali se that 
the Budget Committee must reflect various issues. It must be considering regions,  Political Parties 
and Gender issues. I am a Gender expert  and I can tell you, in o ur Bill of Rights women should 
not be discriminated. And in any Committee, there must be a third of Gender, of which ha s not 
been put into consideration Mr. Speaker. If you look at our Bill of Rights, and at t he Maputo 
Protocol, women are prioriti sed and t hey are supposed to be given their say, and they are supposed 
to be looked at as a threatened part of gender , and therefore they should be given their priority.  
 Also Mr. Speaker,  on the issues of the political consideration, it is critical. If you look at  gender 
parity, men cannot discuss issues of women. And this is a taboo. On issues of health and our doctor 
here Honourable Alex will tell us that on the issues of tampons and other issues of sanitary towels, 
it is only women who can articulate and critic,  those . Therefore Mr. Speaker, I would wish to seek 
for your indulgence on that.  
 Also Mr. Speaker on the issues of representation,  I am an Independent Leader who came into this 
House. Therefore I qualify and the rest of the Members and I am not saying myself, the rest of the 
Independent Members ; there is none  Mr. Speaker . You know, it is not by coincidence, we are not 
aliens of this House, we ought to be given the proper share so that we as the Independent Members 
of his House we can now to go to the ground to represent our people and our views.  
 I wish that this House will relook at this critically and allow you Mr. Speaker, to exercise your 
power s, in order that I am going to put but just before I go to that order, Mr. Speaker on the issues 
of gender there was a case number 1 of 2019 against this House Mr. Speaker and again st the Select 
Committee,  against the Leader of Majority and against the Clerk and the case pronounced itself 
categorically that the issues of women in the House must be given the proper consideration.  
In this matter as the M ajority  Leader has  said, on the  issues of resources, if you put aside women, 
then we will  be contravening the laws. A nd you know  Mr. Speaker , the court pronounce s itself, 
the pronouncements of the court become a law. Therefore, we believe we are operating under 
illegality, and therefore , I wish to request the honourable House to consider that matter on that 
issue of the Budget, and consider increas ing those Members.  
And Mr. Speaker I wish to draw your attention into Order no. 1 whereby, Mr. Speaker in case of 
sui generis  you will be giv en the powers to override any order in this House, a nd in case of matters 
of this nature, you are therefore supposed to make a ruling. And therefore, I would wish that you 
put a caveat on this matter of the Budget Committee. And you order Mr. Speaker,  the Selection 
Committee to go back and do its work.  
I do not know whether the Hansard is capturing me because, these are weighty matters… also the 
legal people as … th is thing is against good morals, of the proceedings of the House and against 
OCTOBER 18, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 the principles of justice  Mr. Speaker. A nd therefore, I wish to request the honorable Members to 
also check on these matters and consider them as weight y matters.  
Mr. Speaker, a s I conclude , this matter requires no further arguments. Because if I draw that 
attention and if you look at the basic structure of our Standing Orders , Order number 1 is the 
primary order and therefore should be respected. Mr. Spe aker, I beg to urge for  your indulg ency 
and your consideration of this matter.  
The Minority Leader (Hon. Phillip Wanjohi):  The Hon. Njuguna has declared to us on Standing 
Order  89, this is where Mr. Speaker a Member declares interest.  A Member who wishes to speak 
on the matter in which the Member has a personal interest like Hon . Njuguna has,  has f irst to 
declare that interest.  So, he has used so many words and the first instance he was supposed to 
declare the interest that he ha s so that he proceeds. Now that he has finished maybe you can all ow 
him now to declare the interest that he had , based on Standing  Order 89 ; thank you Mr. Speaker  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  The matter has been h eard and I want to now make a ruling from 
the presentation by the Leader of Majority Party and Mheshimiwa  Njuguna from Elburgon , 
that…what is it Mheshimiwa Palang ’a? Is it on the same matter or a different matter or are you 
bringing new information to that? Proceed.  
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: Thank you  Mr. Speaker for allowing me to contribute , to debunk on the 
message or the Motion that is before us . Before I indulge into serious and more emphasis on what 
honorable Njuguna  has said, Mr. Speaker a llow me to congratulate the Committee on Selection 
under your leadership that did what it did. And to me, I cannot  say they did not do a good job. And 
you know, 100% mark, may not have been achieved . But we will strive to ensure that at least, that 
Committee makes a good percentage, if anything, to earn  an A. F or now,  Mr. Speaker, in my own 
rating, I might give it around 60 to 70%. We want to see whether it can get to 100 or 80% to earn 
an A.  
Mr. Speaker, I want to draw your attention as well all the Members here , on the Constitution  
provision, on specific appli cations of the rights ; it is within the Constitution of Kenya Article 52 
there onwards . It talks of quite a number of issues  Mr. Speaker;  the representation of youth, the 
repression of women and all that.  
Mr. Speaker l et me draw specific attention to the r epresentation of the minorities and the 
marginali sed group s. When the drafters of this Constitution came up with it, they were alive to  
such like circumstance s of different entities and different regions.  
Mr. Speaker, before I conclude on that, because I am just coming back there. In the address of the 
Governor , Honourable  Susan Kihika who you all cherish and I stand here to cherish her as the first 
Speaker of this Assembly, and now she is the third Governor of this County.  
Mr. Speaker i n her speech, I listened to her very keenly and this is what she said. “I look forward 
for an inclusive Leadership and on Socio -Economic empowerment for all ”; and I want to underline 
the term for all … 
OCTOBER 18, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Nakuru is a diverse County. It has s o many people. In constituting such an important Committee 
that looks across the resources that are to be distributed within the County, it ought not to fail to 
consider marginalized communities. It ought to include the minority in this important Committee . 
Where is our space as the minorities in this particular County if we cannot have the representation 
on those particular important Committees? It is not about the interest. We come here because we 
represent people who are not represented here and when we are given a mandate as an MCA for a 
given Ward, you represent those who voted for you and those who did not vote for you. Therefore, 
we are speaking on an important matter that has to consider the minorities, the marginalized and 
the inclusivity of nearly all the communities. I want to detect some wisdom in the current majority 
leader. I have never engaged with you for so long but from my detection and quick scan and learn, 
you are learning things very fast. I did not expect that this will come from you tha t you feel that 
we should have some more time to consider this. I am proud of you. That is wisdom. We need to 
find out on how we move together. If we want to go far we have to move with others. Unless we 
want to choose to go alone so that we go fast, that will be very bad of us. I therefore echo the words 
of Hon. Njuguna that it is important that we look into such matters for us to go far and to move 
together as County so that no community and no people will feel segregated. I beg to submit.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Abdi  
Hon. Hassan Abdi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I take this opportunity to thank the Committee 
which I was part of  for coming up with these Members. They did a very good job but as Hon. 
Palang’a said, you cannot do everything  in life. I represent very special people in this Assembly 
and our Parties saw it fit to nominate some of us into this Assembly. They saw leadership qualities 
in us that is why they had to nominate us in this House. Hon. Njuguna talked about gender. You 
cannot do anything and you cannot sideline women in this Assembly. We have a very special 
group of youth, marginalised and minority group. Those are very critical groups and they cannot 
be sidelined in anything. In the Constitution of Kenya Chapter 4, Articl e 56 it says, the State shall 
put in place affirmative action programs designed to ensure that minorities and marginalised 
groups participate or are represented in Governance and other spheres of life. This is Governance, 
so we have to be represented.  
The Budget Committee is a very critical Committee. You cannot sideline the youth, the 
marginalised and the minority. I represent a very small community in this cosmopolitan County 
and I would wish, through your guidance and wisdom, please do something. Thank you. 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Kajwang’  
Hon. Peter Kajwang’: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. First of all, I want to say I am very 
disappointed that the Majority Leader has moved this Motion and at the same time wants us to 
move it with amendments. We gave these people enough time. I understand they went to the 
Western s hores so that they could come up with this Committee list and they had enough time to 
talk to themselves and agree on who should belong to different Committees. They are now coming 
here to tell us they need more time.  
OCTOBER 18, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Mheshimiwa Palang’a?  
Hon. Peter Palang’a: (On a point of information to the House) . Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. The 
information to the House is that on behalf of the Committee on Selection, we are not saying we 
did not do our work. We had 21 Committee s which we did and placed the Members. We are only 
putting this information to the House in regard to the Budget and Appropriations Committee which 
we feel it is a committee that cuts across in terms of resource allocation. Therefore, that is 
misleading th e House by purporting that we had not done our work perfectly.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang’: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. We are speaking to people whom we gave the 
duty to work. They are coming back to the House to complain. This is not right. Hon. Palang’a 
and Hon . Hassan here and the Majority Leader had the knife to cut this cake. They cannot come 
back here and start complaining to ordinary Members who did not even know where they were 
having their retreat. Members of this House should also appreciate that if you are not in a specific 
Committee, you are still in that Committee in the plenary.  A Committee cannot have everyone and 
so, even the Reports that are generated in the Committee are passed and adopted in the floor of 
this House.  
The fact that you are not in any other Committee and you cannot be in all the Committees, it does 
not mean that you are now not in that specific Committee that they are talking about here. The 
composition of this House meets the criterion on issue of gender and youth but we cannot red uce 
that to the Committee level because when we give a specific duty to a certain Committee, we have 
confidence in them that they are going to represent all Members equally and if any Member feels 
that he/she has not been represented well in the Report …  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: (Standing on a point of Order) Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to tell 
Hon. Kajwang’ that he is actually not talking or putting forth his matters in regard to the Standing 
Orders. I drew the attention of the Members to Order number 15 4(2) which states categorically 
that the Committee on  Selection shall give consideration on the need for gender balance and shall 
so far as may be practicable ensure that no more than two thirds of the Members of a Committee 
of the Assembly, including a Co mmittee established through a resolution of the Assembly shall be 
of the same gender.  
Therefore, we are narrowing ourselves to a critical Committee. I want to inform him that a ruling 
of a court should not be overlooked by this House because if these matt ers are not going to be 
relooked into, the other bodies are ready to take us into the courts and will be quashed. Therefore, 
I do not want this House to take that direction but I would wish the wisdom of this House to be 
drawn into that ruling so that we c an proceed.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Kajwang’  
Hon. Peter Kajwang’: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Mheshimiwa Mwaura is talking about order 
154. My submission is that if you want to look at the issues of gender, youth and all these other 
OCTOBER 18, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 interests, then we look at all of them in all the Committees; not only Budget. Budget is n ot the only 
exclusive Committee that we are going to apply all these. Let us go to every other Committee that 
has been presented to us. Are we able to meet the threshold that they are talking about? I think this 
is partisan interest and we cannot allow the  House to go this direction. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Members, I need to make a ruling on that. I have heard from the 
two; that there is need to look at the formation and placement of Members into the Committee of 
Budget and also listen to those that are not for that. I want to make a ruling on that. That we now 
proceed with other business. I am going to make a ruling on that tomorrow in the morning session.  
Now we proceed with the other business of the day. We proceed with the Motion on  the floor. The 
Motion was that the House adopts the Report on Committee on Selection on the nomination of 
Members to Sectorial and Select Committees. Now because one Committee has been mentioned 
and has been used as a case study that is the Committee on B udget and Appropriation s. We are 
going to remove it from the Motion, and so the Motion is and will be that pursuant to the provision 
of the standing order 156, this House adopts the Report on the Committee on Selection on the 
nomination of Member to Sectoral and Select Committees save for the Committee on Budget and 
Appropriation s. 
 It is now clear that as we debate ; we are not going to include the Committee on Budget and 
Appropriation s, which I have undertaken that I am going to make a ruling in tomorrow’s morning 
session, so we proceed. Hon . Peter Njoroge Maina.  
Hon Peter Maina : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. First and foremost, allow me to register my 
appreciation to the Selection Committee for the commendable job . I know for sure that you made 
a lot of sacrifices to get this done, including burning the midnight oil, travelling for long hours and 
some of you may even have travelled overnight just to get it done. We appreciate that kind of 
sacrifice just to make sur e that you have put this House in order by placing Members in various 
Committees.  
When I look at this placement and distribution I have noted keenly that the balance is admirable 
because all the major categories have been looked into. Nominated Members ha ve been placed 
somewhere, the regional balance has been observed and also the People With Disability (PWDs) 
have been looked into. Allow me to burst the bubble of this notion that some Committees are 
superior to others. I do not think it is the case becaus e it all depends with the activeness of the 
leadership that is the Chair and the Vice Chair.  If they are active then your Committee becomes 
very active and prestigious in one way or the other. The thing of saying that this Committee like 
the one for Budge t and Appropriation s is superior to the other is neither here nor there. All 
Committees are important and we believe that if you are placed in whichever Committee, you are 
going to be useful there.  
The placement may not have been perfect but I believe tha t there is something we call reshuffle 
and this Selection Committee is not ending today or tomorrow, they will be there to serve that 
OCTOBER 18, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 purpose. So with time they will be reshuffling Members from this Committee to the other, also 
trying to consider all those  parameters like the gender and regional distribution. I believe Mr. 
Speaker even as you work on the ruling, I think reshuffle should also be considered. We can always 
balance this thing through reshuffle because it is a process….  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri): Hon Peter Njoroge are you anticipating the ruling of the Speaker?  
 Hon Peter Maina : I withdraw that Mr. Speaker. Last but not least, with all due respect allow me 
to ask Hon . Member from Elburgon Ward to explain to this House why he is p reaching water and 
drinking wine because if you look at his list of staff, they are all male and he is very busy on this 
floor advocating for gender balance.  
Hon Njuguna Mwaura : Point of order Mr. Speaker. Hon Njoroge needs to substantiate matters 
and what  is good for the goose is also good for the gander. I wish Hon Njoroge would stick to the 
particularity of the Motion before us because you have already ruled on that matter. I am saying 
so because of those who will come after Hon . Njoroge. Let this matter  be taken seriously. I also 
was told to declare my interest, I said I  am a gender expert and also a Le gal enforcer and therefore 
I wish to practice my profession here.  
(Laughter ) 
 
The Speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri ): Hon Mwangi.  
Hon. Joseph Mwangi : Mheshimiwa S pika, nataka kwanza kuwashukuru sana waheshimiwa 
ambao wamekuwa katika Kamati hiyo ya kutupanga katika Kamati mbalimbali na pia 
niwapongeze. Lakini kwa yote tunafaa tujiulize kama lazima kila mtu atosheke, hata kwa sasa 
nikiangalia jinsia ya kiume hapa amb ao wameoa, wengi wao waliahidi wake zao mambo mengi 
na hawajatimiza.  
Kwa hivyo Spika hatuwezi kaa hapa tukakashifu Kamati ambayo ilifanya kazi mchana na usiku, 
wakati sisi tulikuwa katika shughuli zetu.Kwa hayo, nataka kuhimiza Members ya kwamba tuweze 
kuendelea kwa sababu tunaendelea kukwama kwa sababu ya mambo mengine ambayo hayana 
maana.Tunapoongelea kuhusu jinsia, hata Mimi ni wa jinsia ya kiume kwa hivyo sio lazima 
tuongelele jinsia kama tunaongelelea wanawake pekee. Hiyo lazima ikuwe wazi kwa kila mmoja 
kwamba tunaongelea jinsia ya kike na kiume kwa sababu, jinsia ni tamko moja ambalo linafaa 
kuelezea mambo mengi.  
Pia tunapoongea kuwekwa kwa Kamati ambazo kila mmoja wetu amekuwa, mheshimiwa Spika 
watu waliochaguliwa wakiwa Independent na Vyama vingine, kuna watu walichaguliwa wakiwa 
Vyama mbalimbali na pia kuna watu waliwapigia kura na pia kupigia watu wa Vyama vingine. 
Kwa hivyo hakuna kuchaguliwa wala kubaguliwa kwa sababu pia wamewekwa katika Kamati 
zingine ambazo sio lazima uwekwe kwa Budget Committee . Ninaomba ya kwamba tuweze kufikiria 
OCTOBER 18, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 hayo, kuwa lazima kila mtu atosheke ; awekwe mahali alitaka. Sote tungetaka kuwa katika Budget 
Committee  lakini hatuko na hatupigi kelele. Kwa hivyo  Mr. Speaker just give your ruling and we 
proceed. Thank  you. 
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri): The information is to the House or to…  
Hon Stanley Karanja : Mr. Speaker, I wish Members not to trivialize the debate. If you check 
Committee number eight, Committee on Labour, Gender, Youth and S ocial Service s. That is why 
I always say that before you swallow first of all chew. It is not good for members to specifically 
go somewhere without first  of all leading the whole  team. My information is that read the 
Committees well. If you are in Labour, you are there, if you are a gender expert there is a 
Committee on Gender you can expedite all your gender imbalances there.  
Those who are claiming about  the youth there is all Department for the youth. The only thing is 
that it is has been merged to one Committee. The only thing you can do Mr. Speaker if the House 
agrees is that you can be a friend to that Committee so you can expedite your appetite for g ender, 
youth and social service.  
(Laughter ) 
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri): Hon Anthony Kamau.  
Hon. Anthony Kamau : Thank you so much Mr. Speaker for giving me this chance. I stand to 
support the Motion and to draw to the attention of all Members of this Hou se that we are here to 
represent people of diversity from our Wards. We are not here to represent our own personal 
interest, so as I am standing here representing the great people of Nakuru East Ward, I represent 
even the minority people within my Ward. When I argue be ing a minority, we should not argue on 
a personal level but we should keep  the interest of those we are representing and Nakuru being a 
cosmopolitan County we are here to represent everyone . So as you retreat to come up with your 
ruling , Mr. Speaker I would like you to put into consideration that we are all Members here 
representing even the minority in our Wards. Thank  you. 
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri): Hon . Gathanwa from Eburu Ward, then Hon . Francis Kuria from 
Malewa.  
Hon Michael Gat hanwa : Thank you Mr. Speaker. It is in this House that Members agreed that 
we have fallen behind on schedule and that we should be having things moving on. People are 
hungry to work and we cannot learn how to make an omelet  without breaking an egg. I belie ve 
that for us to start working we have to give in something. I stand to support the Motion and the 
Committees as presented. We need to be moving. Thank  you. 
Hon Francis Kuria : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Whenever there is due give credit. The 
Committee did  a marvelous job. I was amongst those who sat down and let the Members know 
that we sat down starting at 8:00 am in the morning and the meeting ended very late in the evening 
OCTOBER 18, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 at around 8:30 pm. All those hours, we were harmoniously trying to put the names of the Members 
together to the Committees of their demand. Allow me to tell the Members that I personally needed 
to be included in the Committee of Budget but due to inclusivity and equality of the Wards, I was 
put aside.  
Remember not all of us will be satisfied , so expect some rejection from other Members, but that 
will not make the car to stop. Let us move on, give support to the Committee that sat down on this 
issue and we proceed. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon . Joel Karuri): Thank you. Hon Doreen.  
Hon.  Doreen Korir:  Thank you so much Mr. Speaker. I stand here to support the list that was 
presented by the Selection Committee. I was among the team that was coming up with the list of 
Members and for sure the Members did a great job. It was not easy, we had  to sit for long hours 
and travel home late. I want to congratulate and thank Hon. Njuguna for the support he has shown 
on women. It seems that he has  women at heart and we really thank him  
(Laughter and applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is y our point of order Hon. Kajwang?  
Hon. Peter Kajwang:  [on a point of order ] Mr. Speaker sir, is the Hon. Member trying to insinuate 
that there are some men who do not have women issues in their hearts  
(Laughter)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Proceed Hon.  Doreen.  
Hon. Doreen Korir : Thank You Mr. Speaker. You know Hon. Kajwang just came in a bit late 
and that is why he is trying to mix us up. On the issue of the placing the nominated Members on 
the Budget, it is very important, you just use your wisdom.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): That one has been overtaken by the Communication.  
Hon. Doreen Korir:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for the information. I am so grateful that you are 
able to place Members and also their competencies. It is very important and I do encourage that 
the nominated Members and the elected Members to ensure that  they vie for various positions in 
the Committees so that we ensure we get leadership positions in various Committees. I would also 
want to encourage that we work together with Comm ittee Members in harmony and consider the 
request of the nominated Members in the leadership. Thank you so much.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. John Maritim:  
OCTOBER 18, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. John Maritim : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I stand to support the Selection Committee fo r 
a good job. Why I am saying so is because I believe that today it rained and I believe it will never 
plant more roses until we plant more roses. What do I mean? I mean that as Members, some of us 
cannot appreciate what happened in Kisumu; that one at Kis umu did a very good job. Englishmen 
say that we give the devil its due. So I support the Motion and I believe we need to move as an 
aggressive child so that not to get  stuck in a given place, I believe we need to move on. Thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon Rottok and then Hon. Alex  
Hon. Isaac Rottok : Asante sana Bw. Spika, yangu ni kukubaliana na Kamati ambayo walienda 
kule kutengeneza hii nakala na kwamba walifanya kazi nzuri. Sina tashwishwi hata moja kwa 
sababu kumekuwa na hii dip lomasia kusema kwamba mukiwekwa katika Kamati ya Bajeti ina 
pesa. So Mr. Speaker, ningeomba hata zile Kamati zingine ambazo ziko hapa ziongezewe hiyo 
pesa wanatamani ili waweze kujumuika upande ule mwingine haswa kwa Kamati ya mambo ya 
Welfare, Catering na  Library. Bwana Spika ninaomba ikiwezekana, waongezewe pesa za kutosha 
ili tutakapokuja kuketi tena kuandaa Kamati kama hii, tuwe na wengi watakimbilia Kamati zingine 
kwa mfano Kamati ya Welfare. Asante sana Bwana Spika na ninakubaliana na mjadala wa leo  
kwa wale walienda kuandaa nakala hii nawapa pongezi. Asante  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:   Thank you Mr. Speaker , I want to stand and support the Motion. I can state 
that great men sat down, this negotiation was made and indeed the names that were brought to the 
House  were under all consideration coming from all sides. When we do study on medicine, I think 
Hon. Njuguna has stated very well the other time that we deal with organ system. The organ 
system, we do not have oral organs functioning perfectly with each other.  
For instance when you look at your hand, one hand has five fingers and all of them are not equal 
to each other. This Committees Mr. Speaker, we find that they are 21 or 20 in number and we 
cannot have everything equal to each other but we complement each other because as you retire to 
make your ruling, we consider that this House makes the composite that will make the final ruling 
on all the matters that the Committees dwell on and as such, you find that when the final word is 
made on the floor of the Hous e you will find that gender, minority, religion and everything that is 
to be considered will be factored by the 75 Members who sit in this House.  
So let us allow the organs as they are to stand and continue. Mr. Speaker as we proceed, you will 
find that a s we proceed, you will find that we have matters of urgency, we cannot continue with 
trivialise debate into gender issues and the moment we have issues at our hand and these 
Committees need to run as quickly as possible, urgently as soon as now.  
In Naivas ha, in my own Ward, unlike all these Committees to start functioning, I have a Lake that 
is swallowing my people and I have three bodies still under the water and I need the Disaster 
Committee to start functioning. For it to function, it will still go to t he Budget Committee for the 
necessary thing to be done.  
OCTOBER 18, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Therefore Mr. Speaker we need to move as a House and then the peace that has been there to 
continue within this House. I support this Motion of course with the amendments that have been 
supported by our Majority Leader because he has thought about it and we support them. Thank 
you very much Hon. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you I now propose question.  
(Question proposed that safe for the Budget and Appropriations Committee, this Hous e adopts 
the Report of the Committee on Selection on the nomination and placement of Members to the 
various Sectoral and Select Committees).  
(Question put and agreed to)  
COMMUNICATION  
COMMITTEES TO HOLD ELECTIONS  
 Now that the list on Committees has been adopted safe for the Budget and Appropriations 
Committee, I want to give notice that Members in various Committees go and hold election so that 
by tomorrow in the afternoon session, that is the afternoon plenary fr om 2.30 pm, we can have 
Committee Leadership in place. So I wish all those that are running for various Committee 
positions all the best. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): This House stands adjourned … 
The Minority Leader  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Bef ore you adjourn, now that you have declared 
that those who are interested with the various positions, I think it is important that we are given 
direction and where to go so that we avoid the Committees coming into one room. So we need to 
have a schedule so  that we are able to move by tomorrow morning.  
Then Mr. Speaker before I sit, in your Communication, one of our very own The Hon. Zipporah 
has been nominated by the Excellency the Governor to the position of a CECM. I think Mr. 
Speaker she cannot just go like that, she is one of our colleagues. May be you would have given 
us at least one minute to congratulate her. Because I will not have other time, I wish to congratulate 
her and wish her well.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): About the schedule for the el ections, the office of the Clerk will 
facilitate the Committees to hold the elections that is the provision of clerk in charge to give 
direction, the place and venue and the manner of conducting the elections.  
ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned until tomorrow 9.30 in the morning.  
(The House rose at 4.25pm ) 
OCTOBER 18, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 