OCTOBER 19, 2022                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday, 19TH October 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10: 35 am 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
MOTION  
ASSEMBLY THANKS BE RECORDED FOR THE EXPOSITION OF PUBLIC POLICY CONTAINED IN THE 
ADDRESS OF THE GOVERNOR DELIVERED ON 12TH OCTOBER 2022  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Motion by the Leader of the Majority Party.  
Majority Leader (Hon. Alex Langat ): Thank you Honorable Speaker , I want to move a  Motion ; 
THAT, the thanks of the of the  Assembly be recorded for the exposition of Public Policy contained 
in the Address  of the  Governor delivered on 12th October , 2022. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  The seconder of the Motion.  
Hon. Cyrus Dida Ndegwa:  I rise to second the Motion  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you, the Motion  is now open for debate.   
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: Honorable Speaker , I want to seek you r indulgence on this important 
Motion . Yesterday  in your wisdom, and this Report of the Committees Membership; you directed 
that we need to have done some elections by today at 2:00 pm.  
It is on this account that I hereby seek your indulgence and request the  House that we adjourn this 
particular Motio n to discuss the Governor ’s Speech and allow the Members  to retreat to their 
respective Committee s for them to undertake the elections  of the respective Leaders of the various  
Committees . 
This is because, as you are aware and the Member s are aware;  I am reliably informed via the 
Communication  from the Clerk that this House  will be retreating  to continue with the facilitation 
and inductions. And for this reason, Mr. Speaker, I feel that today, we do  not have much of the 
time to debate  this particular Motion. How I wish Members can agree to it, that we come back 
after the recess after going to Mombasa for induction, so that we have enough time to scrutini se 
OCTOBER 19, 2022                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 and give our input and comments on the said message or speech. For this reason, I wish to request 
that we adjourn this debate to a later  date that you will direct . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  That is a proposal from Honourable Peter Palang ’a. So much 
Mheshimiwa Palang ’a do you have someone to second that proposal?  
Hon. Peter Palang’a : Mr. Speaker, I wish to request the honorable Isabella Makori to do that 
there are so many people who are willing to second but I am sure she is going to be up to the task.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Okay Honorable Fadhili the Majority Whip.  
Hon. Fadhili Msuri:  Before M heshima wa Palang ’a appointed Isabella , there were people behind 
him who wanted to second him but he seems to have fixated his mind on Isabella . Is there 
something special between that the House needs to know?  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   Actually Mheshimiwa Fadhili it is the Speaker who allots time, 
so we want to exonerate Mheshimiwa Palang ’a. So, Mheshimiwa Isabella you have the floor. And 
later now the Members from my  left side and will have some time to contribute.  
Hon. Isabella Makori:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, for giving me this chance. In fact, Hon. Fadhili 
is in front so he cannot see behind. I was upstanding. I want to second Hon. Palang ’a. In fact, Her 
Excellency’s speech was very good. And it needs  time for us really to scrutiniz e and give our input. 
So I second Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you. On that Mheshimiwa Antony Kanere you have 
something to s ay? Now that the Motion is proper before the House that we adjourn. We need to 
get more input on that, to build the case for that Motion for adjournment.  
Hon. Anthony  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I stand to support Hon. Palang ’as sentiments, because 
we need time to discuss our  Excellency’s speech because you find that it is a skeleton which needs 
to be added some stuff so that it lays a platform whereby we are going to perform in the next 
session and to implement some of the weighty issues that were highlighted in her speech. S o I 
support  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Mheshimiwa Mwangi?  
Hon. Mwangi  Muraya : Thank  you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to support the Motion , the request by 
honorable Palang ’a our senior Member, because if you look at  the weight in the Governor's speech  
and also, if you look at her appointment of the CEC s that you gave us yesterday, the speech requires 
a lot of time to go through it. It is not something that we need to just go highlighting. I support that 
we adjourn the Motion for a later date so that we can have enough time to discuss the Governor’s 
speec h.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Karanja and then Mheshimiwa Alex.  
OCTOBER 19, 2022                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. As I stand to support the Motion, election is 
a tiresome exposition. It is really agonising. It is heartbreaking because if y ou wanted a position 
and somehow you do not get it, it is really heartbreaking. As it is told, it is that when an election 
is done, it is not that easy. As we do this, I will ask one thing. There is something called ego 
massaging. After somebody’s expectat ion has been broken, you require to be massaged. As we do 
this as Honorable Members, can you on your side be preparing for ego massaging such that even 
if I do not get the s eat, I will get the food from your Office?  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshim iwa Karanja, it is a request but then that does not mean 
the Members who are seeking for electoral seats that they relent or do not put enough effort now 
that there would be that. I do not want to say that there would be such an offer because we want 
Membe rs to participate fully, the end result being in a position to get Chairs and not the other 
supplies.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I was just pleading with your generosity 
because you know that elections are not easy and Members know t hat elections are not easy and 
because we are in an institution, these elections will produce Leaders and because of that, I have 
seen that program is going up to 4:30 pm and there is no break in between. I urge your office and 
I know you are really philan thropic; do something for us all because even if I become or another 
person becomes a Chair, you need to be happy. If you do not get, you need to be massaged that is 
why I am telling you to come in as the Holy Spirit will dictate to you. Just do something that will 
make the Honorable Members happy. From the smile, I know that is done. Thank you for that.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Karanja, I could be smiling because the Office of 
the Speaker does not have facilities for … but then, that is we ll understood. Hon. Alex Mbugua.  
Hon Alex Mbugua : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the Motion that we 
postpone the discussion on the address from Her Excellency our Governor mainly because at such 
a time and moment, we are going through d irection period and this period directs us the Leaders 
to critically analyse the speech from the Governor. You realise that the Leaders who will be given 
the task to implement and carry on the agendas that are in address , it is very important that we 
have the guidance and  proper leadership from the Chairpersons and Vice Chairpersons and these 
people must be well equipped.  
This speech from Her Excellency the Governor gives a road map, the blue print for the next five 
years and hence we cannot just discuss it without giving it the ample time that it requires, so that 
we address the matters to the very core of what we desire and have. Thank you.  
The Speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri): Thank you. What is the order Hon Bernard Langat?  
Hon. Bernard  Langat : Some Members i n this House are not in decorum especially a Member 
from your Ward and Hon. Samuel Tonui. They do not have ties.  
OCTOBER 19, 2022                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri): I want to confirm that from the Majority Whip Hon. Fadhili Msuri 
and the Minority Whip (Hon. Virginia Wamaitha) . 
Hon Ali Hassan:  I think Mr. Speaker, the Majority Whip Hon Fadhili Msuri is also not properly 
dressed.  
 
(Laughter)  
The speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri): Order Hon Abdi! Hon. Majority Whip is in the House.  
 The Majority Whip ( Hon Fadhili Msuri): First of all Mr. Speaker, I excuse my brother; we come 
from two different worlds in terms of fashion and the world is changing. The decorum in the House 
is having a tie, so I do not know why he is so concerned with my bottoms. Concernin g a Member 
who has been reported not to be appropriately dressed that is Hon. Samuel Tonui , I can confirm 
with all firmness that indeed he has actually violated the dress code of this House.  
The Speaker ( Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Hon. Samuel Tonui?  
Hon. Samuel Tonui : Mr. Speaker, I do not know if the Standing Order has changed because I 
know that at one time, we agreed that we can come the way we are. So the way I am is ok.  
The Speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri): Order Hon. Karanja! That was information from the  Majority 
Whip. Minority whip confirm whether there are Members in the House who are not in decorum.  
The Minority Whip ( Hon Virginia Wamaitha): Yes they are.  
The Speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri ): Which order Hon . Samuel Tonui?  
Hon. Samuel Tonui : Mr. Speaker sir, I also want to dispute on that because I am sure we are still 
using the Standing Orders which were passed by the previous Assembly and if anything, until we 
pass or we come up with new one s, I cannot get out.   
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Speaker  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Yes Hon. Karanja  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Speaker sir, if I do my recollection correctly and we should not 
involve ourselves in the game of musical chairs, moving chairs from North to East, Hon. Chonjo 
the Member from Nesuit kn ows very well the code that we agreed on. You cannot suffer from 
selective amnesia.  
(Laughter)  
May be I can ask Hon. Palang’a to stand. Now Mr. Speaker you tell him to sit if one cannot read 
from the physical, you cannot read from the spiritual.  
OCTOBER 19, 2022                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 (Laughter)  
So Mr. Speaker , if Hon. Chonjo is suffering from selective amnesia, when you wake up and then 
you decide to wear any gown then you come and defend that one as Kenyan Mr. Speaker, there is 
something that we said, if you cannot be able to buy this  one, wear what you are used to  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): That one is understood  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Because he is a senior Member of this House, he should not take the 
House in a wild goose chase and he knows that. May be I will ask Hon. former De puty Speaker to 
follow the Standing Orders as he used to do, when he was in that seat. He used to chase everybody 
and now it is his turn to be chased.  
(Laughter)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! Yes Hon. Tonui and then I make a ruling on whether  we 
close that debate; make your submission.  
Hon. Samuel Tonui : I think this one is not in order Hon. Karanja.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order Hon. Karanja! You cannot determine what is casual and 
what is official. Allow Hon. Tonui to submit.  
Hon. Samuel Tonui:  Mr. Speaker Sir , what I am asking you or even Hon. Karanja knows we 
never put on  any discipline that these are proper clothes we have to put on when we are coming 
in to the chambers. If there is one we came and agreed on but we only said we put on an African 
attire. Look at mine I am also an African the way I have dressed up.  
(Laughter)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you for that. The issues of decorum I think it is good to 
clarify that they were not in Standing Order. It was from a Communica tion that was made from 
this Chair in the previous Assembly. When we retreat to an induction,  we w ill have an opportunity 
to agree and say what is acceptable in the House as official. That matter is closed. Hon. Members 
I now put the question.  
(Question pr oposed that this House adjourns today’s debate on the speech by Her Excellency the 
Governor to a later date to be determined by the House Business Committee to allow Members 
participate in Committee elections).  
(Question put and agreed on)  
ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned until 2.30 pm today.  
(The House rose at 11.00am ) 
OCTOBER 19, 2022                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
  
 