MARCH 30, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday, 30th March 2022  
Assembly Building - 
The House met at 3.25 pm  
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi ) in the Chair]  
PRAYERS  
The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Hon ourable  Members welcome to the afternoon 
session.  
STATEMENT  
HOUSE BUSINESS FOR THE WEEK STARTING TUESDAY 5TH TO WEDNESDAY 6TH APRIL 2022  
Honourable  Members we have Statements; pursuant to the provision of Standing Oder 47(2 ) (a) 
the Honorable  Majority Leader to issue a Statement on Business of the House on the coming week 
starting from Tuesday, 5th Wednesday - 6th April, which I request the Honorable  Whip to give us 
the program. Hon. Jambo Kenya the Hon. Member for Kiamaina ward.  
The Deputy Maj ority Whip  (Hon. Isaac Wahome): Hon T hank you  Temporary Speaker, before 
I proceed with the Business  assigned  to me, on behalf of the able Majority Leader ; at the gallery  
we have three members from Kiamain a. They have just visited the gallery  and I wish to welcome 
them officially  as we proceed  with the debate. Also it will be my honor  if after the debate is over, 
the visitors from Kiamaina will see you in  Office. They will require you secure my seat because 
they have been sent by a Delegation from Kiamaina because I will be coming back. Thank you 
very much.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Visitors  from Kiamaina Ward, you are most 
welcome to the Assembly. Proceed Hon. Jambo Kenya  
The Deputy Minority Whip  (Hon. Isaac Wahome): Thank you very much; on behalf of the able 
Majority Leader, Hon. Moses Ndung’ u Kam au who is a Member of Elementaita. Pursuant to the 
provision of Standing Order 47(2) ( a) I issue a Statement on  the Business  of the House on the 
coming week starting Tuesday  5th-6th April 2022 w hich will be as follows: - 
On Tuesday 5th April 2022 Morning session we shall be having Papers which  will be laid and 
Notices will be given. The Papers will be as follows ; 
MARCH 30, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Report of the Committee on Health Services  on the Nakuru County Community Health Service 
Bill No.9 of 2021 which will be laid by Hon. Njuguna Mwaura Chairperson Committee on Health 
and also Member of Elburgon Ward.  
The second Notice of Motion will be that this House adopts the Report of the Commit tee on Health 
Services  on the Nakuru County Community Health Service Bill No.9 of 2021 and this will also be 
tabled by the Hon. Member for Elburgon and the Chair for Health Hon. Njuguna Mwaura.  
Tuesday  5th April, 2022,  afternoon session, we shall have the Committee of the Whole House on 
the Nakuru County Community Health Service Bill No.9 of 2021. It will also be laid by the Hon. 
Member for Elburgon, Hon. Njuguna Mwaura, also Chairman Health Committee.  
On Wednesday 6th  April at 2.30 pm, we  shall  have Papers laid and Notices given. The Paper will 
be laid by the same Hon. Chairman for Health Hon Njuguna Mwaura that the Report of the 
Committee on Health Services  on the Nakuru County Maternal Newborn. Hon ourable  Temporary 
Speaker I wish I be protected, Members are consulting loudly.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Order ! Hon. Members.  
The Majority Deputy Whip  (Hon. Isaac Wahome): Thank you very much I am most obliged. 
There will also be a Notice of Motion that this House adopts the Report of the Com mittee  on 
Health Services on the Nakuru County Maternal  and Newborn and Child Health Bill No. 10 of 
2021, to be laid by Hon. Njuguna Mwaura Chairperson  Committee on Health Services. Also the 
same afternoon the Committee of the Whole House will deliberate o n the same Bill, the Nakuru 
County Community Health Service s Bill No. 10 of 2021.  
Having read the Statements for next week, I beg to say that I have completed. Thank you very 
much.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. Jambo Kenya. Now Hon. 
Members you are informed of the activities of the week that will take  place in the Assembly. You 
have time to digest on the Motions and then the Bills will be there for discussion.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable  Members the House remains adjourned until Tuesday next week at 9.30 am  
(The House rose at 3.25pm ) 
 