COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 8TH March, 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:25 AM  
[Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS . 
PAPER  
NAIVASHA MUNICIPAL BOARD PROJECTS FOR THE YEAR 2019 TO 2023 . 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  There is a Paper  to be laid by the Chairperso n of 
the Committee  on Lands, Physical Planning and Urban Development  
Hon. Peter Palanga: I wish to lay a  Paper in regard to the Report of the Naivasha Municipal 
Board of Naivasha . I wish to lay the Paper.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  [On a Point of Order] the reason as to why you have the table in this 
House  is so that whoever is moving the Business at a time can be near the Mace. It was no t by 
default  but by design ; and a senior Member  like Hono urable Palang ’a ought to guide the rest of 
the Members  including myself on the traditions of this House . Therefore,  it will not be good if we 
just fault the traditions of this House  and I wish that you rule that Chairperson raise and move the 
Business in the Order Paper while he is near the Mace.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  Chairperson for the Committee on Lands  come 
forward.  
Hon. Peter Palanga: Thank you honorable Speaker for the guidance . I stand advised ; we do not 
need to belabor too much on this. The information is what I said and I want to repeat. We as the 
Committee  on Lands Housing, Physi cal Planning and Urban Development on behalf of the 
Members, I wish to lay the Report of the Naivasha Municipal Board Projects for the year 2019 to 
2023. I am humbled to lay the  Paper before the House.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  Next Order, there is a Notice of Motion  by 
Chairperson  from the Committee  on Lands, Ho using, Physical Planning and Urban Development . 
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: Honorable Speaker , I wish to give a Notice of Motion  that this  House adopts 
the Report of the Committee on Lands, Housing and Physical Planning on the status of Naivasha 
Municipal Board Projects , I give the Notice of  Motion to that effect.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  Thank you Honorable Palang ’a. Next order.  
MOTION  
MATE RNAL DEATHS AT THE NAIVASHA SUB -COUNTY REFERRAL HOSPITAL  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  There is a Motion  from the Chairperson  of the 
Committee  on Health Services Honorable Njuguna . 
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Honorable Speaker, I wish to move some amendments on the Order 
Number 8 (Motion) and it has some typo error or something like that. The Motion  reads, that this 
House adopts the Report  of the Health Service Committee on the Maternal Deaths at the Naivasha 
Sub-County Referral Hospital tabled before this Hous e on Monday. It is common knowledge that 
we usually do not appear he re on Mondays but we come here as per our schedule and as per the 
time table and as the gazettement states that we are here on Tuesdays which was yeaterday and not 
Monday.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  Hono urable Njuguna it is well noted, it was a 
typo error.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker , I rise to move a Motion  that this 
House  adopts the Report of the Committee  on Health Services on the Maternal Deaths at the 
Naivasha Sub-County Referral Hospital tabled before this House  on Tuesday as amended, 7 th 
March 2023 during the afternoon Plenary. Allow me to acknowledge  the Committee on Health 
Services  for volunteering and also investment of their energy towards this venture of them going 
to investigate or to look for fact s as far as maternal deaths are concerned  at the Naivasha  Sub 
County Referral Hospital.   
Allow me to give the background  information of Naivasha Sub County Referral Hospital . This 
facility was established in 1920 as a  Dispensary on a Level Two located at the District 
Headquarters . It was moved to the current location in 1950 and elevated to a Health Cent re and 
further it was elevated  to a Sub-District Hospital in 1963. History is good because it is like a 
Compass and I would wish the House  flows with me because we would wish to draw the attention 
of the House  as far as this history is concerned.  
Then to a Level  Four Hospital in 2007 and in 2019 the Hospital  was elevated to the current status 
of High -Volume Level Four Facility. The reason why I called the indulgence of the House  as far 
as background  information is concerned is because this facility was establishe d before the Country 
got independence and the kind of negligence we are experiencing today in this facility call s for 
alarm and therefore I would wish to request the Hono urable Members to invest their energy there 
so that they can critique , probably  because a Hospital  that was established before independence 
and mother s are still dying there is questionable and the history will be our Compass  today so 
when we shall be coming up with deliberations of the House  the Members  will be well guided.  
The Facility which is now a Level Four has 273 bed capacity at the Maternity  that was constructed 
by the Friends of Naivasha  (Women Cent re) and it was opened in 2013 under philanthropy or 
individuals came together to rescue it and constructed a very huge Maternity  Wing that before in 
this County  was only a Maternity Facility one would have said was the best Maternity we used to 
have by 2013 all the way to 2017  because we have established Mother  and Baby  in 2019.  
In July 20 05, Naivasha Sub County Referral H ospital , and we want to drop that term “Referral 
Hospital”  this facility is not a Referral Facility but it is a High -Volume Level Four and erroneously 
we start calling it a Referral Hospital, this is a fault of Africans of calling a big spoon  a spade and 
this is such kind of scenario whereby a spade is being called a big spoon.  
In 2015, the Naivasha Sub-County Facility opened an Emergency Department called Accident and 
Emergency  or Casualt y to manage the large volume of road accidents from the nearby Highways. 
The Facilit y is sandwiched  by two  Highways and  by so or by nature it means all accidents that 
usually occur in those two Highways which are International Roads all end up in this Facility . The 
Facility  also has a Radiology Department which was renovated and received a brand new Ultra 
Sound and X- Rays Machines including a portable X-Ray Machine . The portable X-Ray Machines 
are digital that can move  from one site to another for the purposes  of Imaging  of Patient s at 
different location s of the facility or even outside the facility and then thereafter it process es that 
data using a disc.  
The Facility serves residents from Naivasha Sub-County , Nyandarua County, Narok County , 
Kiambu County and Kajiado County. Patients requiring Specialist Care or if available an Intensive 
Care Unit (ICU) bed  can transferred via referral to Nakuru County Referral Hospital through 
referrals. It means that the facility does not have an ICU bed or High Dependency Un it (HDU) and 
that is why I am saying it is not a Referral Hospital. Other cases are being referred to Kenyatta 
National Hospital in Nairobi or Nairobi Hospital because they are nearer  than coming back to 
Nakuru therefore it means Majority of the Referrals end up in the National  facilities at times. Allow 
me to give the chronology of precedents of our facilit ies as far as Referral systems are concerned.  
We shall start with Level One, an d for the purposes of the Members  it constitutes of Ambulatory  
Services  and the Community Health Volunteers (CHV s). They form the first cadre of the Health 
Department . They are manned by the Public Health Officers . Level Two are the Dispensaries  and 
they a re run  by Nurses. We go to the Health Cadre which is the Health Facility which are run by a 
Clinical Officer s, two nurses  and usually have a Lab Technologist and it has a Medical Lab.  The 
kind of the medication that are there are prescribed by the Clinical Officer.  
After that we go to a Level Four which a re low volume. Low Volume Level Four are having 
Theatre Services and it is run by the Medical Officer and it comprises of Laboratory  Services, it 
can have Imaging Services and can have things to do with CCC  and a proper Pharmacy .  
From the Low Volume Level Fours, we have one in Elburgon, one in Keringet and one in 
Olen guruone. These are Low Volume Levels that we have in our County. We have reali sed there 
is some  confusion and allow me to go to Level Three;  in Level Three we have Bondeni Dispensary, 
Langalanga, Subukia and we have facilities that actually occupies that Level. We have one of the 
hospitals a t the periphery  in Rongai and we have one of Hospital as Level Three. I can not recall 
its name ; it is in the periphery  near Baringo County . 
The only High V olume Level Four is Molo, Naivasha and Gilgil including the number of patients 
that frequent there to offer services. They can also offer speciali sed services like Dialysis . They  
also have consultancies in those facilities.  
Then number five Mr. Speaker, you have Level Fi ve which is a Referral F acility. At that Level we 
can start giving it th e PGH  status , which is the only Level Five that we have Mr. Temporary 
Speaker and that they also offer services like Dialysis , Chemo services and other services Mr. 
Temporary Speaker . And they have  a high level of Specialists, that is consultancies  and they als o 
have Orthopedic Theaters and other facilities.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, allow me now to go back because the other Levels that we do not have ; 
those are Levels Six which are National Facilities.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he Committee visited this facility following a public outcry relating to 
maternal deaths reported at Naivasha Sub - County Referral Hospital to find out the status of the  
matters reported. Additionally  during the same period, the Nakuru County Government had 
dissolved N aivasha Level 5 Hospital Board following complaints of negligence and poor 
governance and so the Committee pursuant to its mandate had to ascertain the same.  
The Board was dismissed following an uproar from the public regarding the delivery of services 
that reportedly led to the death of a mother on January 17th, 2023. At the same time, residents of 
Naivasha on Tuesday January 18th blocked the road leading to the facility to protest the death of 
the patient who had been admitted.  
When we arrived, we had so me engagements with the Hospital Management Committee  and Mr.  
Temporary  Speaker, number one of the stakeholders that we met there was the Hospital 
Administrator  and the rest under the hospital system  manages the Departments and they ensure 
that things are moving smoothly  Mr. Temporary Speaker as far as Administration is concerned.  
The said Administrator said that the Naivasha Sub–County Hospital has 337 staff but the expected 
number Mr. Temporary Speaker is 602. Therefore  there is a big gap. And Mr. Temporary Speaker  
when I tabled the PGH Report I said these two facilities that we have in the Country they depict 
whatever we have on the ground in oth er facilities and therefore Mr. Temporary Speaker you can 
see we have a at least a shortage of 50% avera gely of the staff of our facilities.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker  the facility has employed 145 on their own local arrangements  which is 
not good because all their Revolving Fu nd usually end s up pay ing the staff that have been 
contracted by the facility. Mr. Temporary Speaker we noted that there is an acute shortage of staff.  
 
OUTPATIENT DEPARTMENT.   
The facility has an Accident and Emergency Department that was opened in July 2015. And this 
Department doubles up as the Outpatient Department Mr. Temporary Speake r so that they can 
manage the high number  of accident cases that happen on  our roads.  
The officers Mr. Temporary Speaker have certain arrangements whereby the staff usually appear 
to the facility on a duty r oster system or in a system whereby Mr. Temporary  Speaker they usually 
exchange duties . The three shifts are from 7:00am – 2:00pm, 2:00pm – 8:00pm and 8:00pm – 
7:00am.  They also have a Pharmacy . 
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: Mr. Temporary Speaker. I wish to seek your indulgence and give guidance 
to this House i f need be. I want to apprec iate the way the learned friend  honorable Njuguna is 
giving his Report and is getting into details so that we get  to understand. But Mr. Temporary 
Speaker  why I seek your indulgence is  if we go reading word by word  and we go explaining what 
that word means and these Members also require some time for M embers to interrogate the Report 
for purposes of adopting this Report.; s o why I am seeking indulgence  that t he honorable Learned 
Friend does a summary of this  other than now  reading each and every statement and explaining 
what that statement means. Then Mr. Temporary Speaker we will lack time for us to participate. 
So I seek for indulgence and guidance to this s o that the Hon. Chair does a summary of this and I 
know he is able and I know with your direction he will comply.  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon. Elijah Murage):  Hon. Njuguna do a summary so that we can have 
time for debate  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Mr. Temporary Speaker the reason I am doing this in this House is 
because we do not have Medics and I would urge this House to employ Researchers of different 
specialties so that we can be doing proper oversight.  
However Mr. Temporary Speaker I also wish to request the Assembly to come up with a tailored 
system of training the Members on these terminologies and this …  Mr. Temporary Speaker  you 
can agree with me we do not have Medics in this H ouse and if I do not go to the nitty gritty Mr. 
Temporary Speaker, tomorrow some of the mishaps will be coming up. Mr. Temporary Speaker 
however, I am well guided and I am about to summaris e because the se are some of the things that 
we are discussing …different.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker I am on the floor and I do not want any information.  
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: It is not a point of information  Mr. Temporary Speaker, what the Member 
is saying is incorrect.  We have the Majority Leader of this House who is within the fraternity of 
Medics  Mr. Temporary Speaker so it is not fair for the honorable Member as he is to mislead the 
House because we have the Medics and we are also Learned Members in  this House. And 
Honorable Alex as well.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  Honorable Njuguna we have two Medics here. 
We have Honorable Alex…  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  But they are Members of this H ouse, not employees but I am glad 
because they are also Members of Health Committee. And Mr. Temporary Speaker, I can tell you 
they are very resourceful to us. If only we can have Researchers on that field we can appreciate.  
But Mr. Temporary Speaker I said the reason why I said so , the rest of the Members are not from 
the Health Committee. And tomorrow they might find themselves in a corner Mr.  Temporary 
Speaker. I will not go through as honorable Member is saying, but I want to go because there is an 
outline and I know things are legible here. I will go to the specific case that took us to that facility.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  What is it Honorable Jane?  
Hon. Jane Gituku:  Mr. Temporary Speaker  I would request that when we have such ki nd of 
documents  we also be served with them because I know this County Assembl y is full of 
photocopiers so that we can also follow what our honorable Member is talking about. Yes please ? 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  Honorable Jane, the docum ents were served 
yesterday in the afternoon.  
Hon. Jane Gituku:  Ooh sorry.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Mr. Temporary Speaker I request you give the House guidance and also 
protect me Mr. Temporary Speaker because these Members just to negate this House to other 
activities and to give us some invitations that actually will draw the attention away from this Report 
Mr. Temporary Speaker because apart from being a Health Committee Report , it is a healthy report 
that will give us a clue of what is happening in our Department.  
I want Mr. Temporary Speaker to draw the attention of the Members to page 11. On case one of 
the maternal issues at Naivasha facility as Honorable Palang’a who is my senior said so that we 
can flow and save time. This was the first case that was reported on 6th. And Mr. Temporary 
Speaker I would wish here we go slow so tha t the Members can also understand.  
CASE ONE  
The patient was admitted on 6th January 2023 at 9:00am. She delivered on 7th January 2023 and 
she was delivered by a midwife. They said the allegations that the patient delivered on the floor 
unattended were not true.  I want M embers to check that and confirm that allegation if it was true.  
After delivery , the mother had postpartum hemorrhage. The condition was managed through blood 
transfusion and she was stabili sed.  
On 9th and 10th January 2023, the patient was  stable. However on 11th January, 2023 she was weak 
and pale. Her blood pressure was 126/66. More blood transfusion was done and hemoglobin levels 
were at 3.5. The situation deteriorated and at around 7:00pm it was agreed that the patient be put 
on oxygen and be tak en to the Intensive Care Unit which I had earlier  said the facility does not 
have .  
The hospital had no space at their Facility. They tried to look for an Intensive Care Bed at Kijabe, 
P.G.H Nakuru and Kenyatta National Hospital but they could no t secure any. On 12th January, 
2023 at 10.15am the patient succumbed and was reported dead.  
The matter elicited reaction and the Department of Health in the County Government of Nakuru 
initiated investigations to establish what really transpired. That is s elf-explanatory and I want to 
say maternal issues are not emergency issues. This lady was going there for prenatal services and 
she was being examined by the Medics there and they had a report of this patient and if they did 
not have, the patient had a rec ord and therefore when they said they were just caught off -guard 
because of the issues that came later that is a questionable matter. But when investigation s were 
done by the Department they identified the following gaps  
 
GAPS IDENTIFIED  
• It was noted that the Caesarian Section ought to have been done earlier rather than wait for 
the patient to deliver normally.  
That is the first thing that the Department said that is negligence and it cannot be qualified to be 
anything .  
The death could have been avoid ed if they had adequate facilities such as Theatre and ICU beds. 
The delay was also occasioned by lack of theatres and theatre beds but they have a theatre that was 
constructed back in 2013 but has not been equipped but as you look at the Report, the facil ity 
receives something to do with Kshs. 55 million quarterly.  
The recommended proactive Monitoring and Evaluation of labour and post -partum is 30 minutes. 
However, with acute shortage of staff it was not practical.  
CASE 2.  
The patient was admitted on 16th January, 2023. She said the expected Estimated Date of Delivery 
(EDD) was 17/12/2022. She complained of being postdate with mild laps, non -radiating, not 
increasing in frequency and intensity which were on and off. That is labour contraction and 
relaxati on.  
On 16th January 2023, at 0900hrs upon observation, it was agreed that the patient be induced after 
Scan.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Njuguna , there is a problem with your shirt 
and we are live on facebook.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. Though this is not the changing 
room and because I was belaboring to wake up and sit down that was the occasion. Allow me to 
continu e; on 17th January 2023 the patient was induced at 0800hrs and was being observed. On 
18th January, 2023 at 1800hrs, it was noted that the cervix was 4cm dilated, centrally located, short 
and thin, draining clear liqu id, caput forming, and moderate contractions. They planned to review 
and if no progress of labour was reported , intervention through C aesarian Section  was to be done.  
From 16th to 18th, that is when the specialists are coming to tell us that they want to take that lady 
to theatre.  
At 16 30 hr s on 18th January, 2023, a review was done and it was noted that the cervix was 7 cm 
dilated , descent 2/5 cervix long and thick, caput forming, sweeping done, moderate contractions, 
FHR 120 -128bpm. It was agreed that the patient be taken to theatre. T he patient was prepared for 
theatre at 1715hrs.  
However, due to preceding emergencies the patient was taken to theatre at 1940hrs. At 2000hrs 
the Caesarian Section was done and the mother was stable. It is also noted that nobody was 
concerned about that l ady and therefore, all issues that came later were due to negligence.  
On 19/01/2021 at 1530hrs - The PV bleeding was noted and clots expelled. Some medication were 
administered. Further, the speculum exam done by the doctor on call and the patient was stab le. 
The PV bleeding stopped.  
On 20th January, 2023 at 2030hrs, patient reported of PV bleeding, review in consultation with 
OBS/GYN consultant was done. The speculum was done, the cervix was opened, clots noted on 
the cervical. No lacerations noted on the vaginal wall and cervix.  
The PV bleeding stopped, plan was to transfuse patient with 3 pints of blood, monitor vitals hourly, 
monitor urine output and monito r recurrence of the PV bleeding.  
On 21st January 2023 at 0830hrs the patient raised concern of PV bleeding. The patient was 
reviewed in consultation with OBS/GYN consultant and a plan for exploratory laparotomy, GXM, 
FHG and 3pints of blood was prepared. At 0925hrs the patient was taken to theatre.  You can see 
from 16th to 25th January, 2023, the pa tient was still at the facility and at that time, the caregivers 
who were supposed to be taking care of the patient were not given any information and therefore, 
there are issues in those facilities and in our facilities.  
Findings while in theatre  
• Clots wi thin the uterine cavity after reopening of the lower uterine sediment transverse 
incision.  
• Minimal oozing from uterine incision site.  
• Active bleeding noted from the left uterine edge.  
• Normal bladder, normal abdominal organs.  
• Oozing noted from entire myomet rium, Bleeders ligated, clots within uterine cavity 
expelled.  
• B lynch suture inserted, uterine artery ligation performed bilaterally.  
Patient still noted to be oozing, from entire myometrium (muscular outer layer of the uterus) and 
a decision made to perfo rm subtotal hysterectomy (surgical operation to remove part or all the 
uterus). Oozing was still noted from the cervical stump. A diagnosis of DIC ( Disseminated 
intravascular coagulation -is a serious disorder in which the proteins that control blood clotti ng 
become overactive. ) was entertained.  
The patient was transfused with whole blood while intra -op and at 0100hrs the patient got a cardiac 
arrested on the table. Resuscitation was done by a multi - disciplinary team for 45 minutes, where 
ROSC was achieved  (Resumption of spontaneous circulation)  
The plan was to transfer the patient to ICU for close monitoring and inform the relatives on 
patient’s condition. Family conference was done with the medical team to inform the husband and 
sister on interventions . 
The patient was taken to the ICU from the Maternity theatre and on observation she was sick 
looking and very pale. Blood transfusion of 5 pints were administered intraoperatively.  
At 1715hrs the patient went into cardiac arrest, 2 cycles of CPR ( Cardiopulmonary resuscitation -
is an emergency procedure that can help save a person's life if their breathing or heart stops)  were 
administered, FFP ( Fresh frozen plasma -is used for patients with a coagulopathy who are bleeding 
or at risk of bleeding,  and where a specific therapy or factor concentrate is not appropriate or 
unavailable . infusion was ongoing, per rectal bleeding noted to be ongoing.  
At 1800hrs the p atient went into another cardiac arrest, resuscitation done for 15 minutes but it 
was unsu ccessful. The relatives informed at 1830hrs and the patient was certified dead at 1850hrs.   
 
Gaps Identified  
• Lack of proper documentation in trending lab works such as FHG( Full Haemogram  -is a 
blood test that checks for the presence of any diseases and infections in the body , results 
for post -op patients for ample follow -up. 
• Clinicians to give a high index of suspicion and to anticipate mass transfusion with multiple 
blood products e.g. w hole blood, PRBCs, FFP to be requested pre -operatively to enable 
smooth coordination between lab personnel and theatre team in timely acquisition of blood 
products,  
• Provision of abdominal packs to maternity t heatre. In severe PPH cases , there is a risk 
involved in using high small gauze count numbers.  
• Increasing personnel (Nurses, MOs, Anesthetists)to enable opening and proper running of 
the 2nd maternity theatre as the department has high number of  patients and at times need 
may arise to cover multiple emer8gency caesarean sections at ago.  
• Provision of Defibrillators in theater and areas handling emergencies in the hospital.  
Engagement with the spouse of the deceased  
The Committee had a consultative meeting with the one of the deceased’s family member. They 
explained how the hospital management kept them in the dark until the last minute. They faulted 
the hospital for lack of proper communication channel. They said their kin used to tell them that 
the staff were not responsive to her concerns.  
To add salt to the injury, the husband said that his late wife was taken to the theatre without be ing 
consulted and when she passed on the management never consoled them in any way.   
FINDINGS AND OBSERVATIONS AT NAIVASHA SUBCOUNTY REFERRAL 
HOSPITAL . 
1. Mem bers after thorough interrogation of different Department’s staffs and the bereaved family 
members they established that there was negligence and hence the mothers that died were not 
warranted to die.  
2. The Hospital lack enough supervisory tools hence the  staff work on their comfort attitudes.  It 
was noted somewhere while we were doing our own findings that the doctor that was attending 
to the second lady, it was said that when this went out of hand, it was reported that she was 
asleep that time and when h e was requested to come, he said that he was tired. That is why I 
want to say that these are the matters that need to be checked. In fact one of the staff had to leave 
the outpatient to go and attend to that lady.  
3. The hospital lacked strategic communic ation procedures that would establish mutual relations 
with the patients and care givers.  
 
OTHER FINDINGS  
4. Acute shortage of Human Resources  
The facility has 337staff out of the required 602and therefore understaffed which has been 
occasioned by failure to replace Officers lose by attrition and those who seek other opportunities. 
The Chairperson to the Committee on Health assured members of the  public that the matter would 
be resolved by the County Government through budgetary allocation towards employment of 
Health Workers which in turn will enhance service delivery.  
5. Inadequate Infrastructure to cater for increasing needs.  
The Hospital mater nity has two theatres; one is operational while the other theatre has not been 
equipped since 2013.  
The hospital facilities and resources  over time have been overstretched owing to the huge number 
of patients, as the hospital also receives patients from the neighbo uring Counties such as; 
Nyandarua, Kiambu, Narok and as far as Laikipia who depend on it.  
6. The Hospital land has no title deed. There is alleged encroachment on the hospital land.  
7. There is misuse of funds depicted by huge pending bills . 
Recommendations  
The Committee made the following recommendations;  
1. That, a Multi Sectoral team constituting KMA, KMPDU, County Human Resource 
Department, County Public Service Board , County Attorney and other Health 
Stakeholders  should be formulated to probe and subject the officers in question to 
disciplinary action.   
 
2. That, the Department should invest on proper supervisory tools to monitor the staff at 
work and ensure quality service delivery.  
 
3. That, the Department should install Biometrics Identification Systems for the staff and 
install the CCTVS on various Department s to intensify supervisions.  
 
4. That, the Department should hire Social Workers and Public Relations Officers who 
should address the care give rs, guardians and members of public when cases similar to 
the subject case are encountered.  
 
5. That, the External Auditors/Forensic Auditors should be engaged to probe the piling 
pending bills at the facility.  
 
6. That, the County Government of Nakuru should al locate funds in the FY 2023/24 
towards settlement of veri fied pending bills and debts at the Naivasha Sub County 
Referral Hospital.  
 
 
7. That the County Government should allocate funds in the FY 2023/24 towards 
employment of Health Workers and purchase of eq uipment to operationali se the theatre 
and other areas at Naivasha Sub -County Referral Hospital.  
 
8. That the County Government of Nakuru should liaise with the Department of Land s and 
Physical Planning to ensure that the facility get s its title deed.  
 
9. That the County Government of Nakuru through the Department of Health should have 
proper and clear channels of communication to the members of the public on matters 
affecting the patients at the Hospital.  
That is the Report and I wish to request this House to relook on to these matters and take them 
seriously because we are potential customers of the said cases. I am still active and I am planning 
to increase this world at a proportional number and therefore, I do not wish either my sister or my 
wife to have the  same ordeal that the patient went through.  
I would wish to request Hon. Alex Mbugua to second and because he comes from the area and we 
were with him, he can enlighten us as he seconds.  
I wish to move this Motion and request these Members to pass it and also this should not serve as 
a storybook. It should be acted upon and each Department must own its responsibilities of making 
sure that this facility must move forward.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. Let me start by commending the  
Chairperson Health Committee Hon. Njuguna Mwaura. Indeed this Committee has done so much 
as per  visitation to these hospitals and investigations as to why some patients are suffering. Last 
week the Chairperson delivered a Report on the misdeeds and happen ings at the Naivasha Level 4 
Hospital. You will be amused to know that the Naivasha Hospital serves around 350 000; that is 
as per the census 2019. We have a concentration of other Sub -Counties that are surrounding for 
example Nyandarua, Gilgil, Narok and part of Kiambu. There are some cases that are happening 
within Naivasha Hospital that this County Assembly has put through the Committee on Health that 
should be investigated and caution taken.  
There are two case scenarios that have been cited within this  Report. You find that a patient suffers 
for almost nine hours at the labour ward. Finally as a Medic Mr. Temporary Speaker, there should 
be judgement on when to place a woman or an expectant mother on a C -section but this could not 
happen at that hospital . Lives have been lost there. While we were doing our investigations and 
visitations there, we had families who came around and said that the previous night they had lost 
their own kin within the same facility. Ken Gen has placed some money within that reg ion and we 
have a Kshs 300 million infrastructure going on at the Outpatient Department and the other parts 
but the negligence of the Medics within these Departments continue ailing the people of this 
region.  
I feel that other Committees should follow wha t the Health Committee is doing because they are 
going to where the people are. We are the voice of the people and if we are the voice of the people 
then we must get to the core of what is really happening in our society. I support this Motion and 
this Rep ort from this Committee and ask the Members that we do proper investigations of all our 
Health Centres. As the Chairperson Budget, I remind you that every Financial Year we normally 
place around Kshs 7 - 8 billion on health matters. A whopping Kshs 4 billio n goes to the recurrent 
payment of salaries. If we do not have a structure that is checking on the autonomy of these 
hospitals then we shall have lost a whole generation and as our Chair has said he is a potential bed 
man and I am equally still there. I fe el that our ladies should be well protected to ensure that we 
have future voters and makers of this Nation. I beg to support this Report. Thank you.  
(Question proposed  that this House adopts the report of health services Committee on maternal 
deaths at the  Naivasha sub county referral hospital tabled before this House on Tuesday, 7th 
March 2023 during the afternoon plenary ). 
 The T emporary Speaker  (Hon Elijah Murage): The Motion is now open for debate.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I am here to support the Motion 
because the maternal deaths have become many and most of the cases that we have been told are 
High Blood Pressure and other complications. We need our nurses to manage that issue. The 
population in Naivasha is so high; over 350 or more Health Workers should be employed and 
provide supervision tools to monitor staff such as biometrics and CCTV cameras. Another thing 
is to get more equipment to operationalise the theatre at Naivasha. Thank  you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon Elijah Murage): Hon Eliud.  
Hon. Eliud Kamau:  Thank  you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. First, I would like to commend the 
Committee on Health for the Report but I think this Report should not be taken lightly at all because 
we are talking about a case where we have two families without a mother. I think somebo dy must 
be held responsible for this. If you look at the population in Naivasha, we have nine Wards and we 
also have other Counties that depend on that Level 4 Hospital. In the recommendation I wish they 
would come up with a way or formula to ease that pop ulation because we have another upcoming 
Level 4 Hospital and it has been dormant for almost two years. That will help ease that population. 
From the Report, the hospital is receiving over 100 Caesarian Section cases from their maternity 
and it does not ha ve a nice unit. I do not know how we expect not to receive such cases in the 
future if a hundred patients are taken for Caesarian Section. As this House and as a County we 
need to look at this hospital in another angle. As I finish, let me talk about the t wo cases, as the 
recommendation of this Committee somebody must be responsible. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon Elijah Murage): the Hon. Kanyere then Hon. Maritim in that 
order.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Thank you  so much Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. May I  start by saying 
that I stand to support this Report by the able Committee on Health. They have done a good job. 
Mine is just to highlight some issues that I can see are lacking in the Report. When these two 
incidences occurred it was all over the news tha t the Management Board of the Hospital was taken 
home by the Appointing Authority which is the Governor. I would like to ask this Committee if 
they had time to sit down with the Board and to know what happened because having been a Board 
Member of one of t he facilities, I find it not prudent to just sacrifice the Board when such a thing 
happens because the Board of Management of a facility like a hospital does not have the mandate 
of day to day running of the facility. So when such a thing happens and it bo ils down to the Board, 
I think to me I do not take it lightly. The Board should have been given time to go through the 
matter and give a comprehensive Report. Just to ask what comes first, the Board should have given 
the Report then the Report be acted upo n. For me I find that wanting. Also, there is this thing about 
maternal health; I think we are going on a negative trajectory. I remember we used to have the 
Beyond Zero Campaign and nowadays we have things like maternal death. It is disheartening to 
find that our ladies, sisters and mothers are going through what has been reported in this Report.  
As a County Government we should embark on programmes like Beyond Zero Campaign so that 
we can sensitise everybody that is a Player in these facilities. One of t he recommendations that has 
been highlighted in the Report is about the Social and Public Relations Officers. I understand that 
we have people called Community Health Volunteers in our Facilities and I think it is better if we 
involve them in such things. Just to mention, these people have not been paid for a long time. It is 
upon the Committee to look onto the issue concerning Community Health Volunteers (CHVs). I 
support the Report. Thank you so much for this time.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon Elijah Murage ): The Hon. Maritim, Hon. Palang’a and Hon. Jane 
from Maiella in that order.  
Hon. John Maritim : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion and also 
to highlight some issues. On the issue about negligence, I believe we have fathers an d mothers. 
Getting a kid is not a simple thing, in a thousand trials, you can get one or at times it even fails. It 
is not good when the kid that one was expecting dies because of somebody’s negligence. Another 
issue is on workers. Referral Hospitals need 602 workers but here we are dealing with a figure of 
337. This is a big deficit of workers there. For this negligence to occur, the employees are 
overworked or less paid. The best thing is that the Human Resource labour should be there so that 
the function  of the hospital goes on very well.  
Finally is about the issue of financial lay out 2023 -2024 on pending bills. I think this House should 
pass this Motion so that the hospital will get that amount of funds for them to operationalise well. 
When those funds  are given to that hospital, things will work well and operations will be okay. 
Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Palang’a.  
Hon Peter Palang ’a: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker for giving me this opportunity to 
contribute to this. I will also use this occasion to indulge the Members  starting from you as the 
Temporary Speaker that any other time we will be presiding over, the precedence give it that when 
a senior Member  like myself  happens that we are standing up or rising  on our feet with the other 
Learned Friend s who are junior s in nature then my seniority takes precedence that you give me  a 
chance to speak before but that is for the another time. However, that we should not be competing 
when a senior guy is standing up bec ause that is Parliamentary Practice, then you give me that 
opportunity in the first place. On a light touch, allow me to start by appreciating the contributions 
given by the good Committee led by …  
Hon. Hassan Haji : Mheshimiwa S pika,  point of information . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Yes Hon. Member.  
Hon. Hassan Haji : Mheshiwa Spika,  I do not know wat our senior Member Hon. P alang’a is trying 
to place here;  is it intimidation to other junior Members ? We should al so be given time to also 
learn the  many things. Hon. Speaker maybe with your guidance, Hon. Palang’a should stop 
intimidations. Thank you . 
Hon. Peter Palang’a : Mr. Temporary Speaker there are some things we cannot wish them under 
the table. Let us take ourselves back to the time o f swearing in ceremony ; we were sworn in based 
on the seniority and that is a fact. That notwithstanding, if Majority Leader stands up, he should 
be given opportunity to speak prior to any other person and so to the Leadership , and that is 
Parliamentary Procedure. It is not intimidation and thus some facts cannot be changed and of 
course you cannot compare a four -term Learned Friend with a first timer . 
(Laughter ) 
Mr. Temporary Speaker allow me to go further so that we do not labour ourselves too much on 
this because that is a Parliamentary Practice. To start appreciating the Committee as I had stated 
in terms of what they had given up and what they have found out. In fact to start with Mr. 
Temporary Speaker, I was informed by our Hon. Chair some other issues  that probably I had not 
known, this is in regard to the naming of the facilities. He is saying that Naivasha Referral Hospital 
which has been known as a Referral Hospital for a number of years, that name should be changed 
to Level Four High Volume Hospita l but not a Referral Hospital.  
Therefore I think it will also go down in terms of we will need to do some to change the people 
who have been served in that facility including the notice board that has been done by this  good 
County Government indicating a nd those boards indication that Naivasha is referred to as a 
Referral Hospital.  
Therefore as we learn on that we also get to know that a number of issues that we have to undertake 
because it is in the minds and it is all over  and funds for this C ounty have been used to publish and 
indicate that Naivasha being a Referral H ospital. That notwithstanding Mr. Temporary Speaker, I 
think I have picked up some number of issues within the Report which I want to mention from the 
onset from where I am and my convi ction I support this particular Report from this able 
Committee. Just to echo the words of my Learned Friend, the sacking of the Board Members of 
course we have to get the records straight today as we converge here to deliberate on the Report 
that has been  given by the able Committee . It is when we are adopting the Report on the findings 
of this able Committee investigating the matter. The sacking of the Board to me was misplaced in 
the first place. We should have suspend ed even the officers so that the inv estigations are done and 
on adoption of the findings thereof, then the consequences or action must be taken so in my view, 
the sacking of the Board Members  which again does not run the facilities on day -to day operations 
that was misplaced and that ought n ot to have been done. I would really be very comfortable to 
learn that the Board Members were at some point equally being investigated and got some finding s 
on the running of the facility. The words I am underlying is conflict of interest in terms of proba bly 
putting of the Board so that again we have people on board of our choice which again was 
untimely. That is my observation.  
Allow me to go straight to the issues we want to look at, this County Government of Nakuru, it 
has a whole allocation of more th an Kshs 7 Billion in regards to the Health Department alone. We 
will also want to ask ourselves questions as we are looking at in terms of issues of staffing, 
facilities. If we have not been able to account for the Kshs 7 billion -plus prudently, then when we 
are talking of even on enhancing or anything, we must reflect ourselves and get to understand 
where the problem  is. Is it the issues of corruption ? Is it issues of staffing or reluctance of the 
people because it is true that at some point this ought not  to have happened? The deaths , we happen 
to lose our young ladies, our residents ; this should have been corrected but again, with all  Kshs 7 
billion, we should have had proper supervision that has been written here. There are some gaps 
somewhere which we s hould tighten our belts and get to know that we get to do things done right. 
You look at the timeframe within which this patient was supposed to have gone to theatre, a whole 
3 hours from 17 and 15 hours up to that late hours that need to be checked on. Wh y do we allow 
to lose our patient s just because of laxity in terms of coordinating from one level to another in 
terms of treating our patients? That is unacceptable and must be looked into and ensure the culprits 
are brought to book. I am a resident of Nai vasha for a couple of years and some of these issues 
being raised are real especially the shortage of staff. Can you imagine if you happen to get a patient 
and get yourself to hos pital only to get one Clinical  Officer ? 
Hon. Jane Gituku : [On Point of information ]. 
Hon. Peter Palang’a : To the House or to me . 
Hon. Jane Gituku:  To the House . 
Hon. Peter Palang’a : Good . 
Hon. Jane Gituku:  We do not have a quorum ; we are less than 25 Members. I was thinking 
whether the Motion should continue or we adjourn Mr. Temporary Speaker   
Hon. Peter Palang’a:  Mr. Temporary Speaker, allow me to not act on behalf of the Whips ; we 
have able Whips in this House and Hon. Jane should as well kindly liaise with the Whips who can 
confirm this. You have a very valid point but yo u are misplaced in terms of your mandate because 
that ought to have come up from the Whip. So allow me to continue because the Whip will guide 
me if any but otherwise your concerns should be addressed by the Whips. I was on a point where 
I was talking abou t laxity. The shortage of staff within our clinics or hospitals. I was surprised a 
week ago when it happened . I was taking a patient who was critically sick; I reali sed and I 
witnessed we have one Clinician who has to attend to all cases reported overnight  and we are 
human being s; if such a situation is persisting we also expect that human being to get tired at some 
point. If an Officer at some point indicate that he or she is tired, again it is factual but how do we 
get to remedy this. We have to work on h ow to have the staff that are commensurate to the numbers 
that are coming in. I am a teacher by profession and I know at some point teacher -student ratio, 
there is a standard number of pupil or student ratio per teacher. So  this needs to be looked into and  
why we should put our staff to a lot of pressure to an extent that they cannot deliver to the mandate 
they are supposed to do. So we need to also enhance the staff ratio.  
I want to summari se by saying the recommendations here given in regard to the issue  of title that 
the facility do not have a title, I wish to request that this House adopts this Report so that again it 
gives us the mandate as the Lands Committee and to an extent the Implementation Committee not 
only on that but so many other issues that have been recommended here for us to implement. I beg 
to support but Members as we do this, just picking words from Hon. Njuguna, let  us not pass this 
Report only for the Document to gather dust in our shelves  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : [On a p oint of Order. I arise on Order 95 (i) that requires adjournment 
of a debate. I rise to request this House and your indulgence as far as that Order is concerned. I 
wish to read the said order “A member who wishe s to postpone to some future occasion the further 
discussion of a question which has been proposed from the Chair. May claim to move that the 
debate be now adjourned ; that is the evening hours or afternoon hours when even the ladies will 
be here because we are celebrating Women ’s Day and they are they are the first consumers.  
Therefore if they can be allowed to come back to the House in the evening we can ventilate and 
also they give us their views and experiences as far as our facilities are concerned and therefore I 
wish to move that we adjourn till the afternoon so that we c an resume to this debate because it is 
a weighty debate and bearing in mind that the Fiscal Strategy Paper has just been tabled in this 
House. Different deliberations are now before certain Committees so that we can check the 
parameters that our budget is addressing in this Financial Year so that we can guide the Department 
as per the wish of the House. Therefore I wish to move we adjourn because of  the sensitivity of 
the matter you consider that . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): I now propos e the question that this House  be 
adjourned; Hon Njuguna, You need a seconder . 
Hon Njuguna Mwaura:  I wish to request Hon. Virginia who is a Whip and a Member of the 
committee to second . 
Hon Virginia Gicaga : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I arise to suppo rt that we adjourn 
the debate until the afternoon session when most Members will be present. If you look at the mood 
of the House, most Members were present and want to contribute but today we are celebrating 
International Women ’s Day and it is being held here in Nakuru, so most of the ladies are there. 
This Report is touching most of the women issues so that is why I second that we adjourn until the 
afternoon session , thank you M r. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Thank you . 
(Question put and agreed to that this Motion is adjourned until the afternoon session ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
The House stands adjourned until 2.30pm . 
The House rose at 11.37 AM 
 
 
 