 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 18 th  October 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3:25 PM  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ) In the Chair]  
PRAYER  
PETITION (S)  
KIAMBOGO BLOCK 2 / 199  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Report  of the Committee  on Energy concerning a 
Petition  by one Julius Amukanga seeking the County Assembly to intervene and stop the 
Excavation and Sand Mining at Kiambogo Block 2199. This status Report  is to be laid by Hon. 
Rose Chepkoech, the Chairperson Committee  on Environment, Energy, Water, and Natural 
Resources.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech:  Thank you Mr. Speaker ,  I rise on the issue of the status Report  of the 
Petition  that was laid before this Honorable House on 22nd February 2023. And  further committed 
to the Committee  o n Environment,  Energy, Water, and Natural Resources.  
Mr. Speaker ,  t he  Petition er , Julius Amukanga ,  on behalf of residents Kiambogo -  Kiambogo Block 
2/199 in Nakuru East Ward sought the Assembly's intervention to stop Sand Mining in the said 
piece of land. The Petition e r had observed that the impending excavation would cause cracks in 
their houses as well as depreciating the land value in surrounding plots .  
Mr. Speaker ,  t he Committee  while interrogating the matters raised in the  Petition  learned that the 
Land Owner had lost interest in selling his land to the Miners. Further, the Committee  tried 
reaching the Petition er through the contacts registered in the Petition  to no avail. The Committee  
however, was able to launch communication with one Mr. Ruf a s  Mwangi (Co - Petition er) who 
informed the Committee  that Mr.  Julius Amukanga had left Nakuru East and was residing in 
Western Kenya. The Committee  has also reached the area MCA, Hon Anthony Kanyere who 
informed the Committee  that the matter had been put to rest.  
Mr. Speaker ,  t he  Committee  has discussed the matter with the Petition ers and resolved that the 
Petition  be withdrawn. The  Committee  is working on tentative dates to bring in the Petition e r and 
make a verbal withdrawal of the Petition .  
Mr. Speaker ,  t o this end, I hope that the House  has been updated on the status of the Petition . 
Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Chairperson Committee  on Energy, 
Environment, Water and Natural Resources.  
Honorable Member for Nakuru East Ward, is he in the House to ascertain that the matter has been 
put to rest? If not, then the Honorable Chairperson has to follow up with the respective Committee  
Clerk  to make sure that the  Petition er has formally withdrawn that Petition .  
PAPER(S)  
ATC FUND REGULATIONS 2023  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Paper to be laid by the Hon. Chairperson Committee  
on Agriculture.  
Hon. Isabella Makori:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Under the provision of Section 116(1) of the 
Public Finance Management Act 2012, I beg to lay the Nakuru A gricultural T raining C entre  Fund  
(ATC)  Regulations 2023. Thank you  Mr. Speaker , I beg to lay .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Chairperson. The Regulation s are properly laid 
before the House and I hereby commit the Regulation s to the Committee  on Assembly Rules and 
Delegated Legislation .  
Chairperson? Vice Chairperson? Any Member of  that Committee ? Please take note and r eport  that 
to the Chairperson ,  to pick up the matter and interrogate the Fund Regulations and have a Report  
to this House.  
STATEMENT(S)  
PLOTS  IN MAIELLA WARD  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): There are requests for Statements  and the first Honorable 
Member to request will be Hon. Jane Gituku. She is requesting a Statemen t from the Committee  
on Lands, Housing, and Physical Planning concerning the  Allocation of  Plots  and Procedures  of 
Repossessio n in Maiella Ward.  
Hon. Jane Gituku:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir. I request to present this Statement  to the 
Assembly.  
Mr. Speaker ,  p ursuant to Standing Order 47(2) C, I hereby request a Statement from the 
Chairperson of the Sectorial Committee  on Lands, Housing, and Physical Planning concerning 
Allocation  the of Plots  and Procedures  of Repossessio n in Maiella Ward.  
Mr. Speaker ,  Section 12(8 and 9) of the Lands Act states that Public Land allocated under this 
Section  shall not be Sold, Disposed of , Sub - Leased , or Subdivided  unless it is developed for the 
purpose for which it was allocated. When the land allocated under Sub - Section 8 is not developed 
according to the terms and conditions stipulated in the Lease , that land shall automatically revert 
to the National or County Government as the case may be and the  Commission shall include it in 
its annual Report  the status  of implementation of the Sub - Section .  
Mr. Speaker ,  Maiella Ward has suffered Irregula r and Illegal A llocation of land and this is a major 
component of all the plots  as is in other areas in question in Nakuru County. The plots  in question 
are major rhetoric as it is not one issue but a myriad of issues entrenched in Colonial 
Administrative methods and systems which lead to lack of transparency and abuse of offices in 
the self - interest s  of individuals pertaining to land.  
Mr. Speaker , w e have Moi Ndabi which is a settlement area in Maiella Ward and has plots  in 
various places like Kipkonyo, Ndoro, and Sero among others whereby we have been having 
rampant land acquisition through illegal means which is commonly referred to as ‘ Land Grabbing ’ . 
Mr. Speaker ,t hese practices are becoming rampant among the politically connected individuals 
and the elite segments of the society  thus,  ‘ Land Grabbing ’  in the Ward has unjustly benefitted 
P rivate D evelopers. We have one example where we  have lost an ECDE plot  of 1 a cre to a Flower 
Farm by the name of Rainforest and they have constructed buildings for their private use while we 
are left with ECDE children who hav e nowhere to attend nurseries, and those who can are traveling 
for almost 3 Kilometers to access the nearest Nursery Facility .  
Mr. Speaker ,w e have had several Petition s lodged against Private Developers since 1997 and the 
objection is on the mode of allocation of the land that they sit on. Therefore, there is a need for the 
Count y  Government of Nakuru to urgently relook into and ascertain the process and circumstances 
surrounding the allocation of plots  that we are going to mention here below that are in Maiella 
Ward.  
Mr. Speaker ,  I  therefore seek to request a Statement from the Chairperson Committee  on Lands, 
Housing, and Physical Planning on the procedures of repossession of land and also on the 
following issues;  
1.  Who was involved in the allocation of plots  at Kipkonyo, which  is in Moi Ndabi where we 
have allottee s  holding ballots but they do not have Allotment Letters and therefore, they 
do not pay rates to the County  Government , denying this County Revenu e and they are not 
even reflected into our Sub - County Office Revenue System . When you go there to check 
for your  Name , you do not get your  Name yet these people have got ballots therefore, it is 
not sure whether they are the owners of these plots  and whether these  plots  belong to the 
County  Government.  
2.  We want to know the  Officers responsible for repossession and allocation of  Plots  allotted 
to individuals. We have a case in Sero where there are plots  and we have Plot  Numbers 94 , 
95  and 49 whereby individuals were allocated. They have a Beaconing  Certificat e they 
were allocated these plots  through the County Government back in 2013. They have 
r eceipts , and they have been paying rates but back in 2019, they only woke up one morning 
and reali s ed that they are no longer reflected in the County System and  instead of their 
n ames , other n ame s ha d  been included. Mr. Speake r , o n following this matter with our 
Chief Officer  for  Lands, she wrote letters to the Revenue Department who also claimed 
that if these people feel that their  plots  have gone, they should go to Court .  
3.  We also have plots  at Nduro, Numbers 34 and 35. Therefore  Mr. Speaker ,  I am also seeking 
to understand the procedures used by the County Government of Nakuru to allocate the 
plots  in question to new Allottees  and the due procedures followed. For example, if a plot  
has been repossessed for various reasons, we need to be told how the notice of repossession 
is communicated to the older Allottee s , how the New Allottee receives the Offer Letter , 
and we are supposed to be furnished with their Acceptance Note that the plots  have changed  
hands. Mr. Speaker ,  y ou  realis e that when you follow this matter, the Revenue Receiver 
who happens to collect revenue from these  plots  is usually the person who is in charge of 
the System s at the County  Government  and who is able to change na mes  at will, depending 
on who approaches the Revenue Receiver.  
4.  We would like to understand how the ECD Plots  in Nduro that belonged to the County 
Government were allocated to the flower farm by the name Rainforest and the motive 
behind this grabbing and allocating of this land to the flower farm.  
5.  The measure the County Government of Nakuru is putting in place to ensure grabbed plots  
in Maiella Ward are reclaimed and used for p ubli c use, if they were meant for public use, 
and in that case, we are mentioning this particular ECD plot .  
6.  The Measur e the County Government is undertaking to protect its  Allottees who have Late 
Payment Receipts but still lose their plots  to New Allottees .  
7.  Measures that the County Government of Nakuru is putting in place to reduce cases of 
double allocation of plots  within plots  that are owned by the County Government.  
Thank you  Mr. Speaker , I  wish to forward my S tatement .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Member for Maiella Ward. The Chairperson 
Committee on  Lands?  Vice Chairperson?  Member?  
The Honorable Member for Turi, forward this Petition  to the Chairperson for action and Report  
back to this House with a comprehensive response to that request.  
There is another request for a Statement by Hon. Rose Njoroge, the Deputy Majority Leader from 
the Chairperson Committee  on Early Childhood Education and Vocational Training concerning 
the Bursary Disbursement for the Financial Year 2022 - 2023 in Gilgil and Subukia Wards.  
STATEMENT(S)  
BURSARY DISBURSEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2022 - 2023  
Hon. Rose Njoroge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir. Pursuant to Standing Order 47 (2) C, I hereby 
request a Statement from the Chairperson of the Sectorial Committee  on Early Childhood 
Education and Vocational Training concerning the Bursary Disbursement for the Financial Year 
2022 - 2023 in Gilgil and Subukia Wards.  
Mr. Speaker, t he 2001 Children's Act requires the Government to undertake all necessary steps to 
make available Free Education to every  c hild . The County Government has actuali s ed this through 
the award of Bursarie s to needy s tudent s to enhance access to Education .  
Mr. Speaker, Her Excellency the Governor issued Cheques  to Bursary beneficiaries across the 
County on the 4th of April 2023 through Electronic Funds Transfer directly to the learning 
Institutions . However, it is important to note that some beneficiaries in Gilgil and Subukia Wards 
are yet to receive their Cheques  hence inconveniencing most l earners.  
Mr. Speaker, a n amount of Kshs . 500  000 and Ksh s . 697  000 for Gilgil and Subukia Wards  Bursary  
respect ively  was enhanced in the Supplementary II  Budget of the year 2022 - 2023. However, to - 
date, the beneficiaries of the bursaries have not received their Cheques  due to continued delay by 
the County Government to release these Fund s. This has led to humiliation and disadvantaging of 
the needy s tudent s who had been targeted from the respective Wards.  
Mr. Speaker, i t is o n this note that I seek to request for a  Statemen t from the Chairperson  for  
Committee  on Early Childhood Education and Vocational Training on;  
1.  Status of the Bursary Enhancement amounting to Ksh s . 500  000 and Kshs 697  000 for 
Gilgil and Subukia Wards respectively.  
2.  The plans the County Government is undertaking to unlock the stalemate in the release of 
the above Funds.  
Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Member for Gilgil Ward. There is a request for 
a Statement from the Chairperson Select Committee  on Implementation concerning the 
Implementation Status of Karai Fish Market Fence in Naivasha East Ward. The  Statement is 
requested by Hon. Stanley Karanja.  
 
 
STATEMENT  
KARAI FISH MARKET FENCE  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir. I am standing on behalf of Hon. Stanley 
Karanja, MCA Naivasha East Ward.  
Mr. Speaker , p ursuant to Standing Order 47(2) C, I hereby request for a Statement from the 
Chairperson of the Select Committee  on Implementation concerning the Implementation Status of 
Karai Fish Market in Naivasha East Ward.  
Mr. Speaker , t he Karai Fish Market Fence was programmed under  Budget for  2019 - 2020 Phase 2 . 
Mr. Speaker, i t is worth noting that the  f ence is yet to be imple mented hence the operationalis ation 
of the  Market has not been achieved within the required timeline . The continued delay in the 
implementation of the aforementioned project has denied the residents of Karai effective ,  and 
timely service delivery within the Market.  
Mr. Speaker , t he  Implementation Committee  is mandated to follow the implementation of all 
House Resolutions passed by the Assembly. The extent to which such operationali s ation has taken 
place within the minimum time necessary.  
Mr. Speaker, a ware that the Budget  is among several House Resolutions , the Committee  on 
Implementation is mandated to ensure th e  S tatus Report  of each. On its premise, I seek to request 
for  a  Statemen t from the Chairperso n  for the  Committee  on the Implementation of the following:  
1.  How much was allocated to the Fenc e and the current Implementation  S tatus  
2.  The Contractor that was awarded the P roject.  
3.  How much has been paid to the Contractor  to date  
4.  Measures and Timelines the respective County Department has put in place to ensure the 
project is completed.  
Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Rose Chepkoech on behalf of the Hon. 
Stanley Karanja. This request for the Statement  is committed to the Chairperson Committee  on 
Implementation, the Hon. Member for Turi take note and respond to this House.  
Earlier there was a request for a Statement b y  Hon. Rose Njoroge. That request for Statement has 
been committed to  the Committee on Early Childhood, Education  and Vocational Training. 
Chairperson? Vice - C hairperson?  Take  note and respond to that request. Next order.  
 
 
MOTION  
REPORT  OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Motion by Hon. Simon Kamau, Chairperson 
Committee  on County Public Account s  and Investments.  
Hon. Michael Njenga:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the Chair and the Members of the 
Nakuru Committee  on County Public Accounts and Investment s , I beg to move the adoption of 
the Report  of the Committee  on the Report  of the Auditor General on the Financial Statements  of 
Naivasha Water and Sanitation Company Limited (NAIVAWASCO) ,  for the year ended 30th June 
2019.  
Introduction  
Mr. Speaker, t he Public Accounts and Investments Committee  is a Select Committee  established 
under Standing Order No. 188 and is responsible for the examination of the working of Public 
Accounts and Investments.  
1.1 Mandate of the Committee   
Mr. Speaker, t he Committee  is mandated to: -   
a)  Examine the Accounts showing the appropriation of the sum voted by the House to meet 
the Public Expenditure and of such other Accounts  laid before the House as the Committee  
may think fit.  
b)  Examine the  Report s and Account s of the Public Investments;  
c)  Examine the Report s, if any, of the Auditor General on the Public Investment s ;  
d)  Examine, in the context of the autonomy and efficiency of the Public Investments, whether 
the affairs of the Public Investments are being managed in accordance with  sound Financial  
or B usiness Principle s and P rudent Commercial Practices.  
Mr. Speaker, the Committee comprises of thirteen Members.  
 
Challenges Experienced by the Committee   
i)  Members noted time and resources allocated to the Committee  is  too little in comparison 
to the work they are supposed to handle.   
ii)  Tracking  of the  Implementation Status of previous PAIC Report s was difficult as Status 
Report s on I mplementation were not available.  
 
 
 
Committee 's Objectives  
Mr. Speaker, t he  Observations  and Recommendations  if taken into account  and implemented will 
enhance Accountability, Effectiveness, Transparency, Efficiency, Prudent Investment, and 
Financial Management in Naivasha Water and Sanitation Company.  
COUNTY WATER ENTITIES   
1.  Naivasha Water, Sewerage and Sanitation Company Limited  
2.  Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Company Limited  
3.  Nakuru Water and Sanitation Services Company Limited  
Mr. Speaker, t he  Committee , after in - depth analysis, insights, and engagement with the 
Managemen t of NAIVAWASCO Ltd, identified several key issues raised by the Auditor General 
which affected both directly and indirectly the performance of the Company  during the year under 
review.  
Mr. Speaker, t he  Company continued to suffer under the weight of Long - Standing Debts which 
stood uncollected. This resulted to  a weak F inancial P osition hindering effective service delivery. 
Despite the C ompany providing a provision for B ad and D oubtful D ebts of over  Kshs 15 Million, 
over Kshs 70 Million of earned revenue remained uncollected during the year under review.  
Mr. Speaker, Non - Revenue Water (NRW) was another problem facing the Company. The NRW 
stood at  31% ; that  is 6% more than what is allow ed  by the National Water Regulatory B ody, 
WASREB. This refers to Water supplied but not billed due to burst pipes, dilapidated 
infrastructure, or theft of Meters . The resultant effect is that the Company  could not reali s e enough 
revenue to effectively sustain its operations.  
Mr. Speaker, t he Committee  appreciates efforts of the Company Management to improve 
performance by increasing metering and area of coverage which have improved revenue and 
service delivery. However, a lot needs to be done to realis e the C ompany's key mandate of 
providing w ater  to all residents in its area of operation.  
Mr. Speaker, t he Committee  has proposed a number of recommendations in this Report  which if 
implemented will go a long way in making the C ompany more effective in delivering services.  
Other matters raised by the Auditor General and considered by the Committee  are in this Report .  
Unaccounted for Customer Deposit  
i)  Mr. Speaker, the Committee observed that t he Company Management was not able to 
ascertain the validity or and competen ce  of the Customer Deposit s  of Kshs.9 636 559.  
ii)  This has been a recurring issue over many years, and no credible solution has been 
provided by the Management.  
 
Committee  Recommendations  
Mr. Speaker,  the  Committee  recommend ed  that:  
i)  NAIVAWASCO Ltd M anagement should reconcile and explain the variance of Kshs.  5  
456  311 and a S tatus Report  be submitted to the Committee  by 31st October 2023 .  
ii)  The Management should ensure that all Customer Deposits are supported by credible 
information of Customer Data for accountability.  
 
Understatement of Payables  
Mr. Speaker, t he Committee observed that this is a recurring  issue which  has neither been 
reconciled nor resolved by the two E ntities, which are , NAIVAWASCO Ltd and Rift Valley Water 
Works Agency.  
Committee  Recommendations  
After  careful deliberation s  and consideration of the issues raised by the Auditor General and the 
responses from the Company Management , t he Committee  recommend ed  that:  
i)  The Management of the two E ntities, that is, NAIVAWASCO Ltd and Rift Valley Water 
Works Agency, should, as a matter of urgency, convene and resolve the matter with a view 
to get the true position of Trade Payables due to Rift Valley Water Works Ltd.  
ii)  The Management of NAIVAWASCO Ltd should present a Status Report  of the same to 
the Committee  by 31st December 2023.  
 
Lack of Provision for Bad Debts on Outstanding Receivables  
Mr. Speaker, the Committee made the following observations:  
i)  The uncollected amount of Kshs 76,433,084, which relates to 83% of the Receivables is a 
colossal sum of money which could jeopardise the daily operations of the Company.  
ii)  The Credit - Control Mechanisms put in place were not effective enough to realise speedy 
recovery of debts.  
 
Committee Recommendations  
Mr. Speaker, the Committee recommended that:  
i)  The Company Management should ensure that all debts inherited from the defunct 
Municipal Council were written off if Customers are not traceable.  
ii)  Management should ensure that more efficient mechanisms for Debt Recovery are put in 
place and executed.  
iii)  Management should explore t he incorporation of an External  qualified Debt Collector after 
carrying out a Cost - Benefit Analysis.  
 
Budget Control and Performance  
Mr. Speaker, the Committee made the following observations:  
There was no significant correlation between the political environment and the Company's 
performance during the year under review.  
Committee  Recommendations  
T he Committee  recommend ed  that:  
The Company Management should diversify its operations to cater f o r  more individual 
C ustomers rather than relying mainly on industrial Customers  to realis e more revenue.  
 
U n accounted for Water  
 
 FINANCIAL 
YEAR  2017/18  2018/19  2019/20  2020/21  2021/22  
 NRW  36%  32%  31%  28%  26%  
 
 
i)  Mr. Speaker, f rom the above data, the Management has reduced the Non - Revenue Water 
for the last 5 years from 36% to 26% which is a reduction of 10%.  
ii)  The Company Management has done reasonably well to  manag e  Non - Revenue Water 
problem.  
 
Committee  Recommendations  
After careful deliberation s  and consideration of the issues raised by the Auditor General and the 
responses from the Company Management, the Committee  recommends that:  
i)  The Company Management should incorporate mechanisms to reduce physical losses 
through proactive patrolling for leaks, quick quality repairs, and daily detection of illegal 
water use including illegal connections, use of better - quality pipe materials, unde rground 
leak detection, and pressure management among many others.  
ii)  Management should invest in Management Systems such as the Geographical Information 
System whose technology can guide quick real - time problem solving.  
iii)  Heavy penalties for illegal connections and water meter s  theft must be administered as 
Stipulated by L aw and Company Regulations.  
 
Acknowledgement  
Mr. Speaker, I take this opportunity to commend the Members of the Committee  for their devotion 
and commitment to duty, which made the consideration of the Auditor General's Report  on 
NAIVAWASCO Ltd successful. I also wish to thank the O ffices of the Speaker and the Clerk to 
the Assembly for the support extended to the Committee  in undertaking this important assignment.  
Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank the Management of NAIVAWASCO Ltd who submitted written 
responses to the Report , and who appeared before the Committee  to give further clarity to issues 
raised by the Auditor General. At this point, I would like to request Hon. Muraya to second .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you. Hon. Muraya .  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  I want to first commend the Committee  on Public 
Accounts and Investments for the good work. I wish to second the Motion and also to ask the 
Chairperson on Implementation to take up the matter because we need to salvage the Company.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What other instructions are you forwarding to …?  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Not other  instructions  Mr. Speaker, I am just  request ing  the Chairperson 
because we have some recommendations and we need to see that whatever we have done is fully 
implemented. I was not giving any direction, I was just asking him as a Chair person  for 
Implementation to take up…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Mwangi ,  you had the pleasant duty to second the 
Motion and now  you proceeded to request. I thought your request could come during the debate. I 
get that you are praying, you are putting a request to the Committee  and the Chairperson for 
Implementation to make sure that the recommendations are followed and achieved. What is the 
order the Hon. Chair? Use your microphone.  
Hon. John M wangi :  I rise on Order N o . 47 ( 2 )  (c ).  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): what about it?  
Hon. John M wangi :  Hon. Speaker, I rise on Standing Order 47 (2 ) ( c) ,  concerning a Statement 
that was requested by Hon. Joseph Muraya conc erning the Implementation S tatus all  House 
R esolution s  since the inception of the County Assembly. The Statement was sorted on Wednesday, 
4th of October, 2023.  
Mr. Speaker, I wish to seek clarity from the Hon orable  Member who requested the Statement on 
the period, and timeliness under which the response should be based ,  noting that Resolutions 
dating back to the year 2014 are many and also unrealistic to compile a Report  within the t imelines 
directed by the Speaker , within a period of  one month. Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you. The Hon orable  Chairperson what you are 
communicating is that the Hon orable  Member for Viwandani, the Hon orable  Muraya narrows 
down to a specific R esolution or an  I tem. Is that what you are asking?  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Yes Mr. Speaker,  and also the time frame should be extended  because a 
period of o ne m onth is not enough to furnish this House with a Report  from the year 2014. Unless 
we are being given maybe a period of s ix m onths.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): You had proceeded very well the Hon orable  Chair person  for 
Implementation but now you have lost  the House. What you had requested was  that  the Hon orable  
Member of Viwandani narrow s  down to a specific House Resolution so that the Committee  does 
not seem to be in some sort of fishing expedition throughout the lifetime of this House to get all 
tho se Report s. So the  Hon orable  Member for Viwandani, d id  you have a specific area that you 
wanted to know how the R esolution was done or how do you want it to be?  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I had not asked for  period of time  I had asked 
what the Committee on Implementation has been doing . Unless the Chair wants to tell us that the 
Implementation Committee was only formed during the year  201 8/2019 , or  and he does not want 
to do his duty of  furnishing the House with the Status because Mr. Speaker…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honourable Chair, allow the Member to finish his concerns.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Y es, because we have had many Reports and Motions that have come here 
since we entered  this House and Mr. Speaker, there is nothing that has been done  one year down 
the line.  
Mr. Speaker, we had gone to Naivash a  for example ; we gave recommendations and the matter was 
committe d  to him  by you Mr. Speaker. And since then , there is nothing that has been done  
Mr. Speaker, I can narrow down my request to a o ne  y ear Status of the Implementation  amba z o 
z imefanyika  and  you  just stick to the days that you gave the Chair person  to give us  the Report . Let 
him not work so hard but rather give us the status of one year.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Chair.  
Hon. John M wangi :  Thank you Mr. Speaker for granting me this opportunity to give information. 
So Hon. Joseph Muraya, the Member for Viwandani, what I understand as a profession al  is that…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon orable  Chair person  address the Speaker so that there is no 
exchange between the floors.  
Hon. John Mwangi :  Mr. Speaker, what I understand according to the Statement that was 
requested ,  the Hon orable  Member requested the Committee  to furnish him  with  the 
Implementation Status, R esolutions, and Report s…  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:   On a p oint of information.  Mr. Speaker ,  I did not ask for the status to 
come to me. It is to the floor of this House. He is misleading the House...  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): O rder! Order! Hon.  Chair ,  finish your submission s  then we make 
a ruling on the matter.  
Hon. John M wangi :  Mr. Speaker the Hon orable  Member requested for a  Statement ,  f or  the 
Committee  on Implementation to furnish the House with the I mplementation S tatus for all 
Resolutions, Report s Bills, and Petition s from 2014 to date.  
T he Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it the Hon. Chairperson Committee  on PAIC?  
Hon. Simon Karanja:  Mr.  Speaker, I think the Hon orable  Member for Turi want s  to mislead this 
House .  There  was a  Statement that was sought by the Hon. Muraya and you gave a ruling and you 
gave the Hon orable  Chair person  for the Committee  on Implementation  a time frame to respond .  
Mr. Speaker, Hon. Muraya was seeking the Implementation Status since inception of this County 
Assembly. But because we are dealing with a specific Report ,  I know that work is voluminous and 
th e  time frame  that you gave has not elapsed .  So ,  it is like the Hon orable  Member for Turi wants 
to answer that  Statement that was sought by the Hon. Muraya at this time when we are supposed 
to be discussing his Report .  So ,  I would request the Hon. Muraya to confine himself ,  if he is 
requesting for a Statemen t for this particular time then let him ask for the Implementation Status 
of the Committee  on Public Accounts so that we narrow ourselves down because if we continue 
t his way, then we are not going to discuss anything in as far as this Report  that is on the floor of 
the House is concerned.  
That is my request Mr. Speaker ,  because the Member for Turi cannot answer  all those requests 
that were put by Hon. Muraya at this time and the time that you gave  us,  as the time  has not elapsed.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you .  The  Hon. Member for Viwandani you said that you 
have reduced the time covered ?  That  is since the inception of this term. Now you want to have the 
Implementation Report  across all the D epartments or do you have a special select  Committee  or 
all the Committee s?  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  I just want Report s of all Committee s  because I have given an example of  
a Report  on the  Committee  on Health. So, all Report s since the  Chair person  was elected as the 
Chairperson  of Implementation when we were sworn in. So, all Report s that Mr. Speaker you have 
committed to him in the last year.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Any new information ,  already Hon. Muraya is making it easy 
for you; so, we want to believe that .  
Hon. John M wangi :  I want to inform him something .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): A new information?  
Hon. John M wangi :  Yes .  I want to inform the Hon orable  Member that the  Committee  should 
deal with  Report s that are over s ix m onths .  Some  of the Report s are one m onth  old and two w eeks 
old, and therefore it is not possible to give a response for such Report s. Thank you .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Member, the Chair Committee  on 
Implementation .  Indeed , your Committee  can only deal with matters that are s ix m onths since the 
Report  was tabled. So, take note all the Report s  that  are six months old ,  you are going to table a 
Status Report , and an Implementation Report  to this House within the same m onth , that should be 
easy work, that should not be voluminous work, and as you said earlier  you  needed six m onths  or 
more than six months. That is agreeable .   
Hon . John M wangi : Yes .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you .  We  have a Motion  before the House and it has 
already been seconded and it is open for debate. Sorry for jumping the rope .  The  Motion is THAT  
this House adopts the Report  of the Committee  on County Public Accounts and Investments on 
the Auditor General on the Naivasha Water and Sanitation Company Limited for the Financial 
Year that ended 3 0 th June 2019 that was laid on the table of the Assembly on Wednesday, 11th 
October 2023 during the Morning Sitting . The Motion is open for debate. The Hon. Member for 
Kiptagich .  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech:  Thank you Mr. Speaker ,  sir .  I want to commend the good work done by 
P ublic A ccounts and I nvestment s  Committee  (PAIC) .  The Management of NAI VA WASCO 
Limited  should present their status on 31st December to the  House .  W e are waiting to hear  of 
proper management of physical  losses of water , use of quality pipes, underground leak - detection 
and pressure management  that  leads to a lot of water to be lost .  The last one is heavy penalties for 
illegal connections and water meter theft. We know that there are many theft cases within water 
Management; this should be stipulated by law and company regulation , this will  help end the 
menace. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Member for Kiptagich. What you did not say is that 
you are in support of the  Motion . Okay , the  Hon. Member for London .  
Hon. Bernard Gatuso:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity .  I want to commend 
the Committee  chaired by our able Chair person .  I think NAI VA WASCO and other Water 
Companies have weaknesses in many  areas .  When  there are water bursts in other places, they 
usually take long before they try to address water losses. Also, in terms of m ete r  reading, to some 
extent there are variances  and when they go around reading the  m eters they at times give 
exaggerated figures and to some extent they underestimate .  
Mr. Speaker, I believe the Committee  has done a good job and if all these recommendations are 
considered, the Water Company will be able to ensure that all the observations and 
recommendations in this Report  are factored in and I believe they will minimis e the losses and the 
Company will start flowing in terms of profits and ensuring services are delivered to our people. 
So, I am in support of the said Motion. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you .  The  Hon. Member for Turi and later the Hon. 
Member for Lakeview  
Hon. John M wangi :  Thank you Mr. Speaker ,  I start by commending the good job that has been 
done by the  Committee  but also, I have gone through the Report  and my area of concern is the 
Auditor's Report . Mr. Speaker, a ccording to the Report , the Auditor gave a Q ualified Report  and 
usually, we say a Q ualified Report  is a B ad Report . And  the reason behind that  is,  he was able to 
site Unaccounted Customer Deposits . Mr. Speaker, t hat means some of the m oney  that was being 
received by the Company  was never deposited into the Company's  account and therefore when 
they were trying to prepare the Bank Reconciliation Statements , the Statemen t was not able to 
balance and therefore at the bottom, the Committee  was able to recommend that they should work 
on the Unaccounted Customers' Deposits .  
Also Mr. Speaker,  Understatement of Account Payables or what we call Creditors ,  w hen you 
understate the Creditor s, it is going to give a reflection on the f inancial position that the Compan y 
has L ow D ebtors' L evels and therefore gives a very bad picture of the Compan y whereby it is 
going to be portraying a positive picture while in reality, it is having a very bad impression. 
Therefore  Mr. Speaker , my recommendation is that the  Company should follow the 
recommendations that have already been stated by the C ommittee  so that the Company  can have 
a future ,  otherwise  if  the  Company is not going to do that, it is not going to have a bright future. 
Otherwise, I support thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you .  The  Hon. Member for Lakeview .  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker, let me start by also supporting before I have a 
Statement  to give as the Membe r from Turi is being subjected to give on this floor. Water is very 
crucial and essential to human life. Today when we look at the wars that are happening in the 
Middle East mainly between Israel and Gaza, there is no water connectivity in one C ountry and 
the poor people are suffering because water is life.  
Mr. Speaker, w hen I look at this Report , I look at the Rift Valley Water Works and you find that 
this Compan y used to provide Wate r before the defunct Municipalities , before even the 
promulgation of the Constitution of Kenya 2010. With the N ew Constitutio n, the Counties  
D evolved these functions and we have Water Companies working. It is very bad that these 
Companies  though they cannot prove who owes these debts that run up to the 1990s, and 1980s. 
We have new developments within our estates, for instance, N aivasha, before this Rift Valley 
Water Works came, there were no estates such as Lakeview mainly Kayole and you find that today 
we have such estates and burdening the people of this County  and not just within Naivasha Mr. 
Speaker, t o cater for the burden of the people and Companies that could not collect their debts 
during those times.  
Mr. Speaker, i t is not worth working because it will always derail the agenda of these Companies. 
We would request that these debts be written off and they do not appear any more within these 
Report s. When we do that, our people will get water. I also want to commend the NAIVAWASCO 
because of the personal commitment that they have made within the Naivasha region connectivity 
of the Sewerage System in that region and the availability of Management  whenever we require 
them to tackle issues affecting the people. I house this major industry within Naivasha and I can 
say it is a performing I ndustry. Thank yo u Mr. Speaker, sir.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon orable  Member for Lakeview .  The  
Chair person  for PAIC following up on what the Hon orable  Member for Lakeview ,  he has 
supported a proposal that you put here that all the B ad D ebts be written off.  
Also, you are going to t each the House when a debt is considered bad and the process of writing it 
off so that we do not continue or maybe in the Report  or in the F inancial B ooks of a Company 
which is a Public Company , continuously appearing that these are debts, they are not liquid, they 
are B ad D ebts. Inform the House when the process of dropping or saying that the debts which are 
also public money will be put off. Any other M ember who wants to contribute before the 
Chair person ? The V ice Chairperson  you wanted to comment on?  
Hon. Michael N jenga :  Thank you Mr. Speaker .  I just want to comment on something that Hon. 
Mwangi, C hair Implementation Committee  had said that the Auditor General gave 
NAIVAWASCO a qualified opinion meaning this Report  is very bad. Mr. Speaker on the contrary, 
when it comes to A ccounts, there are usually three Report s, an U nqualified Report  means your 
Report  had no issue at all then two there is a Qualified Report .  A  Q ualified Report  means that yes 
you have issues but there is  no evidence that public money was used badly . T hen Mr.  Speaker , the 
last B ad Report  is an A dverse Report . An A dverse Report  is one that clearly states that public 
money was used in a way that is not supposed to be used. At that point, it does not come to the 
Committee  for recommendations because at that point the Auditor General usually closes that 
Company  or that I nstitution.  
Mr. Speaker, o n the matters on B ad D ebts that the Committee  is recommending to be written off, 
these debts stretch as far back as 90 - 120 days or above.  Such  debts usually recur from people who 
died and have never been collected or  a  C ompany that closed down and never c a me back to 
operational. Such debts cannot be written off from the A ccounts of the Company and still cannot 
be collected. This is why we requested NAIVAWASCO in this case to give us a S tatus Report  of 
every debt by 30th October this year so th at we can also as a Committee  before even writing off 
all of them, we can also as a Committee  justify debt s  stretches ,  back that amount of time and which 
debts we are writing off and which debts are being left by the Company  for them to collect within 
a certain time given by the Committee . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you .  The  Hon Chair person   
Hon. Simon Karanja:  Mr. Speaker for today, my V ice was serving as the C hair .  Today  I was 
serving as a M ember because I wanted to compliment what he has said and maybe I want to concur 
100 percent with what my Chair person  has said and of course, after interrogating this Company, 
just to add one point, is that the M anagement of this C ompany seems to know what they are doing. 
And Mr. Speaker, seeing the C ompany that has reduced Non - Revenue Water from 36 percent to 
26 percent which is only 1 percent short of what may be recommended by the WASREB ,  then it 
means that this Company  is in the right direction.  
Mr. Speaker, m aybe adding on what Hon. Alex has said, it is good and it has been conferred by 
my C hair here that it is good that we do away with the Bad D ebts so that from there, we can start 
holding those in O ffice accountable in case there is a loss of any other money as per the Auditor 
General ’s  Report . Otherwise, they may be hiding behind that particular name " Bad D ebt" but of 
course accrued for so many years. Mr. Speaker, i f we write off the debts that have been 
recommended by the Vice Chair person , if we do away with them, then maybe we hold those people 
responsible in case they misbehave as far as matters of NAIVAWASCO are concerned. Therefore, 
I stand to support this Report  Mr. Speaker. Thank you .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you ,  I now want to put it to question .  
(Question put and agreed to)  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members, this House is adjourned to next week on Tuesday at 9.30 am  
The House rose at 4.00 pm  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 