COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Friday 3rd November , 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House Met at 2:50 PM  
(The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): In the Chair ). 
PRAYERS  
PAPERS  
APPROPRIATION BILL No. 7 of 2023  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Report  of the Committee on Budget and 
Appropriation s, on the Nakuru County Sup plementary Appropriation Budget 1. That is 
Appropriation Bill Number 7 of 2023. Chairperson.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to lay a Report  on the Committee on Budget and 
Appropriation s on the Supplementary Budget 1 , for the Financial Year 2023 /2024.  Mr. Speaker, 
I beg to lay .  Thank  you Mr. Speaker, and  as such I wish to proceed to the Report  that this 
Committee has engaged on . Mr. Speaker, let me inform Members  that the Report  is available on 
their Tablets, and also on the Hardcopy.  
MANDATE OF THE COMMITTEE  
Mr. Speaker, the mandate of t he Budget and Appropriation s Committee is established under 
Standing Order 189 and is mandat ed to:  
1. Investigate, inquire into, and Report  on all matters related to Coordination, Control , 
and Monitoring  of the County Budget;  
2. Discuss and Review the Estimates  and make Recommendation s to the House;  
3. Examine the County Fiscal Strategy Paper presented to the House, a mong others  Mr. 
Speaker.   
The Agendas  of the Committee  are enshrined there.  
Mr. Speaker, before us here, is an adopted Report  from this Committee . This is the first Report  for 
the Supplementary  for the Financial Year 2023/ 2024 submitted to the County Assembly for 
review scrutiny and to pave the way for the Enactment of the Supplementary Appropriation Act , 
2023.  
The Supplementary  was submitted on the 25th of October 2003  and tabled on the same date and 
subsequently committed to t he Budget and Appropriation s Committee .  
Mr. Speaker, w hen it comes to Legal Compliance  on this Document, Section 39 (9) of the Public 
Finance Management County Government Regulations 2015 requires that in approving any 
estimates under Sections 135 and 154 of the Act, that County Assembly Approval shall not exceed 
10% of the Approved Budget  Estimates of a Program of Sub Vote unless it is for unforeseen and 
unavoidable need as defined in Section 112 of the Act. Mr. Speaker, this Supplementary came in 
through different rationale s. Mr. Speaker, t his Supplementary  was intended to address the 
following issues  
• Unspent Development of K shs. 3.6 billion  into the Approved Budget for FY  2023/2024 
and a Balance in Facility Improvement Fund (FIF) Account o f 491 million  
• Projected Own Source revenue growth   of K shs 200 million.  
• Interest Earned in Third Quarter Nakuru City , KUSP UDG Grant Account of K shs. 3. 2 
million   
• To reorganis e Department al funding so as to align with the new emerging priorities such 
as the Current Salary Adjustment by the SRC, the new NSSF Law, changes in Taxation 
Policies as contained in the Finance A ct 2023 , that impact s on the  compensation of 
Employee's Budget, Medica l and Motor Vehicle s Insurance Renewal, KRA and Kenya 
Power pending bills.  
• To incorporate the Molo and Gilgil Municipalit ies' Program  based and itemi sed Budge t in 
the Budget for FY 2022/2023.  
• Respective changes in Donor and Grant , and Conditional Funding such as:  
1. Agricultural Sector Development Support Projects (ASDSP II) growth by K shs. 
500,000.00  
2. Nutrition International Grant growth by K shs.  2.5 million  
3. Equali sation Fund Allocation of K shs. 6.4 million  
 
Conversely Mr. Speaker,  the following Revenue S ources endured a reduction in the proposed 
funding:  
• Transfer  for Library Services function s, by K shs 14.0 million  
Mr. Speaker, the above funds are as summari sed below: There is a table therein  Mr. Speaker , on 9 
of 28 that entails that . 
  APPROVED 
ESTIMATES 
2023/2024  ACTUAL 
COLLECTION 
(UPTO % 
ACHIE
VED VS ADDITION
AL/ 
REVISED 
FUNDING  SUPPLEMENT
ARY I 
2023/2024  
SEPTEMBER 
2023)  TARGE
T 
Balance 
in 
County 
Revenue 
Fund              
3,603,111,49
1                  
3,603,111,491  
Balance 
in 
Facility 
Improve
ment 
Fund 
(FIF) 
Account                 
491,696,867                     
491,696,867  
Local 
Revenue                
1,900,000,000                     
289,266,633  15.2%           
200,000,000                  
2,100,000,000  
Agricultu
ral Sector 
Develop
ment 
Support 
Projects 
(ASDSP 
II)                         
583,629                      
500,000                         
1,083,629  
Interest 
Earned in 
Third 
Quarter ( 
Nakuru 
City)                     
3,200,000                         
3,200,000  
Nutrition 
Internati
onal 
Grant                     
10,000,000                   
2,500,000                       
12,500,000  
Equalizat
ion Fund 
allocatio
n (Soin 
Ward in 
Rongai)                     
6,435,119                         
6,435,119  
Transfers 
for 
Library 
Services 
function                     
14,033,063                
(14,033,063)                                      
-    
 
TOTAL              
18,790,910,014                     
676,932,043   
19%         
4,293,410,41
4          
23,084,320,428  
 
 
REALLOCATION OF DEPARTMENT AL BUDGETS  
Mr. Speaker,  a number of County  Department s reallocated their Budget  to reflect the current 
economic times and address emerging issues ; as we had envisaged Mr. Speaker, we have the SRC  
New Guidelines , the NSSF Taxation,  the KRA and the Kenya Power  bills that have been pending .  
Further on Mr. Speaker, in Molo and Gilgil Municipalities, we injected into them Kshs . 10 Million  
for their proper operationalisation at the moment. Mr. Speaker, on page 10 of 28, we have a table 
that brings a summary of different  entities . For the purpose of record Mr. Speaker, I will touch on 
some of them.   The Offices of the Governor and the Deputy Governor we have a total of Kshs 27 
million, or 0.6% of the total Budget. County Treasurer Mr. Speaker has 9% or Kshs 388 Million. 
It goes all the way to the last part of the County Assembly where there was a nega ted part of Kshs 
1.6 Million Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker due to the low revenue collection you reali se that part of the  County Assembly 
amount ing to  up to  Kshs 66 million had to be deducted and taken for further development within 
the Treasury or the County Government . Mr. Speaker, the Supplementary Budget No. 1 for the 
Financial Year 2022/23  with the County Fiscal Strategy Paper , has been well realigned  according 
to Section 108 (2) of the Public Finance Management Act . Members  can get it on page 11 of  28, 
all the way down Mr. Speaker.  
An analysis of Department  of Education Mr. Speaker, we started with Office of the Governor and 
herein Mr. Speaker, you will reali se that the effect of the many Circulars we obtained, for instance 
on the Wages, we had a di fference of  Kshs 1.6 Million.  We have House Allowances  to conform 
to the Housing Levy  and all the way to the Contractual Workers  or Employees , the County 
Treasurer Treasury follows, County Public Service Board , Health  follows, we also have a Table  
on page 14 of 28. Mr. Speaker on the registration of NHF Card s for the vulnerable , some of the 
Ward s have enhanced some amount that will help in helping the people within their Wards,  we 
had four Wards, Lake View, Viwandani, Kihingo and Mauche  totaling up  to Kshs 3.2 Million that 
were enhance d for that pa rt. 
 Mr. Speaker, we have Infrastructure  for the  Nakuru City Board which also have faced some 
changes upward . The Department s from Agriculture  and Lands  as indicated in the document can 
well elaborate on w hat has happened, we have other Department s like Wate r and Energy where 
you will find that all these changes have been necessitated by the different Circular s that we have. 
That is why you will find  Members Gratuity  is changing, because when the Salaries change, the 
Gratuity  change, the NSSF change, the House Allowances change, Mr. Speaker, and also the 
Salary Adjustment that must be effected immediately.  
On the part of Education, it is important to note that some of the Wards  have enhanced their 
Bursaries.  We have Bahati , Lanet Umoja and Kabatini, in Gilgil, we have Eburu  Mbaruk and 
Gilgil.  In Kuresoi  South we have K eringet  and in Molo we have Elburgon , and in Naivasha 
Olkaria  and Mai Mahiu, in Nakuru East we have Kivumbini , in Nakuru West we have Shabab and 
Rhonda, in Njoro  we have  Kihingo and Mau Narok . In Rongai we have  Solai, in Subukia  we have  
Subukia Ward  and Gilgil we have Gilgil Mr. Speaker.  A total of  Kshs 45 Million has been brought 
there in Mr. Speaker, as a Bursary  for the Youth.  
Mr. Speaker, i n the Department  of Youth and Sports , Gender, Social Services and Inclusivity,  we 
have different just as the other Department s have had the House Allowances , the contribution to 
the Staff Pension Scheme. All that has been captured  just to conform to the New Order, Mr. 
Speaker , in empowering the Youth,  we have changes that have been made and I think Members 
can go through the schedule attached on 18 o f 28. Those  are the different Wards , Mr. Speaker, that 
have done the enhancement, you  will find that we have a total of  Kshs 25 Million that has been 
enhanced into that Department . It is good to note that within this Docket , Member s of this 
Assembly  have seen it fit to empower the  Youth within their localities with different equipment  
that can help them meet the challenges of the day. Herein Mr. Speaker, w e have facilities that will 
empower  Youth and Women of different Sub-Counties  and localities.   
On the other Capital Grants , Mr. Speaker, we have nurturing of youths through talent s, you will 
find that  most of the Members  of this Assembly requested a transfer from that Vote  to other  Votes. 
We initially had 4.5 within the same Department , but you will find that most of them say all t he 
Members  in the  Assembly requested that the monies be transferred to other activities  and the major 
beneficiary of this was the Youth Department .  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
The Committee recommend that: - 
1. The County is directed to focus on ensuring the completion of Ongoing Projects with 
particular emphasis placed on projects nearing completion to ensure that Citizens  benefit 
from such Public Investments as opposed to starting new ones  
 
2. The Ward Projects must be prioritis ed and fast -tracked to ensure their timely completion. 
Further, the County  to undertake an Economic Analysis of the need, and sustainability of 
this project s to ensure that only optimal projects are undertaken. It is worth noting that the 
Committee  noted that we had projects within our Budge t that dated back to 2014 and 2015. 
Mr. Speaker, that remains to be money on paper but not money on the part of projects . So, 
it is worth noting t hat Members  that they must update their projects  
 
 
3. The Coun ty is further advised that the process of identification and prioriti sation of the 
programs and projects under the Conditional Allocations above must be done in a 
participatory and all -inclusive manner. It is a requirement by the Constitution  of this land,  
Mr. Speaker, that we must identify projects through Public Participation.  
 
4. The respective Department s should hasten the Procurement Process to increase the 
implementation rate of the projects , having done this, Mr. Speaker, we are hoping that the 
Procurement Plan is already out and that the ball will hit the ground running, or the 
Members  who are the one to  hit the ground running with the implementation of this.  
 
5. The Treasury should formulate th e appropriate  Policies to address Revenue Shortfalls . It is 
worth noting that we are still not collecting enough revenue. And in this, Mr. Speaker  I 
also asked  Members  to help the County Treasury in the address of the revenue . With  this 
Mr. Speaker, it is a plea from the Budget and Appropriations Committee that we must 
recheck the Finance Bill 2023 from the Department  of Finance to help the Committee  and 
the County Government of Nakuru come up with ways of generating more income . Mr. 
Speaker, we are falling  short of this revenue  
6. The Department  should ensure timely completion of the projects to reduce Rollover 
Projects, we  have had a lot of Rollover Projects from time immemorial, from many years 
behind as far as from when we had the first County Assembly unde r the new Constitution. 
Mr. Speaker from page 21 to page 28 , we have revised the Schedu le of Pending Bills for 
financial year 2023/ 2024 Supplementary 1.  It is worth noting that here we have different  
Companies that have been paid, some of them that are waiting to be paid from different 
entities, be it supply , be it construction or others. We felt as a Committee, and Members  of 
this House  are able  see cases that have been closed by the Count y because in the last  
Supplementary Mr. Speaker, this Assembly passed a resolution of spending so much on 
the Pending Bills . Mr. Speaker, those were the Findings  of the Committee.  I ask Members  
of this  House to adopt this Report . Mr. Speaker, sir, thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the next order!  
MOTION.  
APPROPRIATION BILL N o. 7 of 2023  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Chair Budget.  
 Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Mr. Speaker. Just a general overview of this Motion . We have had time to 
go through this Budget , and a s a Committee , we have reali sed that many things  have happened, 
mainly because of the many schedules that we have been given by the Government. And when 
you look at the KRA we have a demand that the County  must pay  so much amount, for instance, 
the KRA has a Demand Notice of around  Kshs 200 Million Mr. Speaker that has not been paid 
overtime.  
Mr. Speaker, t he County  risked at one point finding itself in a position whereby we shall not be 
receiving our money, or at one point our money will hit  the County Treasury Banks , or the National 
Treasury Bank and all this amount is taken away. Mr. Speaker, the Kenya Power is also laying 
before this County  a Demand Notice of around  Kshs 300 Million  mainly accruing from the many 
Street Lights that we have within this County . And you will find that some of the  Offices  like that 
of Naivasha, are disconnected from power now and then ; and such must be cushioned  at this time 
and through th is Supplementary.  
Mr. Speaker, we have workers whom  we have been asked to adjust their salaries upward s to cater 
for the Housing Levy and even the New Taxe s. Mr . Speaker , without this  Supplementary passing 
in time, Mr. Speaker, these  Members will suffer , and these are Household s within the Society  that 
we have.  
On the same Mr. Speaker , we have Members  of our Society who have engaged in Contractual 
Works Mr. Speaker , and they will suffer . Some of the people who are Contractors within the 
System that  are working within Nakuru County might fail to get paid before the year closes. As 
such, we know t hat we must create time for this Budget  to be uploaded within the Systems , and 
before the uploading and the requisition of these monies happen, there might not be circulation of 
currency within Nakuru County to the effect that many people will go hungry.  
And Mr. Speaker, s chools have closed , but they will open soon and s ome people might delay 
getting their  children back to school. Our  Governor has promised to ensure that the economy of 
Nakuru County grows purposely well to ensure that each and every indivi dual is able to  realise 
their dreams within this County.  
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate Members who are seeking to add value to their bosses at the 
Ward level. People are suffering  even as we are sit here.  We know people who are suffering within 
the h ospitals and they do not have ways of coming up with these monies. It is good that we cu shion 
such people  with some money.   
Mr. Speaker, o n the part of Education, there is a Feeding Program that we have always talked 
about and must see the light of the day herein. As such, we have had this County Government, and 
with the goodwill of H.E Governor , many Members here have enhanced the Bursary Kitty . From 
the main Budget, we had a  Budget of aroun d Kshs 320 Million  and right now we have added 
another  Kshs. 45 Million . We shall ensure that Members  of the  Society who are hard hit by the 
economy are well  cushioned; and  if we proceed this way  Mr. Speaker , I think the County  is headed 
on the right direc tion, because education  is the only equali ser between the poor and the rich.   
Mr. Speaker that  is the brief summary of this Budget. I move that the Nakuru County Appropriation 
Bill Number 7 of 2023  be now Read a Second Time. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): A seconder ? 
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I ask Mheshimiwa  Ann Njaguara to second.  
Hon. Ann Njaguara:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker,  I do second.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Mheshimiwa  Ann, be upstanding.  
Hon. Ann Njaguara:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker,  I do second.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. It is good to debate , or even to comment while you 
are upstanding.  The Motion is that the Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Bill Number 
7 of 2023 be now Read a Second Time. The Motion is open for Debate.  The Honorable Member 
for Naivasha East Ward and the Hon.  Member for Elementaita Ward , in that order.  
Hon. Stanl ey Karanja : Thank you  Mr. Speaker . Let me first of all thank the Committee for work 
well done. When the Chair Budget  was also giving some comments on the reasons why there is a 
paradigm shift from the original Budget  to the Supplementary Budget, some of th ese things we 
cannot escape. Therefore Mr. Speaker,  I feel there is nothing much to debate because the issues 
have been laid and therefore, Thank you  Mr. Speaker, I do support the  Budget .  
The Speaker ( Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Member for Elementai ta Ward  
Hon. George Nene:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I also do support the  Budget , but with some 
amendments.  Mr. Speaker, i f you look at money allocated for the County Assembly of Nakuru, 
you will find that there is Kshs. 40 Million allocated for Design  and Consultanc y for the 
construction of Basement Parking and Members' Office .   
Mr. Speaker, a ccording to me, this is not a p riority , because I have never heard  any Member of 
this Assembly complaining that he did not get somewhere to park his Car. I wish this money was 
divided among our Wards. We have roads that are deteriorating, hospitals without electricity , and 
therefore , I would like to urge my fellow Members … 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it the Member for Naivasha East Ward?  What 
information?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. First of all, let me thank the Member for 
Elementaita Ward and also inform h im that it is not the role of the Assembly to do the roads. The 
role of the County Assembly is well  defined. I thought that it was obvious through the training that 
we have had, that it is the role of the  Executive to execute the Budget  in terms of Development s. 
Therefore, anything that is in the Assembly  Mr. Speaker,  is meant for the Assembly.  
Mr. Speaker, t hat one gives me in terms of information , that we really need to do some little bit of 
enhancements of our money for  Training because if at all a whole year has gone and a Member 
thinks that the Assembly can build a hospital, there is something terribly wrong. I think Mr. 
Speaker w hat we need to do is to enhance our Trainin gs in terms of what is the role of the Assembly 
vis-a-vis the role of the Executive.  The County Assembly  is headed by the Speaker , and the 
Executive is headed by the Governor , and the Governor is the CEO. She is the one who executes 
through the Chief Officers.  
Mr. Speaker, I was only trying to help my teacher. In Teaching , he knows very well that you must 
have the Objective, the Aim, and the Conclusio n. He concluded otherwise through a somersault.  
And therefore Mr. Speaker, maybe that one … 
 
(Laughter)  
The Speaker ( Hon. Joel Karuri):  Order!  Order!  
But t here is a difference between what the Assembly does and what the Executive does. Maybe, 
he could have said we reallocate o n something t hey had  done , in the Assembly, not building his 
hospital. That one he has a Ward ki tty, he can do that one or visit the Governor. He knows the 
Office.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honorable Member for Elementaita Ward.  
Hon. George Nene:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I think the Honorable Member from Naivasha East 
did not understand what I was saying. I was saying that this money be reallocated to do another 
project because when I tried to interrogate it, I did not see the importance of doing such a project 
for Kshs. 40 Million. I wish it was even reallocated to do other things , if it cannot build my hospital.  
If the problem is building my hospital, then let it do another thing in this Assembly , but not 
constructing a Basement Parking . Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honorable Member for Elementaita Ward, do you have a 
proposal, like what project you would propose within the Assembly?  
Hon. George Nene:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker . Let this money be reallocated to our welfare.  
(Laughter)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Chairperson Committee on Budget, you need to respond to 
that when the time comes for response.  The Honorable Member for Gilgil , who is also the Deputy 
Majority Leader.  
Hon. Rose Njoroge:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would also like to ask Hon. Karanja from Nakuru 
East, next time to be a little bi t softer to the Honorable Member …  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Mr. Speaker sir. I stand to correct the Honorable Member. Hon. K aranja 
comes from Naivasha East , not Nakuru East.  
Hon. Rose Njoroge:  Thank you. That was not the point of my standing.  Mr. Speaker,  I would like 
to support this Motion if it will be my savior from Wanjik u in the current position of impro ving 
the road network in Gilgil,  I support it.  If it will be my savior to make sure tha t we have good well -
built and improved Hospitals , I support this Motion because I want a working Government as we 
promised Wanjiku  that we are going to work for them, and if this will be the difference or the point 
of connection, I support it wholly. Thank  you Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Member for Gilgil.  The Member for Viwandani.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . First, I take this opportunity to thank the Budget 
and Appropriations Committee for a job well done.  
Bwana Spika, n ingependa kwa machache niseme ya kwamba kuna mambo ambayo tumeyasikia 
tukielezewa hapa na Mwenyekiti  wa Kamat i hii kama mambo ya KRA  na Pending Bills . Kuna 
Contractors  wako na  kisukari , wengine wako in depression  na wengine hawajui wataenda wapi 
maana  Benki na Saccos  ziko kwa mabega zao.  
Bwana Spika, n imeona ya kwamba kwenye  Pending Bills , wamefanya kazi ya dharura na 
wamehakikisha ya kwamba hawa watu wataweza kupokea jasho waliyoifanyia kazi. Natambua ya 
kwamba kunayo mambo kama ya KRA  ambayo yanaweza kutufanya tukaingia katika Vyombo vya 
Habari na mengine ambayo yanaweza kutuchafulia jina . Na kwa hayo  Bwana Spika , ninaomba ya 
kwamba ni support the Motion ; na kama vile mwenzangu Deputy Majority Leader  amesema, 
nataka kumhakik ishia ya kwamba sio kwamba kama itakuwa mwokozi. kuligana na vile  Budget 
imesomwa na vile nimeiona , ya kwamba tunaokolewa mahali. Kama kwangu, ninahitaji Shades  in 
the new Market  na nimeona katika Budge t hii bado ziko. Kwa hivyo, naomba kila moja wetu hapa 
tuweze ku support the  Motion , ili tuweze kufanyia Wanjiku kazi tunapoendelea … 
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Speaker ; Mr. Speaker, point of information.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa you had your time.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Speaker,  I am rising on a point of information. That one cannot be 
prevented.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): This is the second time.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Speaker , as far as there is information, I do not think there is a 
Standing Order left. You kno w Mr. Speaker…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the information?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  [On a Point of Information] Mr. Speaker , the information is that Hon. 
from Elementaita  did ask for the amendment…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mhesh imiwa, you are getting us back!   
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Therefore Mr. Speaker , what ought to have followed is that you look 
whether there is the issue of …  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): You are out of order ! 
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Sawasawa.   
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The  Member for Viwandani Ward and after Mheshimiwa  
Mwangi,  Mheshimiw a Doreen, in that order.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Asante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Nilifikiria Mheshimiwa wa Naivasha East 
Ward  alikuwa anataka kunipasha habari kumbe sio kwangu. Nashukuru sana kwa hayo.  
Nilikuwa namalizia kusema ya kwamba naomba kila mmoja katika hii Bunge  yetu, kwamba 
tunapokaribia kuenda Likizo ambayo ni ndefu maana kwa uhakika tutaienda, Bwana Spika tuwe 
tumefanya hii Supplementary  na imepita ili tunapo kuwa Mashinani  Wanjik u anaona kuna kazi 
ambayo inafanyika na hii itatupunguzia vita , maana tusipotoka na hii Supplementary Budget  
hapa, hakuna haja ya hi i Bunge kuenda Recess.  Tunafaa kukaa tu hapa ili tutoroke kwa Wanjiku. 
Asante sana . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you.  
Hon. Peter Palnag'a:  Mr. Speaker, there is a point of order that I want to request from you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the order?  
Hon. Peter Palnag'a: That you determine whether Hon. George Tallam is in decor um, and I wish 
also to challenge the  Chief Whips  to be keen as to whether a  Member is in decorum. I wish to 
request that you ascertain whether Hon. Tallam is in decorum.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Whips in the House. The Minority Whip.  
Hon. Virginia Gichanga:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I cannot see how he is dressed when he is 
seated. Hon. Tallam, please stand up.  Mr. Speaker sir, Hon. Tallam is not in decorum.  
Hon. George Tallam:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have dressed …  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joe l Karuri): Order! The Whip, you have ascertained that Hon. Member for 
Kabazi Ward is not in decorum.  
Hon. Virginia Gichanga:  Mr. Speaker , he does not have a tie.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member for Kabazi Ward, are you in a tie?  
Hon. George T allam:  Mr. Speaker , I have just left my tie in the car. I forgot to come with it.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Kindly have your time. Go dress well and come back . Hon. 
Doreen.  
Hon. Doreen Korir:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I also rise to support this Supplem entary Budget  as 
a Member. I want to thank the Committee for the work well done led by the Chair person  and also, 
I want to make some comments on the Supplementary Budget.  
Mr. Speaker, I have seen the issue of Molo and Gilgil Municipalities to ensure that i t is 
operationali sed. This will improve the economy of Nakuru  County. The issue of Compensation 
for Employees  is also very important. When we pass his Supplementary Budget , the Employee s 
will also get their share.  Mr. Speaker, o n the issue of NHIF that was recently revised, this will also 
be of benefit to its members. Mr. Speaker, I know this is in line with the Agenda of the President  
on the acquisition of the Universal Health Coverage and it is well captured in the Supplementar y 
Budget.  
Mr. Speaker, t he issue of Kenya Revenue Authority. They say “Kulipa Ushuru Ni Kujitegemea”.  
The same thing, the County  should do the same to e nsure that as a County, we are i n good terms 
with the Kenya Revenue Authority.  As Kenyans, it is our civ il duty to pay taxes and so, in the 
same way, the County should ensure that they pay the tax to ensure that the economy of the County 
is okay. Thank you  Mr. Speaker, I support .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Hassan and then Hon. Ann Gite from Maai M ahiu. 
Hon. Hassan Ali:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Allow me also to thank the Committee o n Budget 
and Appropriation s, of which I am a Member for the job that we have done.  Mr. Speaker, 
something that c omes  out very clearly here, and something that has become a tradition for the 
County Government of Nakuru; something that as the young people we are very proud and very 
happy of what the H.E Governor is doing , is the empowerment of young people back at Mashinani.  
The issue of buying tents and chairs  for yo ung people. Mr. Speaker, t here is a big problem with 
employment of the young people of this Nation  and o nce we empower them with such kind of 
tools , the tents and chairs , it basically shows that a L eader knows what he or she is doing. So Mr. 
Speaker, o nce these young men and women have these tools of work, they will not need to be 
employed anywhere.  
Mr. Speaker, the second thing which is also very important, is once we pass this Supplementary 
Budget, there are Suppliers  and Contractors  of Nakuru County who have done a great job for this 
County. Once this Supplementary Budget is passed, the se hard working people and women , the 
citizens of  Nakuru , are going to get their payments promptly. Mr. Speaker, we ask that o nce they 
are paid, they make sure that the projects they are doing are completed in time so that the citizens 
of Nakuru get to enjoy these projects.  
Mr. Speaker, t here is also the issue of Pending Bills , and I do not know why there are so many 
Pending  Bills emanating from the Cou nty Attorney . But we know once these Pending  Bills are 
paid it is  going to help these Suppliers who have done a great job for this County. This is very 
important for this County because once they are paid, so many things will start rolling . Thank you 
Mr. Speaker, I support.  
Hon. Ann Gitee:  Thank you Mr. Speaker  for this opportunity. I stand to support this 
Supplementary Budget because if we do not support it, we will be left behind; because Mr. 
Speaker, t his morning I came across a n article in one of the Local Daily’s rat ing Kenya's best 
Members of County Assembly , and we  are nowhere to be seen. T herefore, I support this Budget 
and I want to ask all Members to support it. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Kamara.  
Hon. John Maritim:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I also rise to support and thank the  Budget and 
Appropriation s Committee for this wonderful Report  they have given us. I have seen that revenue 
for Nakuru County has risen by Kshs 200 Million and that is very great. But I have also seen some 
set standards , which if we comply with them, we can raise our revenue from Kshs 2.1 billion to 
say, Kshs 3 billion.  I recall what one  Hon. Member said, there was a time that Nakuru County 
appeared in a List of Shame of Counties that do not meet their target , and I did some follow  up 
and I found that there were some figures that were omitted in the Finance Department . We were 
doing well and we ought not to have appeared there. What the Budget has shown is great.  
Secondly  Mr. Speaker , figures do not lie . If you are given a Million to construct a road, you cannot 
change  that, so the best we can do is adopt the Report , and go by it so that we can start the job as 
early as we can. Thank you  Mr. Speaker, I support.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Member fo r Nakuru East.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. Allow me to join my fellow Members 
in supporting this Motion and congratulat e the  Committee on Budget.   Mr. Speaker, first and 
foremost the recommendation they gave for the completion of the Ongoing Projects, for the 
Nakuru people to get value for money it is prudent for us to prioriti se the Ongoing Projects , and I 
think that is a recommend able recommendation.  
Mr. Speaker, o n matters to do with Youth Empowerment, I just want to say this i s the right way to 
go because our youth are the citizens who se issues  we are supposed to so much dwell on and 
empower .  
However Mr. Speaker, a s I support this Motion, I have some reservations in that , Nakuru City has 
a Board where we have  lost some money , to the tune of  Kshs 13 Million. In my Ward , there were 
some rollover projects;  I had a Shade Project in one of the Market s and a toilet amounting to  Kshs 
5 Million. So Mr. Speaker, what I want to recommend going forward  is matters to do w ith projects 
from the Headquarter s, when they want to reallocate the money, it is good to inform the Members 
of that Ward  because this information is out there, and the members of the public know that some 
money was put aside for such project so when money  is directed to other projects , it might lead to 
members of the public complaining about the Members of the County Assembly and say  huyu 
amekula pesa zetu. 
Mr. Speaker, i t is good to inform the Member  of that Ward  that we are reallocating your money 
because it is a requirement that when we are reallocating our Ward Fund, we involve members of 
the public, come up with the minutes and inform the relevant Department . So we expect the same 
to happen. However  Mr. Speake r, I want to commend this Report  on the strength that they have 
taken into consideration the Pending B ills. This is the way to go because m any Contractors have 
been complaining about these Pending Bills.   
Mr. Speaker, o n the issue of Nakuru City , this Assembly is located in Nakuru City , and when you 
visit this place at night, it is very dark . So you reallocate some money from Nakuru City. Drainage 
is also another issue in Nakuru city and as Nakuru City people we feel that sometimes we do not 
get o ur equal share of this Budget. Thank you  Mr. Speaker, I support . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Member for Subukia.  
Hon. Isabella Makori:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  I want to congratulate the  Committee for 
bringing up a very good Report . On the fourth recommendation, the respective Department s should 
hasten the procurement process to increase the implementation rates of the project s. Mr. Speaker, 
how I wish t he Procuremen t part is hastened because when we get a lot of rollovers it does affe ct 
our Budge t because of the prices of items. I want to urge the Procurement Office to make sure that 
they h asten their process for us to make sure that the projects at the ground are implemented to 
avoid getting into awkward  situation s. Thank you  Mr. Speaker, I support . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): T hank you. The M ember for Nakuru West, Barut Ward and then 
the Member for Malewa, in that order.  
Hon. Bernard Langat:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity. I rise to support and to thank 
the Budget Committee for the job well done. This being our first  Budget since we were elected to 
this honorable  House, I think it will be better to pass it and I know that it will help us put our name 
at par because these projects are going to run in our Wards. I believe next time we are going to 
feature in the Newspapers  as my colleague has said. Thank you  Mr. Speaker, I support . 
 Hon. Francis Kuria:  Asante sana Bwana  Spika . I supp ort this Motion. First  of all Mr. Speaker,  
the cost of living  has gone up  and we have incurred some expenditures that were not captured in 
the last Budget. With this Supplementary, we will be able to settle some of the Pending Bills that 
will not put our County  to shame. This Supplementary  will pay the  Contractors  and have the stalled 
projects  completed. I therefore support this Motion. Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel K aruri): Thank you. The Member for Elburgon.  
 Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker. Allow me to commend the Committee for the 
work they did with a lot of haste to save the face of this  County because all the Contractors  are 
crying that they cannot be paid because of the issues of the Budget  and Rollovers. Some of them 
did their work during the last Financial Year and had expected to be paid but they could not be 
paid because of the Supplementary Budget issues.  
Mr. Speake r, there are a lot of challenges including issues of the Housing Levy , NSSF, and other 
issues that emanated from the National Assembly. Therefore,  this Supplementary  aligns this 
County with the expectations of the Country. Allow me to say that this is an u pdated 
Supplementary  that defeats other requirements that were there before.  
Mr. Speaker, I also want to commend the Budget  team for the good work they did and the schedule 
they have given us for the Transf er of F unds as outlined here in the annex of this  Report .  
Mr. Speaker, allow me to  request the Chairperson to direct me because in the Schedul e, there is a 
well outlined system of how I moved my money or the way letters and minutes came to the Offic e. 
However, there is one of the projects , the Mutamaihu  Milk Cooler . Mr. Speaker,  if you come to 
Elburgon the residents are about to pour their milk because on average, every day we collect 15,000 
liters of milk. And Mr. Speaker, because of the need for the Farmers to store their milk, we reali sed 
that we needed to reconstruct th e Cooler  House because we already have a tank needed to chill the 
milk. But Mr. Speaker, I cannot see the money I reallocated to this project  so I would wish that the 
Chair man would consider that.  
Mr. Speaker, t he said project was passed in the Financial Year 2023 /2024 and we also added 
Kshs.400  million . Mr. Speaker, It was  Kshs 800,000 but it is not reflected here. This is one of the 
projects that the Farmer s from Elburgon are looking forward to seeing  us operationalis e Mr. 
Speaker. Yesterday when Her Excellency the Governor came to Elburgon , she talked about that 
project.  
Therefore  Mr. Speaker , I would wish that when the Chair person  is making  his responses , he 
considers or allows us to move with amendments while passi ng this Report . Thank you Mr. 
Speaker, I beg to support.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you. The Member for Menengai, Hon. Rottok.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok:  Asante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipa hii fursa. Kwanza kabisa ningependa 
kuipatia kong ole Kamati  ambayo ilianda a hii Supplementary Budget.  Kwanza Bwana Spika, k una 
baadhi ya projects ambazo nilibadilisha pamoja na wananchi ambao walihudhuria Public 
Participation , lakini ha zijakuwa captured  kwa hii Document  ya Supplementary .  
Bwana Spika , kuna  pesa ambazo tulitenga za kuchimba kisima cha maji kule sehemu za Menengai 
West, Olorongai  na kwa sababu serikali haiwezi chimba  kisima kwa shamba la mtu binafsi, 
tulionelea kubadilisha hela hizo zitumike kununua sehemu ya shamba  ili tuweze kuchimbiwa 
kisima  lakini sija iona katika nakala hii.  
Jambo lingine Bwana Spika, tuko na  Wakandarasi ambao walipewa kazi na ilichukua mda mrefu 
sana na hata hadi leo hawajafanya kazi hiyo. Na Bwana Spika, w ananchi waliketi chini na 
wakatoa uamuzi watumie p esa zile kufanya Mirad i tofauti nasijaona kwenye hii nakala kama pesa 
hizo ziliondolewa pale , na pia kwa sababu tuko na mambo mengi ambao tungehitaji kufanya 
marekebisho katika hii nakala, n ingeomba Bwana Spika utupatie fursa na nafasi ili kazi iweze 
kufan yika, turekebishe yale ambao tulishafanya hapo awali na ha yakuwa captured kwa hii nakala, 
ili tuweze kupewa nafasi turekebishe, na Chairman  pia aweze kutusaidia ili iweze kuwekwa kwa 
hii nakala na Bajeti ya hii Supplementary .  
Pia Bwana Spika, k una hela zingine amba zo niliweka kwa upande wa Afya, NHIF . Pia naona 
haikuwekwa kwa hii nakala lakini kwa nguvu zako Bwana Spika ningepe nda kuomba hiyo nafasi 
ili tupewe nafasi zaidi tu  review  ili tuweze kuiweka katika hii Bajeti ya siku ya leo. Asante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): As we proceed, Chair man, there is that issue of projects that are 
not in the annexes  as it is . Does it mean that all the projects that have been affected are appearing 
in this document? Or what direct response can you give to the Hon orable  Member for Menengai 
West and the Hon orable  Member for Elburgon?  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Mr. Speaker, let me take this opportunity to first respond to Hon orable  
Member from Menengai West. It is important to note that yes, he raise d the complaint th rough the 
Budget Office . He was given a direct link to the County Treasury and a number that he was 
supposed to contact one person at the Treasury . He was asked to talk to one Ashina and the Budget 
Office saw him again today. He never brought any Report  back to the Budget Office and that is 
the current information that I have. Once you communicate to the Budget Office, they can only do 
as much as advised from the ot her side because the implementers of the project are not this 
Assembly but the Executive part .  
On Hon orable  Anthony Kanyere  Mr. Speaker , he requested that Kshs.13 Million Rollover Projects 
from the City Board be retrieved. When the County  falls short of revenue, it is important to note 
that we only have the money that we have to share amongst ourselves and  as such Mr. Speaker, 
Her Excellency the Governor requested  for Budget  cuts across all the  Department s, and  one of the 
Department s that falls here in the City is the Nakuru City Board , and we also have Naivasha which 
lost around  Kshs. 9 Million. Nakuru city lost  Kshs. 13 Million and even the Office of the Governor  
lost almost  Kshs. 27 Million as indicated in the Report .  
The County Assembly itself lost  Kshs. 66 Million. So w hen we are not able to meet our revenue, 
it is something that every Department  within this  County  will bear  because we are all shareholders 
of this Government. We  the have Hon orable  Member from Elburgon, wh en it comes to projects 
that have been fronted from the Headquarters , it is important to note that still they contain the 
control of such projects until the time they have enough revenue to proceed with such projects. 
Within this Budge t Mr. Speaker , you re alise most of the projects that were not captured here, some 
of them must have been Rollover Projects from the past years , maybe before 2021.  
And Mr. Speaker, when the Committee sat down,  we reali sed that such projects with a deficit that 
has already rise n, they were  not sustainable within this Budget. There is no need having a Budget 
that is not balanc ing on paper. And as such, t he Committee came up that only the viable projects . 
And that involves the 2023/24 projects, all of them are here from the Ward level . But all those 
from Headquarters , the Governor convened a Cabinet Meeting , and all the Department s were asked 
to cut their Budgets . Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the Hon. Member for Menengai West, Hon. Rottok.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok:  Yes Mr. Speaker, the way the Chairperson  said, I am not satisfied because I 
have copies of received documents from every  Department  that I submitted my chang e of Projects 
Documents.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon orable  Member, there is a process; when the documents are 
received from the Executive, what is supposed to be done ? Chair . 
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Mr. Speaker, once you receive your documents from the s ide of the 
Executive, you are supposed to pass these documents back to the Budget Office in  the County 
Assembly . We have the  Director of Budge t who is within the Assembly , and we have Officers 
from  the Budget  Office who within the Assembly.  
Mr. Speaker, I think two weeks ago we started on the process , and I stood here and asked the 
Majority Leader to offer me an opportunity to explain to Members that if anyone wanted to change 
a project, the process  they are supposed to  follow and for the due  diligence on working of this 
Committee, we were  asked that by Thursday last week, all the  Members that needed to do the 
changes, they must have done the changes so that when the Committe e sits Mr. Speaker , we are 
able to scrutini se all the documents.  
Mr. Speaker, t his morning before noon, when I requested for Member s that had complaints, I also 
requested for the dates that they delivered the letters back . And  unless the information was held 
from me, the information that I had from the Department  is that the Hon orable Member  for 
Menengai West, never ever brought the information back to the Budget Office and with that, I am 
not able to move. I do not want this to be an up -and- push . But if that information is availed and 
we verify that he  had delivered the Documents  in time, I think the  Committee can act as per his 
request . But without that Mr. Speaker, we are not able to.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok:  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; Mheshimiwa  Rottok you have  …  
Hon. Isaac R ottok:  I had already submitted my documents Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Now as such, Chair,  you need to liaise with the Budget Office 
to ascertain whether  there were any omissions  and see how you support the people of Menengai 
West to be able to reali se their aspirations in this Supplementary Paper. The Hon. Member for 
Elementaita.  
Hon. George Nene:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I also have similar complaints with  Mheshimiwa  
Rottok . There were t wo Project s that were allocated in the Financial Year 2022/23 , but they were 
not implemented and the Chairperson  for Budget gave a direction that when you want to change 
our projects, we have to write minutes and attach the  signatures of electorates to express their 
needs .  
Mr. Speaker, t his project read, “Construction of Chicken Empowerment Houses”, at Miti Mingi, 
Mugao , Ole -Sultan and Debai . And because Mr. Speaker we cannot construct Chicken Houses in 
private land, the people of Elementa ita found it wise to reallocate this money to complete Merie 
Borehole that has a Pump  but does not have Solar Power .  
Mr. Speaker, there was another project that read' “Construction of Chicken Empowerment Houses” 
at Kiambogo, Kahuho and Muthaiti in the Financial Year 2022/23 .  It was allocated Kshs.  3 million 
and the  electorates found it wise also to change this project to provide electricity at Ole-Sultan 
Polytechnic that became operational early this year. This project was also to include the 
electrification of Ole -Sultan Polytechnic which was allocated Kshs. 800,000 . Therefore … Mr. 
Speaker I request your indulgence.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Yes Mheshimiwa  Elem entaita . 
Hon. George  Nene: Thank you Mr. Speaker, I was saying there was another project that was 
awarded Kshs  3. Million  for the construction of Chicken Empowerment and a letter was written 
with the signatures of the electorates and they reallocated that project for electrification for the 
Ole-Sultan Polytechnic.  And…  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Mr. Speaker , point of information . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Chair man.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  [On a Point of Information] Mr. Speaker, it is important to note that for a 
change of project, one project that has been indicated as ongoing, you must have a “Cancellation 
Letter” . The project that Hon orable  Nene is indicating as an “Ongoing Project” and hence, you 
cannot reassign t hat project as a Committee . We do not have power even to change. It is prudent 
that we note that if we had been in such a direction, we would pull this County into Litigation s and 
we cannot afford that.  
So Mr. Speaker, u nless if you have a project and you  want it canceled, you follow the due process 
because you cannot have a project that has been awarded then we come here we change and we 
proceed that way. It will be dangerous for us to change this Assembly into a Kangaroo  kind of 
Assembly. Thank you Mr. S peaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, Hon orable  Members, when we come to look at the 
Supplementary or any  Report  in the House, it is deemed that , when for example the Supplementary 
Estimates were committed in this House and the Paper  was committed to the Committee  on the 
Budget and Appropriation s, it was expected and it is expected that the Chair man facilitated 
communication that went to all the Members informing them  to undertake all they nee ded to do 
on their end so that they can find what was changed and what could not  be changed.  
The Chair man has just given information that if projects were already awarded, as an Assembly, 
we do not want to risk putting our County in a Litigious Cycle.  If you want to terminate a Contract , 
there is a process to that and as an Assembly we might not be able to terminate Contracts  that were 
awarded by the user or the Implementing Department .  
That information needs to be clear  so that , if a project is ongoing and was already awarded, there 
is another process that the Department  ought to do which of course would involve the Courts . It is 
not a very direct or time -bound process and so, as for that, Hon orable  Members, I am going to 
proceed  to put this Motion before the House to question.   
(Question proposed that the Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Budget 1 which is 
Appropriation Bill No. 7 of 2023 be now read a second time. ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
The Nakuru County Supplemen tary Appropriation No. 7 Bill of 2023, a Bill for an Act of County 
Assembly to Authorise the issue of money out of the Consolidated Fund and its Applications 
towards the services of the Year ending on 30th June 2024 and Appropriate those Sums and Sums 
Votes on Account by the County Assembly for certain Public Services and Purposes: -Second 
Reading . 
 (Then)  
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) Left the Chair]  
IN THE COMMITTEE  
[The Chairperson (Hon. Loise  Kagecha) Took the Chair]  
NAKURU COUNTY SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL NO. 7 OF 2023  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Loise Kagecha): Hon orable  Members we are now at the  Committee of 
the Whole House on the Standing Order No. 126 as consi dered in the following sequence. (a) 
Clauses as printed excluded the Clauses  providing for the  Citation of the Bill, the Commencement 
if any, and Interpretation . (b) New Clauses, (c) Schedules, (d) New Schedules, (e) Interpretation, 
(f) Preamble if any, (g) Long Title , and (h) the Clause s providing for the Citation  of the Bill and 
the Commencement. Clauses without amendment s. 
Clause 3  
(Question proposed that Clause 3 be part of the Bill ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Clause 4  
(Question proposed that Clause 4 be part of the Bill ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
  Schedule  1 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Loise Kagecha): I call upon the mover to move the amendment .  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Thank you Madam Chairperson , I move  that the First Schedule addition s on 
the Recurrent Expenditure to be amended as indicated in the Order Paper . 
The Chairperson (Hon. Loise Kagecha):  I propose that;  
(Question proposed that the First Schedule be amended as proposed in the Order Paper)  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
(Question proposed that Schedule 1 be part of the Bill ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Schedule  2  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Loise Kagecha): The mover  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Madam Chairperson, I move that Schedule 2 be amended as proposed on 
the Order Paper . 
The Chair person (Hon. Loise Kagecha): I propose the question that  
(Question proposed that Schedule 2 be amended as proposed in the Order Paper)  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(Question proposed that Schedule 2 as amended be part of the Bill ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
The Long Title  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Loise Kagecha): I now propose the question that - 
(Question proposed that the Long Title be part of the Bill ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Clause 1  
(Question proposed that Clause 1 be part of the Bill ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Loise Kagecha): Honorable  Members we are now at the Report ing stage 
of the Committee  of the Whole House. Mover,  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Hon. Chairperson I beg to move that the Committee  do Report  to the 
Assembly its consideration on the Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Bill No. 7 of 2023 
and its approval thereof with Amendments . 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Loise Kagecha): Hon. Members, I will put the Question . 
(Question proposed that the Commit tee do Report  to the House its consideration, the Nakuru 
Country Supplementary Appropriation Bill No. 7 of 2023 and its approval thereof with or 
without Amendments)  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(The House resumed)  
[The Chairperson (Hon. Loise Kagecha) Left  the Chair]  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Took the Chair]  
REPORT ING AND THIRD READING  
NAKURU COUNTY SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL N o. 7 of 2023  
Hon. Loise Kagecha:  Hon. Speaker I beg to Report  that the Committee of the Whole has 
considered the Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Bill No. 7 of 2023 and its approval 
thereof with or without amendments . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): So, is it with or without amendments?  
 Hon. Loise Kagecha:  With amendments; sorry.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The mover  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Hon Speaker, I beg to move that the House do agree with the Committee on 
the said Report , I ask Mheshimiwa  Virginia to second . 
Hon. Virginia Wamaitha:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir; I stand to second . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. I will now propose the question . 
(Question proposed that the House do agree with the Committe e in the said Report ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel  Karuri): The Mover . 
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Hon. Speaker, I beg to move that the Nakuru County Supplementary 
Appropriation Bill No.7 of 2023 be now R ead a Third Time. I ask Hon. Dr . Lang'at to second . 
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang'at: Thank you Mr. Speaker I rise to second. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you I will propose the question . 
(Question proposed that the Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Bill No 7. Of 2023 be 
Read a Third Time)  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(The Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Bill No. 7 of 2023 was accordingly  Read a 
Third Time ). 
The Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation No. 7 Bill of 2023, a Bill for an Act of County 
Assembly to Authorise the issue of money out of the Consolidated Fund and its Applications 
towards the services of the Year ending on 30th June 2024 and Appropriate those Sums and Sums 
Votes on Account by the County Assembly for certain Public Services and Purposes: -Third 
Reading . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Bill is now done and is going to be taken to Her Excellency 
the Governor for assent. Thank you for the work well done .  
(Applause ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Honorable Members, this House stands adjourned to Tuesday next week at 9.30 AM  
The House rose at 4.30 PM . 
 