NOVEMBER 30, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
1 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday, 30th November 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10: 1 0am 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
MOTION  
RESOLUTION TO PETITION THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY ON COUNTY WARDS  
EQUITABLE DEVELOPMENT FUND 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  There is a  Motion by the Honorable Peter Mwamba Kajwang, 
the representative Member  for the County Assemblies’ Forum.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang:  Thank you Honorable Speaker and Honorable Members . I beg to move 
a Motion  That, pursuant to Article 37 and 119 of the Constitution  of Kenya , This County 
Assembly resolves to petition the National Assembly individually and collectively as the 
County Assemblies Forum  (CAF) vide the annexed draft Petition  for the National Assembly to 
intervene  and ensure :-  
1. That, the County Ward Equitable Development Fund be incorporated in the proposed 
Constitutional Amendment Bill before the National Assembly by the honorable 
Stephen Mule , MP and the Honorable Gichimu Githinji , MP  alongside  other proposed 
funds namely National Government Constituency Development Fund (NGCDF), 
National government Affirmative Action Fund (NGAF), The Senate Oversight Fund, 
Economic Stimulus and Empowerment Fund either prior to the publication of the said 
Bill or before it is referred to the Senat e in accordance with rules of procedure of 
Parliament.  
2. That, the proposed Constitutional Amendment Bill in amending Article 204 of  the 
Constitution should provide for the following with respect to County Wards Equitable 
Development Fund. 
I. That each County G overnment shall allocate funds comprising  of a certain 
percentage of the respective total County’s Annual Budgets Estimates or as shall 
be advised by the Commission on Revenue Allocation ( CRA ) during the 
enactment of the County Allocation of Revenue Act to cater for County Wards 
Equitable Development Fund  
II. That all monies allocated to County Wards Equitable Development Fund shall 
be considered as funds allocated to Wards pursuant to Article 206(2) (C ) to be 
administered in  accordance with the provisions of an Act of Parliament; and  
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
2 
 III. That Parliament  shall enact a legislation to provide for the administration of the 
County Wards Equitable Development Fund.  
Honorable Speaker , this is the Motion I just want to reiterate that County Wards Equitable 
Development Fund, what it means is we are asking as Counties to be able also to be enjoined 
in the Constitutional Amendment Bill before the National Assembly which is going on so that 
we are also allocat ed the County Wards Equitable Development Fund. Equitable is no t same 
to equal, so we are talking of County Equitable Development Fund. 
Honorable Members, as you are aware that we have an existing law in the  County of Nakuru 
in regards to Ward Development Fund. However,  we ar e now enjoining the bigger body  the 
rest of the Country  in this push so that we enhance our kitty to the effect that whatever is 
allocated to the County Wards Equitable Development Fund is pegged  in the coming Budget  
not on the previously Audited Budget . What we have right now is pegged on the previously 
Audited Budget but we want it to be pegged on the coming Budget . I think that is going to 
boost our kitty to a higher level.   
Honorable Members,  as we are aware right now,  we are entitled to forty -five percent of the 
Development Fund to the County . We leave a whooping fifty five percent for the Governo r 
and the Executive  to execute their Pilots Projects but we insist that forty -five percen t goes to 
our Ward s for the development that are prioriti sed by Wanjiku on the ground.  Honorable 
Members I beg you to consider this  Motion positively and affirmatively  so that we join the rest 
of the Country  in this push for County Wards Equitable Developm ent Fund . Honorable Speaker 
I do not want to speak so much;  I might have finished the words from  the mouths of the 
Honorable Members . I want a robust contribution from the Honorable Members into the 
positive consideration of this Motion. I beg to move and I call upon honorable Catherine the 
MCA representative of South Rift Chapter on County Assemblies’ Forum to second the 
Motion , thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honorable Catherine . 
 Hon. Catherine Mwangi: I second the Motion  but let me say something. About the Ward 
Fund in the Constitution , the National Parliament were only given mandate and what 
Honorable Kajwang is saying about the forty five percent should be passed bec ause the MCA 
are the people who have the mandate on the ground . When  it comes to  Mashinani  at least  we 
are the one s who know the projects that are going to be done and to implement these projects . 
Kindly pass this Motion  and I second the Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you honorable  Catherine, the Motion  is now open for 
debate. Honorable Mutai.  
Hon. William Mutai: I support the Motion . My argument and support is on the interest of the 
people back there in the village. All along,  we have always been trying to find ways of 
supporting Devolution and D evolution means that trickling down the resources from the 
National  level up to  the Ward  level. I was a sympathis er of Chama Cha Mashinani Party (CCM) 
at some point . They had this one in mind that if resources can really be pushed to the Ward 
level where the representative in the Ward  is the MCA who actually knows and they have 
collected the information o n needs and requi rement s of the local Mwananchi it would really 
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
3 
 auger very well. Today if you ask me to talk about a Cattle Dip in Keringet Ward , I will be able 
to tell you the location and the importance of that cattle dip  if it can be improved. When 
resources are therefore allocated t o the Ward level in plenty, the MCA  and the Development 
Committee  in the Wards  will be able  to chart way forward on how to improve this project . We 
are going to register a lot of speedy develo pment which  to me I believe that is actually the 
essence of a developing Country. We begin from the small unit to the Ward level and we move 
on developing nationally . I really support this and I want to believe that each Ward in this 
Country  will actually support the same. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you. Honorable Karanja.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Honorable Speaker ; let me first thank Honorable Kajwang 
and CAF Leadership. I think for the first time you have rediscovered yourselves and you have 
known the mandate we pay for  you to be in existence therefore ... 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Honorable Kajwang ? 
Hon. Peter Kajwang : I Think Honorable Karanja is out of order to say that it is the first time 
that I am rediscovering myself. I beg Honorable Karanja to withdraw and apologi se. 
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Honorable Speaker I did not say Honorable Kajwang , I talked about 
an Institution called CAF that it is for the first time this Institution has rediscovered that it does 
exist although it is not constitutionally in the Constitution . Honorable Kajwang you are just 
and appendage for that Body and that is why we are thanking you . I do not know why you are 
jumping the gun; we are just thanking you for knowing that you are existing. We thank you for 
knowing that your cardinal objective is to defend the Devolved  Units , that one we thank the 
whole administration and the leadership of  CAF  for that. I do agree with the  Motion because 
last there was what was called the Kang ’ata Bill, before Kang ’ata became the Governo r. When 
he was a Senator he brought a Motion that was killed by the same Assembly and therefore we 
are asking that the Bill that is currently underway that it does anchor  whatever CAF  is asking 
into law.  
Why I  am suggesting that and why I am in the same footing with the Honorable Member , it is 
the very bad scenario and I know the Members know what is ailing Meru County and I think 
Members have seen that the Meru Governor is under siege. The reason being the Members 
want facts because you cannot operate as if you are operating in a vacuum as Members of 
County Assemblies . We want such scenarios  to end and end completely such that it is not the 
prerogative of the Governor  to know how much poison he or she should give to the rat in order 
for that rat to die ; it should be prescribed that you give certain percentage and the rat will die.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honorable Karanja are you a sadist? Do you have another 
way of framing it apart from introducing death and poison in this debate?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  As a student of  Literature sometimes,  you juxtapose so that you are 
able to explain you r scenario correc tly, that it is not always ...let me put it in a language that is 
palatable to you.  
(Laughter)  
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
4 
 Honorable Speaker , what I am saying is this; it is not the prerogative of the Governo rs after the 
resources have come all the way from the National Government to know how much he or she 
should give to a Ward. One ward can get less the other one gets more but when there is a fund 
that MCA s will be able to know exactly what, how and where he or she should place the money 
because the smallest un it for development should be the Ward . I know Members  will concur 
with that but there has been a scenario and that is what I want to disabuse that an MCA is so 
small that he or she should not be given money and there was... when you relook at the ...  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  and That is why I am also worried that we are giving some people 
who have not been safe to save us the assembly because if you look at the scenario that the 
Kang ’ata bill was I know honorable Murkomen is listening, because he is now a CS.  he was 
the engineer and the catalyst of killing the motion.  
Mr. Speaker, if you look at what now we are saying that MPs should first of all distance 
themselves from the MCA phobia, that if you give development money to MCA, then 
automatically that the MC A will overthrow you. you know very well that there was an MCA 
here, Hon. Mutai who had nothing other than the height who he is now an MP, he defeated a 
Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly without money leadership is given by God not by 
people.  
Mr. Sp eaker, I do urge the MCAS here that because we are the devolved unit, we do urge 
parliament that they should not unite when they are fighting for their own welfare. Right now, 
they are together they do not know … because they are fighting for CDF. Now when  it comes 
to the issue of MCAS and the ward development but you will see some of them detaching 
themselves from the.  
 Also, CAF I thank God that you have seen the Light to Damascus, CAF should first of all fight 
to be integrated in the law. This issues of being beggars is the one that has made the devolved 
units to die.  and I know Honorable Kajwang has a bigger mind. He has the focus just like these 
brothers. Are we asking that we use what we have here so that we can urge the National 
Assembly and our asse mblies the 47 of them that when we pass this bill, what happens when 
we pass this law? And then the National Assembly takes up what happens?  
 Honorable Kajwang when you bring a problem definitely you must have an answer, what will 
happen because now you a re you are using the assemblies as a pipe to take you to the other 
side, and what CAF intends to do.  
As you have now seen in Damascus now fight for the welfare of all members, you cannot give 
an Honorable Member a 90 kg sack to carry when the member is onl y two kilograms of weight. 
you will be suffocated the member. So, what we are saying as we fight for this one, let us also 
fight for the welfare of members. We cannot just be members of a society, just the way we 
have been relegated.  
Mr. Speaker, I know y ou are also a member. And I know you are listening, because you are 
good, because you were also an MCA s and it goes also you are in charge. as we fight for this, 
also fight for the downtrodden, fight for those people who have no say. And I know that when 
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
5 
 you do so, because Hon. Kajwang is here and our dear sister is here. And we thank her because 
she was elected, when you elected just do something that you should also be seen.  
Therefore, I am asking members, can we support this one, and then we put an anne xure that 
what happens when they do not what they told us.  
Thank you Hon. Kajwang for bringing it I can see you have the spirit of your brother. Thank 
you. 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you, The majority whip, and then Mheshimiwa 
Mwangi.  
Hon. Fadhili Msuri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mine is just to support these timely interventions 
and to urge and ask my fellow members to unanimously endorse this. But just to echo what my 
brother, the Honorable Karanja has said, which will also be alive to the re ality that this initiative 
might not find favor with a section of maybe politicians like he has mentioned maybe the MPs. 
So, we also need to start scratching our heads and find ways that the caf in case this initiative 
goes to that level. And it finds a ve ry serious blockage from our MPs. What is the way forward 
because we do not want this a very important agenda. And I was just seeing the page we have 
a page of majorities in the entire country. And the whole discussion from yesterday until today 
in the mor ning was that each house in the counties is passing the document today. So we just 
want representatives to assure us that they have put enough very good strategies that in case it 
reaches Nairobi to that level and a few people here and there decide to spea k otherwise, against 
this document what happens to it? Thank you Mr. Speaker I support it.  
The speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Mheshimiwa Mwangi  
Hon. Mwangi:   Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I stand here to support 
the motion, and also to congratulate our brothers in CAF  for a very commendable job that you 
are doing. Thank you, honorable Kajwang. And our sister here, Mr. Speaker, to be very honest, 
that Members of County Assemblies are the first officers in the line of response to logical 
queries in all manners of things.  
 So, by having such a ward kitty, it will solve a lot of problems. Because like now being 
followed by our people. Mr.  Speaker, if you had walked into the governor's office this morning, 
you would have seen that people are really in need of work, the tender box is already full. 
Tenders are there in a heap. it means we shall be able to reach to our people at our ward level , 
not by coming to county or to the national level.  
So yes, I am here to support this motion. And also, to urge members of the National Assembly 
please do not fail us by not adopting the motion or the good bill that is going to be brought to 
your attentio n. So, I support the motion in totality.  
The speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   the Honorable John Martin from Kamara then honorable 
Alex Mbugua.  
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
6 
 Hon. John Maritim:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand here to support the motion, and 
also to congratulate Honora ble Kajwang and Catherine for doing a good job at CAF . One is 
that I believe that it men of our words, we have rampant stalled projects that are rampant across 
all the wards, because the county allocation sometimes is not enough, given an example that 
you can give another 30 million new you have given project that needs to be done in a ward 
are almost of 60 million. You see that there is still insufficiency of funds to complete it. So, I 
think that is the best.  
 The second thing I think also our members is MACs our MPs are also representative they have 
voted for and many of us did a lot of job to see our MPs Were given that position. What if we 
come with talk our MPs to accept this bill, I think it can work well. Because like Kuresoi North 
we have Mheshimiwa  Mutai and I believe he also understands because he was one an MCA.  
Finally, to CAF members. I think that the next thing you will do is that we need the increment 
of salaries in that 40% of the basic salary of a governor. A Governor takes like 866 000, 40%  
Visit like 346 000 Honorable Kajwang and Hon. Catherine next time you are in CAF that is 
the next proposal. Thank you very much. I stand support.  
The speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you Mheshimiwa, I know Honorable Kajwang is 
noting taking and of cours e at the closure of this motion he will be responding much more.  
Mheshimiwa Alex.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I rise to support this motion and first 
congratulate the member and those from CAF  body for this noble task that they hav e seen fit.  
Mr. Speaker, in the year 2003 When the Quebec administration started, in fact, you find that 
the ninth parliament will be remembered for the enactment of the CDF act. that is the time that 
we saw the people and the Republic of Kenya getting th e benefits of a government. a 
government that we saw had so had had worked for so many years.  
When you go to the previous regimes before the ninth parliament that came in 2003, you realize 
that most of the counties and constituencies had lag ged behind, th e main cause of this was if 
you are not in touch with the president of the country, you will not get any service to your 
people. And hence it made Members of Parliament to be beggars in statehouse and even the 
intelligence services were surrounding members . If you are heard not communicating well or 
whether or not in good terms with the presidency or the executive, you will not get any of the 
services from the government.  
However, when this happened in the year 2003 you find that the ninth Parliament becam e like 
a Bible to many other countries within the world, India, fast tracked its legislature and they 
took the example of Kenya, being the first parliament  to adopt the CDF within their country, 
South Africa and Ghana within Africa took it.  
Mr. Speaker, I  look at a situation whereby the CDF has changed so many lives within this 
country. It has since evolved from CDF to NGCDF within the past years. I have had the 
opportunity to represent the people of Naivasha as the chairperson CDF within the last regime 
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
7 
 from 2017 to 2022. And within that span of time, if this is the dream that has been envisaged 
by the great people who will represent us in the CAF , I would say that we  as a Country and as 
Nakuru County, we are headed to great things. It is time we saw such Motions being moved 
and passed by this Assembly. The meaning of this would mean that today, the person living in 
Visoi Ward and Lakeview Ward in Naivasha will not depend on the mercies of the Governor 
for execution of their mandate. Today, we have a Govern or who listens to the people. What if 
one day, we have a Governor who will be drunk with power and will ensure that such programs 
will not happen to the people? We must secure our own Wards and I feel like by us stating that, 
we shall get enough money for our Wards. We shall ensure that the service to mwananchi  is 
well felt. Most of these Hon. Members came from their homes this morning because they do 
not reside anywhere else. When you go to Mheshimiwa from Elementaita, you will find that 
he has an area that is so vast but he comes from an area where he feels th e needs of the people. 
If he is given a privilege to run a Ward kitty whereby, he will be able to secure the needs of 
those people, it will be good.  
In the past one month, we have had darkness in our streets within Nakuru County and more so 
within Lakevie w Ward in Naivasha where I come from and we have had instances where school 
going children are being attacked and when you come back to the County where you try to get 
electricity poles fixed, it is nearly impossible because there is no framework. All you are told 
is that we shall wait for a centralised kind of procurement and we do not have materials at the 
moment which means that the big man is in control. We need an approach whereby 
development in Kenya will surely be a bottom -up approach whereby we will  start development 
from down here going up. I second this Motion. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): thank you Hon. Alex. Mheshimiwa Rose.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support and congratulate our 
Honorable Members who are in the County Assemblies Forum team because of County 
Equitable Development Fund which will promote growth in our Wards and our representation 
will be well. We will do oversight very well. Again, each Ward shall identify development 
projects for implem entation in our Wards and it will be so easy. Again, duplication of any 
project in National and County Government will not be there because we will be consulting 
with our MPs. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Mheshimiwa. Hon. Majority Leader.  
Hon. Alex Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support this Motion and also to give 
it a little bit of understanding for the sake of some of our Members so that they can participate 
in debating  this particular Motion. Members, I think we a re aware that the CDF which has been 
a kitty for the Members of Parliament at some point was declared illegal. When the Members 
of Parliament went back to Parliament, they have introduced a Bill that will try to legalise and 
legitimize the presence of CDF and also be able to entrench it in the Constitution so that it will 
not be something that you beg or someone wakes up in the morning and decides to remove it. 
It will be part of the Constitution and that is why there is this Bill already in Parliament to t ry 
and amend the Constitution to entrench CDF.  
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
8 
 The County Assemblies in the same way will remain orphaned because if the CDF will be 
removed and declared illegal, our Ward Fund will also appear to be illegal in one way or 
another. What the Members of Parl iament have gone ahead to do, they introduced their own 
security for CDF funds. We as MCAs did not have a framework or a way in which we can also 
have our own Ward Funds. I do not want to underscore the importance of our Ward Funds 
because we all know its importance. As you meet wananchi,  you know where the shoe pinches 
and without such fundings, it becomes hard if you are only to rely on the Executive to be able 
to assist you to do development in your own Ward.  
This Motion is to ensure that the Ward Funds  is also entrenched in the Constitution. It will not 
be something that you need to beg or to request the Executive to help us. It is something that 
while the National Assembly is entrenching their own CDF there, we as County Assemblies 
also seek to have th e Ward Funds be part of the Constitution which is being amended in the 
National Assembly. We would wish to request the Members from where we come from and 
the various Constituencies that we seek to talk to our various Members of Parliament and I am 
glad th at while this activity is going on here in Nakuru, it is also going on in most Counties and 
we thank a few Counties which have already gone ahead to pass this Motion to implore the 
National Government to consider us as the basic unit within the County. It is our duty also to 
go and solicit and ask for help from our various Members of Parliament and this one is a 
message that we have passed to all MCAs and all Counties that they should speak to the 
Members of Parliament that as we pass this Bill in our vario us County Assemblies and when it 
reaches Parliament, it can get the support that as much as they consider themselves for CDF, 
let them consider our Ward Development Funds. I know most Assemblies are going to move 
this and accept it and adapt it and the tas k is ahead there.  
It is also upon us as Nakuru County Assembly that let us see the importance of entrenching this 
particular part of amendment of Article 204 of the Constitution. We are asking that this Ward 
Development Funds of ours should now be entrenc hed in law so that it is anchored like CDF 
and nobody will wake up one morning and remove it. Otherwise, I wish to end by 
congratulating Hon. Kajwang’ and Hon. Catherine for representing us in County Assemblies 
Forum. We know you are equal to the task and when this House sent you there, we are seeing 
the fruits. I beg to support this Motion on understanding and on an assignment and as Members, 
let us go back and talk to our Members of Parliament and request them that when this 
consideration is done in the a mendment of Article 204 of the Constitution of the Republic of 
Kenya, they also consider us. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Majority Leader. Mheshimiwa Robert Ruto 
and then I would come on my left.  
Hon. Robert Ruto: Thank you M r. Speaker sir. I stand to support this noble idea from CAF 
Members, Hon. Peter Kajwang’ and Hon. Catherine Wanjeri for this idea. It will promote the 
growth in our Wards and it will be felt. As you know, the MCA is the one who knows more 
where the rubber meets the road and that is why by empowering MCAs, Wanjiku  will definitely 
be empowered. I only urge my fellow Hon. Members to go and task their Members of 
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
9 
 Parliament in order for them to own this idea and support it. I therefore beg to support. Thank 
you. 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Nene and then Mheshimiwa Anthony Kamau  
Hon. George Nene: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I think that Devolution was meant to move 
decision making closer to the citizens. Devolution was also meant to bring resources c loser to 
the common mwananchi . The MCAs are closer to the challenges affecting the people because 
every day, we interact with the people and therefore with the equalization  fund we shall be able 
to address some of the challenges affecting our people. If yo u look at the scenario of Meru, that 
scenario should not have happened if the MCAs had funds. The MPs have been able to achieve 
a lot because they had funds that they could use to address the challenges of their people. 
Therefore Mr. Speaker I rise to supp ort this Motion and also congratulate Hon. Kajwang and 
Hon.  Catherine for this noble Motion before this House. I support this Motion with my body 
and soul. Thank  you. 
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Asante sana Bwana Spika, mimi nasimama kuunga Mswada huu 
mkono na niseme ya kwamba hili ni wazo ambalo wakati wake umefika.Pia nipatie kongole 
wenzetu ambao wanatuwakilisha katika shirika la CAF  kwa kazi nzuri ambayo wamefanya. 
Mwenzangu ameongelea kuhusu mambo ya CDF . Ukiangalia kiini cha CDF , ilianzishwa 
mwaka wa 2003 na wakati huo hatukuwa na Ugatuzi. Wakati huu tuko na U gatuzi na Wadi 
ndio kitengo cha chini cha ugatuzi. Kwa hivyo ningependa kusema ya kwamba ni wazo ambalo 
limekuwa la muhimu sana.Ukituangalia sisi kama wa  wkilishi wa wananchi pale chini, 
wengine wetu i natupasa tutoke asubuhi na mapema kwa sababu hatuwezi angalia zile shida 
wananchi wako nazo kwa sababu zimekuwa nyingi sana. Bila pesa kuwekwa kwa Ward  itakuwa 
ni vigumu sana kuongea na wananchi na mahitaji yao ni mengi.  
Kwa hivyo Mimi naunga mkono Mswada huu kwa sababu ukiangalia wakati huu watoto wetu 
wengi wamefukuzwa shuleni na hatuna pesa za CDF  ambazo zilikuwa zinatumika kama 
bursary.  Pia bursary yetu ambayo tulikuwa tunapewa kama millioni moja  ama mbili ni pesa 
kidogo sana. Tukiweka mswada huu katika sheria itakuwa ni jambo la muhimu sana kwa 
sababu kama vile mwenzangu amesema wakati huu tunaweza kuwa na Gavana ambaye 
anatus ikiza lakini itafika wakati ambao yule amba e atakuwa pale kama G avana i takuwa 
lazima uimbe wimbo wak e ndio uweze kupata maendeleo.  
Kama vile tunajua pale ambapo tumetoka, kitambo ilikuwa ni siasa mbaya maisha mbaya. Kwa 
hivyo hili jambo likiwekwa katika sh eria itatuwezesha sisi kama wa  wakililishi wa Wadi 
kutekeleza wajibu w etu kwa wananchi. Nina unga mkono huu Mswada na asante sana kwa 
wakilishi wetu. Nasihi wenzangu tuunge mkono suala hili ilituweze kuendelea mbele.Asante 
sana.  
The Speaker  (Hon . Joel Karuri): Asante. Hon Murage from Waseges.  
Hon Elijah Murage : Thank you Mr.  Speaker for giving me this opportunity. Let me start by 
congratulating Hon. Kajwang ; this Motion  is a game changer. We are going to have more 
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
10 
 resources in our Wards and our residents will be able to identify priority projects in our Wards. 
The equitable s haring of resources will mean that the resources will be decentrali sed. I can see 
the spirit of  “Bado Mapambano”  in Hon . Kajwang. Let us support this Motion  and our Wards 
will be great. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon . Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon . Murage. Hon Gathuita from Dundori Ward.  
Hon. James Gathuita : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the Motion by Hon . Member 
on three bases . First is the empowerment of County Assembly Members in all Wards. If you 
look at the criteria of leadership, it comes with responsibility and responsibility comes with 
management. If you are given a responsibility,  it is up to you to take it to the management level. 
Responsibility comes with financial burden. It is only in this level t hat a Member of the Country 
Assembly has responsibility but they do not have the financial muscle to drive those 
responsibilities. I would like to support the equitable share for every Ward so that MCAs can 
have that fund to drive their agenda.  
Secondly, it will create a scenario where some projects are stalled and do not come to 
conclusion due to lack of funds. I come from Bahati Constituency where the management of 
CDF was very well utili sed and we were positioned as the County where the CDF was well 
managed. I want to support this Motion on a scenario where the Member of County Assembly 
will have a say and take responsibility of every project that is done so that we can have projects 
done to completion anytime anywhere. I rise to support and beg all the Members of County 
Assembly to support the same. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon . Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Hon Degaulle then we put to question.  
Hon. Degaulle Naburuki : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I stand to support this Motion. I want 
to thank our honorable  Members, Hon . Catherine and Hon Kajwang for this Motion. This 
Motion is going to actuali se the meaning of Devolution because this Motion will help us in the 
ground since we are always with the people at home. This Kshs 30 million given to a Ward 
represent ative is just peanuts compared to what the MPs get. At times it is very shameful for 
an MCA to give bursary of less than Kshs 600 000 for the entire Ward. It is so embarrassing to 
divide only Kshs 600 000  to the entire Ward where people are very needy. I see it is very 
important for us to have more funds in the ground. Recently before schools closed, we have 
been receiving so many calls and visitors at home in the morning or evening that their children 
have been sent home  from school that every school needs what is known as zero balance so it 
is a problem. When we have more funds, we shall have to increase the amount to be given as 
bursary because Wanjiku  always feels that when you give him or her bursary for their childre n, 
they value it even more than all infrastructure in the school. I know of previous MCAs ambao 
wamekuwa na shida sana wanalalamika ya kwamba hawajapatiwa  bursary kwa sababu pesa 
ni kidogo . I support this Motion because I know when we have more funds in ou r Wards every 
Member of the Ward will have a share and they will be satisfied. Thank you.  
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
11 
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank Hon. Degaulle. I want to give the mover but then it 
looks like there are Members who want to air their views. Hon Wathiai from Shabab  then Hon 
Kamau then the mover Hon Kajwang.  
Hon David Wathiai : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir I stand to support this Motion because the 
County Ward equitable development fund is exactly what we need as MCAs. We need it 
because we are closer to Wanjiku  than other leaders in our society and we will be able to 
implement the need of Wanjiku as per their wants including the projects. We will be able to 
work diligently for our people because we have direct access of funds. We also need to look 
for other ways  to reach out either the President, either through CAF or some other ways ; old 
MCAs  maybe look for an appointment with the President and try and talk to him so that he can 
also try and lobby for us and also assist us lobbying to the Members of Parliament. With the 
support of the President, I believe we can lobby our MPs to support the Bill. I support this 
Motion  and I also want to congratulate Hon . Catherine and Hon. Kajwang for be ing elected to 
represent us at CAF. Thank you.  
Hon. Eliud Kamau : Asante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipatia hii nafasi. Ningependa 
kuwashukuru Mheshimiwa Kajwang  na Mheshimiwa Catherine kwa kutuwakilisha CAF. Huu 
ni Mswad a wa wakati kwa sababu sisi kama wa wakilishi wa Wadi tuko kama askari ametumwa 
kwa vita akiwa amefungwa mikono kwa sa babu bila hizi pesa na umeambiwa uende kwa 
mwananchi ulete mahitaji yao yote na hauna uwezo wowote  wa kutekeleza wajibu wako. Kwa 
kweli tumefungwa mikono kwa hivyo mimi nimesimama niunge mkono huu mjadala na niseme 
ya kwamba utakuwa wa maana na utakuwa kwa faida kwa Wanjiku. Ombi langu kubwa ni ya 
kwamba hata kwa wabunge watushike mkono na watuunge pamoja ndiposa huu mjadala uweze 
kupata na mimi nina amini ya kwamba hii ikipita, naweza kuwa na uhakika nikiimba kusema 
ya kwamba our freedom is comi ng. Asante sana sana.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Member; now the mover Hon. Kajwang.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir and Hon. Members and I want to thank you 
in a special way Hon. Members for having given a very positive contribution to this Motion. 
There is no one single contributor who has spoken contrary to what the Motion proposes and I 
am very sure that we are going to sail 100 % in affirmative for this Motion.  
Hon. Speaker I just want to reiterate what our Members h ave talked in details, just in summary 
because this is now as one Member has said that is where the rubber meets the road. People 
will gauge your performance in this House with the development that you have initiated on the 
ground through public participat ion and this is the time that now we are going to get very good 
opportunity to get priorities on issues of development from our people and be able and stand a 
very good ground to implement them.  
Mr. Speaker we are aware that there are several arms of devo lved units of the government and 
mostly these devolved units are being sorted at the County level. Issues of infrastructure, 
drainage in our various Wards, roads, lighting, these are issues that we are able to resolve once 
we get this Ward Development Fund  entrenched into the law. We have issues of capacity 
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
12 
 building and we know that issues of our youth and the vulnerable people in the society like our 
women, we also have People Living with Disabilities; we are able to reach these people with 
development age nda when we have these funds and I am very sure that the little we can do, we 
going to make very positive changes. Issues of bursary kitty and a Member has stated here with 
a lot of sympathy that we usually have very little to give to our people in terms o f trying to help 
them to meet their bursary needs and now I can tell Hon. Members that we will be able to boost 
even that bursary kitty by using the funds that emanate from this Ward Development Fund. 
Issues of service delivery, ECDs, our young children go ing to school, we will be able to build 
infrastructure for them using this kind of funds from the ward Development Fund.  
Therefore,  I want to appreciate the Members for giving this Motion a very positive look , and I 
now want to ask all Members that as we leave the chambers, I know and have the confidence 
that Members are going to vote in affirmative of this Motion and once this is done, as we leave 
the chambers, kindly all Members let us sign the affidavit at the Sargent -At-Arms desk. We 
do not want to pr esent a Petition from Nakuru Assembly that has been signed by maybe 20 
Members. I want to give a challenge and urge our Whips, the Majority Whip and the Minority 
Whip, Hon. Fadhili and Hon. Virginia, to kindly whip all the Members so that we append our 
signatures into that affidavit so that we stand to be counted among all the Counties that have 
passed this Motion positively. A number of Counties as we speak right now have already passed 
it and this was a very important Motion that has been addressed since yesterday in all the 47 
Counties and I will be very privileged also to report to the rest of the Membership of CAF that 
we as Nakuru County Assembly have passed that Motion positively and now we push it to 
another level.  
Mr. Speaker,  I wanted to address j ust a small thing on the issue of what if we pass it and then 
it goes to the National Assembly and then they reject it. Right now we have to appreciate the 
fact that there is a Bill that is now on the floor of the National Assembly that was done by huyu  
MP wa Matungulu and then the MP for Gichugu in regard to this Bill and we are just putting 
as affidavit ; we are putting a Petition that our agenda gets enjoined in that Bill and because if  
we remove the issue of Ward Development Fund for the Counties  that w ill be suicidal and Mr. 
Speaker, as Members have reiterated, we are the primary level of development in this County. 
Therefore Hon. Karanja, I think this will be well received by the National Assembly and also 
by the movers of this Bill in the National Assembly. Apart from this Mr. Speaker, I want to 
reiterate for the benefit of those who were not there yesterday, I gave a brief of a number of 
agendas we are following as CAF for the benefit of the welfare of the Members and also for 
the welfare of Wanjiku  at the ground. Ward Development Fund has been a big issue and now 
it has been escalated to very positive levels we are also at a very advanced stages of entrenching 
CAF into the Constitution.  
Hon. Karanja be well assured that we are on this squarely becaus e this is the only way that we 
will make sure that whatever we pass at CAF level is implementable. We are also talking of 
financial autonomy for the Assemblies, we do not want to go with the old system and beg the 
Governor, so that when we make requisition  to facilitate Members for their program, then we 
have to make requisition through the Executive. Now we want total financial autonomy as it is 
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
13 
 in other levels of Legislation, the National Assembly and also the Senate. We are also following 
up on the issue  of pension which also is at a very advanced level and I am proud to say that it 
has not met any controversies and as things develop, I am sure that I will inform Members of 
the positive development in that issue. We are saying that we are equal also to th e other 
Members who are representatives in other Countries kwa sababu tulichaguliwa na Wanjiku . 
Another thing that we are also following up is the issue of Car Grant;  it is called reimbursement. 
Last time the Members of Assembly who were here, we really re jected that after we had been 
offered the reimbursement, the taxman came and said now we have to pay tax in regard to that 
reimbursement. We found that one was quite unfair because it only happened in County 
Assemblies. In National Assembly and the Senate these benefits are never taxed.  
Therefore,  we are also working closely with KRA and SRC so that we iron out these issues so 
that Members are not caught up in shock that they need to pay tax in regard to car 
reimbursement. The issue of salaries, this is no w very important and we have a very positive 
argument to it that we want our salaries to be pegged as a percentage of the Governors salary. 
It is happening at the National level where MPs and Senators are being paid salaries equivalent 
to 40 per cent of th e President and we also feel the same should trickle down here; we should 
also be given the same as a percentage of the Governor’s salary. Members if you work out 40 
percent of the Governor’s salary,  I think most of you will be very motivated to work for 
Wanjiku.  Another thing that we are also looking at which should not even elicit so much 
controversy is the issue of plenary allowances; the same argument is being advanced in the 
National Assembly and also in the Senate and we think and believe that we Memb ers need to 
be given the plenary allowances and the main argument here is that when you are revising the 
benefit of a Member or and employee , it can never be to his disadvantage. Hauwezi kuanza 
kusema huyu alikuwa anapata mshahara ya  Kshs 20,000 sasa tumpa tie shilingi 15,000; 
haiwezekani, si ndio ? So tunasema  let all these things come back and we in CAF, we are very 
dedicated following up these issues with all the relevant authorities and I can assure you 
Members we are going to get very positive results in  our pursuit.  
Hon. Speaker before I sit, I just want to congratulate or I want to say thank you to Hon. Ruto 
of Kapkures who has addressed me as the Right Hon. Peter Kajwang. I do not take that one for 
granted. He is my neighbor on the other side of the r iver and I know when he says that he has 
a very positive preview for the Member of County Assembly for Kaptembwa Ward. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker sir . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Kajwang; thank  you for your input and 
points you have put across. I now want to put question on what we have been discussing the 
whole of the morning session , and b ecause the Motion is quite lengthy, it has two parts, we are 
going to just have those of the same opinion and those of contrary opinion. I may not read 
through the Motion as it is because as you realise it is a lengthy Motion.  
                                                          (Question proposed)  
(Question put and agreed to)  
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
14 
 ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members the  House stands adjourned until 2.30 in the afternoon.  
(The House rose at 11.20pm ) 
 
 
 
 