NOVEMBER 23, 2022                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday, 23RD November 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10: 0 0am 
[The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
PENDING BILLS 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware ): Honorable Members , I wish to bring to your 
attention that several  Petitions were read and committed to the relevant  Committees pursuant to 
the provisions of Standing  Order  205. Members should note that the Committee s concerned are 
expected to respond to the  Petitioner by a way of a report in not more than sixty calendar days. 
The Petitions include;  
1. Petition by Ms. Grace Wanjiku & others on the Disbursement of the Nakuru County 
Persons with Disabilities Fund - Labour , Youth and Social Welfare  
2. Petition by Athinai Village Squatters that the County Assembly intervenes in the eviction 
of squatters who have lived as squatters in Athinai - Lands Housing and Physical 
Planning  
3. Petition by ACK St. Stephen church in Waseges Concerning illegal acquisition of church 
land - Lands Housing and Physical Planning  
4. Petition by Mr. John Ndune Mwangi Concerning suspension and dismissal from the 
defunct Nakuru Municipality - Labour, Gender, Youth, and  Social Welfare  
5. Petition on Youth and Governance Consideration of th e youth Bill - Labour, Gender, 
Youth, and Social Welfare  
6. Petition by residents/stakeholders of Mawanga market in Kiamaina ward on the 
formation of new market committee - Trade, Tourism, Cooperative and planning  
7. Petition by residents of Mwaki Mugi Sub -Locat ion, concerning construction of Kabatini 
Ward social hall in the area as resolved during the public participation - Budget and 
Appropriations Committee  
8. Petition by Mr. Joseph K . Langat & others Concerning the plight of community health 
workers in the Count y during Covid -19 pandemic - Health Services Committee  
NOVEMBER 23, 2022                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 9. Petition by Mr. Joseph Ngugi seeking review of revenue allocation of Lare Ward to 
match the population and Geographical size capturing Lare and Naishi Wards which were 
merged to form Lare Ward - Finance Committee  
10. Petition by Digital Transport Forum Seeking waiver of parking fees due to financial 
constraints experienced during the Covid - 19 Pandemic - Finance committee  
11. Petition by Mr. John N.  Muthoni Seeking the Assembly’s intervention on the Rapid 
Water disconnection by NAWASCO in Menengai Ward - Energy, Environment water 
and Natural resources  
12. Petition by Nakuru County Opinion Leaders Caucasus ; Investigation into the alleged 
misuse of funds allocated to the concluded Covid 19 Program -   Disaster Comm ittee 
13. Petition by Mirera Maruti Concerning Community in Hell’s Gate Ward seeking the 
intervention of the County Assembly with regards to pollution by a Bakery Industry 
located within the residential area - Energy, Environment water and Natural resources  
14. Petition by Pyrethrum Processing Company of Kenya (PPCK) seeking the intervention of 
the County Assembly with regards to awarding of 100% waiver to PPCK on outstanding 
Land Rates , Rent, Accumulated Penalties, and Principal Rate Arrears within the Nakuru 
Muni cipality Covering the Nakuru East and West Sub -Counties amounting to Kshs. 
83,627,263.00 – Finance  and Lands Housing and Physical Planning  committees  
15. Petition by the Torobeek Community of Nakuru County Seeking the intervention of the 
County Assembly regarding to resettling and legitimizing their existence in the County - 
Lands Housing and Physical Planning  
16. A Petition by residents of Kiplemeiwo Village , Kiptagich Ward, Olenguruone sub -county 
Seeking  the County Assembly through the relevant County Executive Department to 
undertake a fresh plot allotment Public Participation exercise of the plots in Kiplemeiwo 
village - Lands Housing and Physical P lanning  
Honorable Members, further to this  the respective  Committees  are reminded to expedite the 
consideration of other business before them including Bills, Reports and Statements . This 
will enable the plenary  to have enough business for deliberations, t hank you. Clerk next 
order.  
PAPER  
AUDITOR GENERAL REPORT ON NAWASCO COMPANY LIMITED  
 FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2021  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  We have a  Paper to be laid by the Leader of 
Majority . 
The Leader  of Majority  (Hon. Alex Langat):  I want to lay the Report of the Auditor 
General on NAWASCO  Company  Limited for the year ended 30Th June 2021.   
NOVEMBER 23, 2022                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware ): Thank you, I now commit  that report to the 
Committee  on Public Accounts and Investment Committee (PAIC). Next order.  Thank you 
the House stands  adjourns  until today in the afternoon.  
(The House rose at 10:15 am) 
 
 