COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 1 9th April 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03: 05 PM 
[Deputy  Speaker (Hon . Joseph Ngware) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
PETITION TO THE SENATE  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  We have a Communication . This is to bring to your 
attention that , That pursuant to the provision of Article 37(119) of the  Constitution as read together 
with Standing Order 225 of the Senate Standing Orders, the County Assembly of Nakuru wishes 
to petition the  Senate to consider various subject matters under their jurisdiction which include s 
amendment of the  Constitution to incorporate the County Ward Equitable Development Fund to 
enact a legislation to provide fo r the administration of the County Ward Equitable Development 
Fund, firs tracking  of the County State Officers Pension Bill 2020 and exception of paying  Taxes 
with regards to Motor Vehicles Reimbursement among other issues.  
You are therefore requested to  pick a copy of the Petition  from the Sergeant At Arms and append 
your Signatures for onward transmission to the Senate. Thank you. Next order.   
QUORUM  
Hon. George Tallam:  Hono urable Deputy Speaker we do not have quorum in the House.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  Thank you Hono urable Tallam for alerting the Chair 
and I request the Sergeant at Arms to confirm whether we have the Quorum . Thank you, Sergeant, 
At Arms. I direct that you ring the bell for ten minutes.  
(The quorum b ell was rung for ten Minutes ) 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware ): Sergeant at Arms you can be working on the 
microphone s if they are not working. I think we have attained the quorum and we can now proceed . 
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Whatever is contained in the Petition is what we want to go to the Senate . 
That is my humble request Hono urable  Deputy  Speaker . 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  I also want to support him and I want to award him 
like five minutes to take us through the Petition because I think it is of  importance to the County 
and also to the Members of County Assembly (MCAs). It is you r time Hono urable Karanja to take 
us through the Petition for five Minutes.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
This is a Petition that when we went for t he Liaison Training  and we were taken through some of 
the things by the facilitator Mr. Deputy Speaker, we decided as Liaison we come up with a Petition. 
And this Petition is supposed to be taken to the Senate  so that Mr. Deputy Speaker some of the 
issues that we have dealt with can be clearly addressed by the Senate.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker , you know very well that the role of these Members seated here. One of them 
is Legislation. Mr. Deputy Speaker, you also know that we do Oversight. We oversight the 
Executi ve and the work the Executive does Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
You also know that without the budget, no work can be done in a County Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 
within these roles that we do as an Assembly Mr. Deputy Speaker, the cardinal, spirit and role  of 
the devolution was to make sure that the Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we bring the government closer 
to the people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that Government, was now the devolved unit. Therefore, 
the assemblies were supposed to be equally treated, the way th e Senate is treated, the way the way 
the National Assembly is treated. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is really disheartening that after all what 
has been done the Salaries and Remuneration Commission, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we were 
in campaigns reduced the Members and enumeration Mr. Deputy Speaker to the level that we 
started the Assemblies with in 2013.  
And therefore Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Petition as Members go through it, we have the pleas that 
we are making today, which I will go through because it is th e cardinal essence of this Petition.  
Now, therefore, our Prayers are this to the Senate Mr. Deputy Speaker :  that the inclusion of Ward 
Equitable Development Fund in the amendments to the Constitution, and this will give effect to 
Chapter 11 Mr. Deputy Speaker of the Constitution on the objects of Devolution.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker without developing the ward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know it is a zero sum 
game Mr. Deputy Speaker ; and that is Prayer number  one. Prayer  number two Mr. Deputy Speaker 
is that Bill of Article 204 of the C onstitution with respect to County Ward  Equitable Development 
shall provide us that each County Government shall allocate the funds comprising of the Counties 
Annual Budget Estimate as advised by the Commission.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you go to ; I am giving the power to number one , through three, then Mr.  
Deputy  Speaker Parliament to enact a Legislation to provide the administration of County Wards. 
When you go to n o. 5 where I want the Members to be now , it is enhancement M r. Deputy Speaker 
of remuneration of Members of the County Assembly Cogni sant to the critical role that they play 
in Governance, taking into consideration the principles of equity and the prevailing market rates.  
Mr. Deputy S peaker when we were elected la st time, what was the price of petrol ? Right now Mr. 
Deputy Speaker even coming to the Assembly is a nightmare. Mr. Deputy Speaker that is why we 
are saying that this in view of the fact that Gazette Notice , and I want Members to take cogni sance 
of that , 8792 of 27th July 2022 reviewed the Members of the County Assemblies salary 
downwards. Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know you cannot review a salary downwards. It is not 
practical . Mr. Deputy Speaker , we know some people do this  without public participation. How  
do you review a salary of any Member downwards? That one has never been heard of; and 
reviewed the Members of the County Assemblies downwards in comparison to SRC Circular dated 
27th, 2013. Can you imagine the MCA who was elected in 2013 was paid better t han you? That is 
why we are saying that, that Circular that was there in 2013, if everything has to go to a standstill, 
we ought to remain with the 2013.  
You also know that this is the only Assembly where we will not now be having what is called 
annual in crement. Ile mshahara umewekewa ni kama imewekelewa jiwe. Ile uliwekewa ndivyo 
itabaki mpaka uzeeke hapa miaka tano.  This is what we are fighting.  
If you check number 6, fast tracking the County State Officer Pension Bill 2020. If you compare 
Hon. Palang’ a and Hon. Waseges; Hon. Palang’a even after serving for 20 years, he will not get 
the pension. He will stay like that and that is why we are saying that this is very serious. When 
President Uhuru Kenyatta finished the 10 years, we are now giving him pensi on; ama sivyo?  When 
Hon. Moody Awori finished being the Deputy President, he is now enjoying pension. Hon. 
Kalonzo Musyoka is enjoying pension. When Hon. Raila Odinga finished the work of being the 
Prime Minister, he is now enjoying pension but an MCA like  Hon. Palang’a, after serving for 20 
years, he will go home like Hon. Kajoyce who is here digging graves. Therefore, this is what we 
are saying that it must be effected.  
The last one is that Members of the County Assembly currently, we are given car reimb ursement. 
Even that car reimbursement that we are given, we are supposed to buy a vehicle then you get the 
same amount of money that you used. It is what you should be given. We are asking the Senate to 
make sure that we are not being double taxed. We are taxed when we buying the vehicle then you 
are taxed again when you are given reimbursement. If it was Kshs 2.2 million which I used to buy 
the vehicle, I was taxed at the source when buying the vehicle. Therefore, KRA should give us 
back our sh. 650,000. T hose are some of the prayers that we are asking the Senate to do.  
I am asking the Members, that is why we gave this Petition that if there is something that we have 
left\, this Petition is not for the Liaison, not for me but it is for the whole Nakuru Cou nty Assembly. 
Therefore, I would ask the Members that whatever they want to add here to add then after we are 
through, we set a date so that this Petition will be taken to the Senate and then we be given an Ad 
Hoc Committee of maybe 10 or so; including the  Leadership so that when we are taking it, we are 
taking this Petition as Nakuru County Assembly and then we talk on behalf of Kenyans.  
You know that we formed a group that is supposed to fight for welfare and we will be meeting on 
3rd May, 2023. As we do  that, we let the Senate be working on it. That is the prayer that we are 
asking the Senate to do and I think Members now can add, subtract, empower and add meat to the 
skeleton that we have drawn. Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): The Minority Leader you can have your one minute.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi : Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to congratulate the Hon. Karanja on behalf of 
the other Members. What he has just presented is not his personal document. That is a doc ument 
that has been enacted, discussed by the Members of this Assembly and therefore we own 
everything that he has said. Like he has rightfully put it, if you have any other issues that you wish 
to bring forward, kindly do it between today and tomorrow so that next week we take this document 
to the Senate. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Is there any other Member with an addition? Yes.  
Hon. Alex Bor : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity. First I would like to 
commend the work that Hon. Karanja has done. I want to say that if the Members of the National 
Government are treated as we know, then we are also supposed to be treated as they are treated 
because their work is equivalent to our work.  
 I want to just make a comment o n the Prayer no.7; that if it is a reimbursement, it is not supposed 
to be subjected to double taxation. The Constitution provides that no Kenyan is supposed to be 
subjected to double taxation.  
I therefore support this Petition and just as the Member has said that we all as a House need to 
have our input so that Hon. Karanja can have our blessings. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Members can we move on and agree that the 
document is now our document? It has transitioned from the Liaison  to the House. Can we adopt 
it? Can I put it to question that we adopt it?  
(Question put and agreed to)  
STATEMENTS  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): We have two Statements. Two from Hon. Wanjohi. 
Kindly, the floor is yours.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker, pursuant to Standing Order 47 (2) (c) I 
rise to request for a Statement from the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance concerning the 
revenue generated from cess collection in the County of Nakuru. As we may be aware, the Coun ty 
Governments relies on cess collection as one of its key Strategic Revenue Generating Streams.  
Currently the Cess Points are distributed in various points across the County but there is lack of 
clear information on how such points are managed. As the Ho use we have been charged the 
responsibility to exercise Oversight and ensuring the County Government puts in place proper 
strategies in mechanising maximum revenue collection.  
It is important that we get accurate and verifiable information on key financia l matters to enable 
the House make its decisions. I therefore request the Chairperson Committee on Finance to respond 
to the following:  
1. Give to this House a list of all legal authorised Cess Collection points and their locations.    
2. Give us the names of Cess Points that are gazetted  
3. Present to this House the total revenue collected from the respective Cess Points in the Financial 
Year 2020/21 and the 2021/22.  
Thank you  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have ... 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Ho n Wanjohi for that Statement request 
and it stands committed to the Committee on Finance ; and in 30 days, the Committee is expected 
to give us a Report. Proceed  Hon. Member  
STATEMENT(s)  
REQUEST FOR STATEMENT CONCERNING THE DATABASE OF HEALTH WORKERS IN 
NAL KURU COUNTY  
The Minority Leader  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Mr. Deputy S peaker for making that 
declaration; I have a second Statement  that; Pursuant to the Standing Order 47(2) (c), I arise to 
request for a Statement from the Chairperson Committee on Health Services concerning the 
database of Health Workers in the County Government of Nakuru.  
Hon. Deputy Speaker, Health is a critical health function under the Forth Schedule in the 
Constitution and as such should be treated with utmost cons ideration in terms of recruitment , 
distribution and the management of the Health Workers. As we may be aware , the Health 
Department consumes the highest percentage of the County Budget due to the nature of services 
provided ; the number of personnel engaged  in the Department. It is therefore important that this 
House interrogates the management of Health Services in the County to ensure fairness and equity. 
I therefore request the Chairperson Committee on Health Services to respond to the following: - 
1. Provid e a list of all Health Workers and their job cadres employed by the County 
Government of Nakuru.  
2. How the Health Workers and one above are distributed across the Health Facilities in the 
County  
3. The terms of engagement of Health Workers in one above  
So Mr. Deputy S peaker , we need to know in the County Government of Nakuru how many 
Health Workers are permanent, we need to know those working on contract and in case  we 
need casuals if any, we need to have the database provided to this Assembly. Thank you Mr. 
Deputy Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Hon . Members for the Statement 
request and that Statement stands committed to the Committee on Health and we expect a 
Report from that Committee in 30 days. Thank you . 
MOTION  
THE HOUSE ADOP TS THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH SERVICES ON THE 
VISIT TO BONDENI SUB COUNTY HOSPITAL ON 28TH FEBRUARY, 2023 . 
We have a Motion from the Chairman Health  Services  Committee Hon. Njuguna Mwaura . Is 
the honorable Member in the House? The Vice Chairman Committee on Health? Okay we 
differ that Motion to another date.  
ADJOUTRNMENT  
Having accomplished the Orders of the day, this House will stand s adjourned until next week 
on Tuesday. After this Sitting, we shall be having a brief Kamukunji  to do some other  Business.  
The House rose at 3.35pm  
 