FEBRUARY 9, 2022  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday , 9th  February, 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3.00 p m 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Karanja) in the Chair]  
PRAYERS  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Karanja):  Good afternoon Honorable Members. 
Welcome to our afternoon plenary session.  
PETITION  
                      NAKURU TAX ASSOCIATION SEEKS REDUCTION OF MONTHLY PARKING FEE 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Karanja): Honorable Members we have a Petition. A 
Petition by Nakuru Tax Association seeking the intervention of the County Assembly through the 
relevant department to lower the monthly parking rate from  Kshs  2000  to 1000 shillings . The 
Petition is open  for the Members to have any contribution before I commit to the relevant 
committee. Yes, Majority Leader.  
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Moses Kamau) : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. The Assembly is in 
receipt of this Petition from the Nakuru Tax Association, to  my understanding is that we normally 
have a Finance Bill which stipulates some of the rates to be charged by various sectors within 
Nakuru County. Therefore, during the Finance Bill, I understand we normally have public 
participations where all wananchi a re supposed to air their views. So, my concern is that if we now 
have one item here when we are almost heading to the preparation of the Finance Bill, could it be 
possible that this Petition be referred to the Finance committee for the purpose of this tax excision 
going for public participation with the Finance committee for them to air their views . 
 I understand they will be listened to, and the Members of the Finance committee will be in a 
position to adjust for this tax excision properly. To my understanding I think I need to be guided 
because, if you approve that they be paying 1000 shillings, are we in a position to amend the 
Finance Bill as a House or are we  supposed to wait for the Finance committee to go on public 
participation on the Finance Bill. Therefore, I am requesting this Petition be moved to the Finance 
Committee, waiting for Finance Bill for them to get proper guidance.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Michael Karanja):   Thank you Hon. Majority Leader for 
guiding us on this Petition. Any other person who feels he has something different.  
FEBRUARY 9, 2022  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Simon Wanyoike:  asant e Mheshimiwa Spika wa muda, sina maneno tofauti nayale 
Majority Leader amesema, laikini ningependa kusisitiza tuwe waangalifu hasaa musimu huu wa 
mwisho kwa sababu vitu zingine zinaweza letwa harakaharaka ili tupitishe na zikuwe nizakupiga 
hii nyumba mashinani. Kwa hivyo naunga mkono hii Petition ipelekwe kwa kamati ya Finance. 
Asante . 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Karanja):   Thank you very much Hon. Wanango from 
Lake view. I commit this Petition to the Finance Committee and give them 60 calendar days so 
that they can bring this report back to the House. Next order!  
MOTION  
HOUSE APPROVES THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU CALENDAR  
FOR THE SIXTH SESSION  
The Leader  of Majority  (Hon. Moses Kamau):  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker, I want to 
thank the almighty God for giving me this opportunity to move a Motion ;- 
THAT  Pursuant to the provisions of Standing Order 31(1), this House approves the Calendar of 
the County Assembly of Nakuru ( Regular session ) for the Sixth Session as attached . As a 
practice, after a long recess, we normally have a new calendar and this is our calendar for this 
new session; the regular session which is our last session and you can see it is beginning on 
Tuesday 8th February which is yes terday when we came and it goes up to 2nd March and 
thereafter, we shall have a short recess and that short recess will allow us to go and talk to our 
people, now that it is an electioneering period. We shall come back on Tuesday 22nd March to 
13th April a nd thereafter, we shall have a long recess. This long recess allows Members to go for 
party primaries and I want to take this opportunity to wish all Hon orable  Members success 
during this long recess. After that, we shall meet here on Tuesday 10th. I belie ve all of us will 
have succeeded from the nominations and I believe none of us atagongwa.  If you happen not to 
be nominated, you remember you are still an Honorable Member of this House. On 10th, you 
need to come back to this House but I believe all of us will be here. Thereafter, we shall have 
sittings to 8th June, 2022 and I believe that is our last sitting as Members of the Second 
Assembly. We shall have sine die  recess which translates to say good bye to this House because 
from there, we shall be headin g to elections on 9th August and thereafter come back here as 
elected MCAs awaiting to be sworn in again. We thank God for this opportunity that he has 
given us to be the Members of the Second Assembly.  
That is our last calendar of the five years term that we have been here. Thank you, Mr. 
Temporary Speaker sir,  and even thank you for our staff for guiding us and helping us during our 
debate s and I believe even the remaining few days of this calendar, they will be with us. My 
Honorable colleagues, God bless you. I wish you all  the best for this new calendar. I want to 
welcome my Deputy Majority Leader to second the Motion as she wishes us ushindi huko mbele.  
FEBRUARY 9, 2022  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Rose Chepkoech: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir , as we have seen the calendar , the 
way it has been brought, we support it and I support it.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Karanja):  Thank you to our Leader of Majority for 
moving the Motion and thank you to your Deputy ; Rose from Kiptagich ward.  
(Question proposed that, pursuant to the provisions of Standing Order 31(1), this House 
approves the calendar of the County Assembly of Nakuru (Regular session) for the Sixth session 
as attached.)  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Karanja):  Honorable Mem bers, the Motion is now open  
for debate on the floor of this House, welcome. Yes, Honorable Rachael Maru.  
Hon. Rachael Maru: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, for giving me this honor and thank 
you for recognizing me. I just want to thank you for the ca lendar that is with us because it is 
automatically give us a plan of what we are supposed to do in our community and it is going to 
assist us to have a way forward. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Karanja):  Thank you Honorable Rachael Maru. Any 
more contribution regarding this Motion. I can see Honorable Eddy Kiragu from Flamingo ward.  
Hon. Eddy Kiragu: Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, we are so grateful to management and the 
leadership for having shared this very important document. Having said th at, I have confirmed 
through my neighbor of the dates that is from 14th to 9th of May. I support that long recess; it is 
during this time according to the timelines of IEBC that nominations will be taking place as from 
16th to 22nd of April. So, it is very much in order and for confirmation let it be as always that during 
this long recess we shall be having our committee meeting sittings. Thank you.     
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Karanja):  Thank you, Honorable Eddy Kiragu from 
Flamingo ward for your contributions.  
(Question proposed that, pursuant to the provisions of Standi ng Order 31(1), this House 
approves the calendar of the County Assembly of Nakuru (Regular session) for the Sixth session 
as attached.)  
(Question put and agreed to)  
ADJOURNMENT  
There being no other business, the House is adjourned until Tuesday next week a t 9.30 am  
 
(The House rose at 3.15 pm ) 
 