COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Thursday 6 th  July, 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10: 45 AM  
 [Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) in the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
MESSAGE(S)  
COUNTY SECRETARY SELECTION PANEL  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a message from Her Excellency the Governor.  
Hono u rable Members, pursuant to the provisions of Section 44 of the County Government Act 
No.  17 of 2012, I am in receipt of a M essage from the Governor nominating the fo llowing persons 
to the selection panel for the recruitment of the County Secretary.  
In line with S section 44 of the County Government Act 2012 and S ection 15(2 A) and 2  b  of the 
County Government Amendment Act, 2020, the Governor has constituted the followi ng panel to 
serve the purpose of competitive recruitment of the County Secretary;  
NAME  ORGANIZATION  POSITION  
Rev. ( Fr. )  William Muchai Kambo  Father in Charge, St. Lwanga Catholic Church, 
Njoro  Chairperson  
Jemutai Margaret Kibosia  Private Sector  Member  
Samson Matoke Nyagaka  Advocate of the High Court  Member  
CPA (K) Clifton Ayieta Okeno  Member of the institute of Certified Accountants 
of Kenya  Member  
Redepta Wayuwere  Treasurer Association of workers, Kenya 
Primary School Head Teachers Associatio n 
(KEPSHA) Rongai  Member  
 
This is committed to the Committee on Appointments for further action. Thank you.  
There is another M essage from Her Excellency the Governor about the Nominees to the Nakuru 
County City Board, Gilgil, Molo and Naivasha Municipalities.  
Pursuant to the p rovisions of Section 11 of the U rban A reas and Cities Act, 2012, I am in receipt 
of a M essage from Her Excellency the Governor nominating the following persons to the City 
Board  and the respective Municipal Boards.  
Pursuan t to Urban Areas and Cities (Amendment) Act 2019, the County Executive is in the process 
of filling vacancies in the City Board of Nakuru, Municipal Board of Naivasha, Municipal Board 
of Gilgil and Municipal Board of Molo. Following the successful completi on of interviews, the 
following persons have been found suitable for appointment as M embers of these respective 
B oards;  
S/NO  NAME  BOARD  POSITION  
1.  Teresia Karugi Kuruma  Gilgil Municipal Board  Appointment through 
competitive process  
2.  Shamma Wangui Njuguna  Gilgil Municipal Board  Appointment through 
competitive process  
3.  Joseph Maina Theuri  Gilgil Municipal Board  Appointment through 
competitive process  
4.  Fredrick Mbogo Kimani  Gilgil Municipal Board  Representing the Professional 
Association  
5.  Stephen Kimani  Gilgil Municipal Board  Representing the Private Sector  
6.  Josephat Kiarie  Gilgil Municipal Board  Representing the informal sector  
7.  Mary Shaw Coulson  Gilgil Municipal Board  Representing Neighborhood 
community  
 
1.  Johra Said Ali  Nakuru City Board  Appointment through 
Competitive process  
2.  Crispus Anthony Wathimba  Nakuru City Board  Appointment through 
competitive process  
3.  George Njenga Mwaniki  Nakuru City Board  Appointment through 
competitive process  
4.  Stephen Muli  Nakuru City Board  Representing informal sector  
5.  James Njau  Nakuru City Board  Representing neighborhood 
community  
 
 
1.  Jonathan Kuria Warothe  Naivasha Municipal 
Board  Appointment through 
competitive process  
2.  Joseph Mukui  Naivasha Municipal 
Board  Appointment through 
competitive process  
3.  Richard Cheruiyot Langat  Naivasha Municipal 
Board  Appointment through 
competitive process  
4.  Lucy Gikara  Naivasha Municipal 
Board  Representing professional body  
5.  Peter Kimani  Naivasha Municipal 
Board  Representing the private sector  
6.  Ruth Wagatua  Naivasha Municipal 
Board  Representing the Neighborhood 
Community  
7.  Rose Njeri  Naivasha Municipal 
Board  Representing the informal sector  
 
 
1.  Florence Wairimu Kabii  Molo Municipal Board  Appointment through 
competitive process  
2.  Kaggai Thiongo  Molo Municipal Board  Appointment through 
competitive process  
3.  Jemimah Njeri Kuria  Molo Municipal Board  Appointment through 
competitive process  
4.  Paul Mwangi  Molo Municipal Board  Representing professional body  
5.  Zahra Tiebo  Molo Municipal Board  Representing the Neighborhood 
Community  
6.  Benard Gitau  Molo Municipal Board  Representing business 
community  
7.  Evans Ngigi  Molo Municipal Board  Representing the private sector  
 
The names are hereby committed to the Committee on Lands, Housing and Physical Planning for 
further actions.  
PAPER(S)  
COUNTY FISCAL STRATEGY PAPER  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Chairperson Committee on Budget, Hon. Alex Mbugua.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Tha nk you Mr. Speaker sir. I wish to lay a P aper, R eport on the Committee 
of Budget and Appropriation s  on the County Integrated Development Plan 2023 - 2027. I beg to 
lay.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Chairman.  
NOTICE(S) OF MOTION  
ADOPTION OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE REPORT  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Notice of Motion by the Chairperson Committee on 
Budget and Appropriation s .  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I wish to give a Notice of Motion  that pursuant 
to provisions o f Section 8 (e), part 9 of the County Government Act 2012; section 125 (1) a of th e 
Public Finance Management Act 2012, this House adopts the R eport of the Committee on Budget 
and Appropriation s  on the Integrated Development Plan. I give the Notice of Motion.  
ADJOURNMENT  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hono u rable Members, this House stands adjourned until  2:30 
Pm today  
House rose at 11:00 A M  