 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday, 17 th October, 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3:30  P M  
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai ) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
P ETITION(S)  
 
UNFAIR TAX REVENUE  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): There is a Petition, the Report  of the Committee  
on Finance on Petition by Mr. Kennedy Mugo, a resident of Gilgil Sub - County. I want to request 
Hon. John Maritim, the Chairperson Committee  on Finance to lay the Report .  
 
Hon. John Maritim : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker, sir. This is a response to the Petitio n on 
Unfair Tax Revenue for Motorcycle Operators and the Business Community.   
 
MANDATE OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
Mr. Temporary Speaker, the  Sectoral Committee  on Finance is mandated to:  
1.  Overseeing granting and Administration of D onations and G rants  
2.  Approving Taxation Measures including interrogation and approving of the 
Finance Bill  
3.  Identifying and A dvising on new R evenue S treams  
4.  Monitoring I mplementation o f the Finance Bill and Finance R aising M easures  
5.  Consider ing  requests for borrowing of loans by the County Government including 
consideration of the relevant regulations.  
6.  Overseeing the I mplementation of W ard D evelopment F unds and other F unds as 
contemplated by S ection 116 of the Public Finance Management Act 2012.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I take this opportunity to thank  Members of thi s Committee  for their 
commitment and contributions during the process of interrogation of the aforementioned Petition.  
On behalf of the Committee , it is my pleasure and duty to present the Report  on the  Findings of 
the Public Petition on Unfair Tax/Revenue Regime  for Motorcycle Operators and the Business 
Community.  
 
BACKGROUND AND PROVISIONS OF PUBLIC PETITIONS  
 
Mr. Temporary Speaker, Public Petitions are provided for under Standing Order 198 of the County 
Assembly of Nakuru Standing Orders.  
Pursuant  to Standing Order 205(1) of the Nakuru County Assembly, the  Speaker  committed the 
Petition to the Committee  on Finance for consideration.  
 
Mr. Temporary Speaker, by  the provision of Standing Order 205(2), the Committee  on Finance 
received the Petition  from Kennedy Mugo representing Boda - Boda Operators and the Business 
Community from Gilgil.  
The Petitioners/Stakeholders had a P rayer that;  
I.  The prohibitive Motorcycle Sticker Revenue Generation System requires 
payments even if a Motorcycle  is not operational or utilis ed commercially.  
II.  Stiffer penalties for late payment by any Motorcycle Operator even if he/she 
has not been in operation and his/her Motorcycl e data are in the Revenue 
System .  
III.  Payment of Firefighting Levies yet there are no services provided in case of fire 
emergency within Gilgil Sub - County.  
IV.  Double taxation for business Licenses/Permits . This includes Trade Licenses, 
Liquor Licenses, Public Health Fees, Fire Inspection Fees, Advertisement Fees, 
and Operating Fees and they find it difficult to operate the business.  
V.  The grievances raised above relate to Unfair Tax/Revenue Regime for 
Motorcycle Operators and The Business Community . Further, consider that the 
above measures have brought unsound relationships with members of the public 
against the Law Enforcement Department as well as the County Government 
Administration.  
 
SUBMISSION BY THE PETITIONERS  
The Committee  upon receipt of the Petition, wrote to the Petitioners to ascertain the issues raised 
in the Petitio n. The Committee  accorded the petitioners a fair hearing as provided for in the 
Constitution of Kenya.  
The Petitioner  (Mr. Kennedy Mugo) appeared before the Committee  accompanied by the under - 
listed representatives: -  
I.  Francis Kiarie   -  Boda - Boda Gilgil  
II.  Badi Musembe  -  Gilgil Boda - Boda Chairperson  
III.  Samuel Kiagichu  -  Kabatini Boda - Boda Chairperson   
IV.  Dominic Nyakundi  -  Njoro Chairperson Boda - Boda  
V.  Stephen Mwanda  -  Nakuru County Spokesperson  
VI.  Samuel Munyiri  -  Nakuru County Chairperson Boda - Boda  
 
Mr. Temporary Speaker , d uring the hearing, Mr. Mugo stated that;  
1.  Despite their efforts to earn an honest living and contribute to the Nation building, 
they are disturbed by the fact that the taxation regime is unjust and punitive;  
2.  Through deliberations in the Budget  forums, they have tried to seek intervention 
from the Nakuru County Government without any success or way forward;  
3.  In compliance with the law and commitment to seeing the issue s  addressed by 
mutual dialogue, the p etitioners  have chosen to seek the intervention of the County 
Assembly  of Nakuru and therefore the matters being raised herein are not currently 
pendi ng before any court of law, or C onstitutional or L egal B ody by the said 
petitioners.  
4.  They are Nakuru County residents, they are obliged by Constitutional duty to 
fully participate in Governance processes as they seek better service delivery;  
5.  According to Article 201 (b) of the Constitution of Kenya, the P ublic F inance 
S ystem shall promote an equitable society, in particular; the burden of taxation 
shall be shared fairly;  
6.  The PFM Act 2012 Section 132 (3) (b) (c) provides that any recommendation on 
revenue matters shall take into account the P rinciples of E quity, C ertainty, and 
E ase of C ollection; and  consider the impact on development, investment, 
employment, and economic growth among other factors.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  t he petitioner requested the Committee  to consider the following:  
1.  THAT, the County Assembly Reviews  and R evokes  the punitive motorcycle revenue 
systems until a consensus has been reached by the relevant stakeholders.  
2.  THAT, only those who operate the Boda - boda business are the subject of the revenue 
collection.  
3.  THAT, the County Assembly amended the Finance Act to synchroni s e license charged 
on the bar owners to avoid elements of double taxation;  
4.  THAT, the County Assembly Finance Committee  holds a dialogue forum with the 
Business Community, and motorcycle operators in Gilgil to find the most sustainable 
solution to the above issues  
 
   
COMMITTEE  OBSERVATIONS AND FINDINGS  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, the Committee  Observations and Findings are as follows:   
1.  The County Revenue System has a provision to suspend any payment in case the motorbike 
rider r eport s or informs the County of any mechanical problem affecting the motorbike and 
or the motorbike is not operational. In the absence of the said Report / I nformation the 
motorcycle rider will be deemed to be avoiding payment.  
2.  The stiff penalties are provided to discourage non - compliance. The County Government of 
Nakuru draws its charges from the Finance Act, 2019 which is subject to public 
participation, and members of the public are required to raise any objection if any.  
3.  Payment of Firefighting Levies;  the charges are based on the Nakuru County Disaster Act, 
2020. The levies contribute to OSR (Own Source Revenue) for the purposes of service 
delivery in addition to budgetary allocation for F ire E ngines.  
4.  On double taxation, as asserted by the B usiness C ommunity, the County is in the process 
of developing a unified T rade R egime which will result in issuing a S ingle T rade L icense 
in compliance with existing law through amendments in the Finance Bill, 2023.  
 
 COMMITTEE  RECOMMENDATION S  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, a rising from the Observations and  Findings made, the Committee  
concludes that the Petitio n is merited and recommends that the County Government should 
FastTrack the enactment of The Nakuru County Finance Bill, 2023 in order to curb the bureaucracy 
in the issuance of the County Licenses.  
Finally  Mr. Temporary Speaker , on issues of Finance, we are the  engine force for the growth of 
our County  in Revenue Collection . Recently we were low in Revenue Collection but as a 
Committee  we have come up with some measures that will sealing  off a ll the loopholes that take 
away the revenues of our County . What we have discussed will be dealt with well and everything 
will be okay. Thank you  Mr . Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Thank you the Chair man  Finance, Hon. 
Maritim. And now  Honourable Members , I will allow two or so comments .  If there is any Member 
who would want to make a comment pursuant to the Standing Order 204 you are invited to make 
your comments. Hon. Alex.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker , l et me start by giving my gratitude to 
the Committee  on Finance for the good work they have done ,  and more for taking on a P etition  
that was  brought to this House by that gentleman….  
No 072D  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Mr. Temporary Speaker, the Bodaboda Industry just like many other 
industries has felt the eff ects of the rising cost of fuel,  the rising cost of living, and as such, it is 
upon this Assembly to caution these people. When we are talking about double allocation or double 
taxation on these people because I have seen that is one of the things that the Petition  is 
complaining about, it is good that the County Government of Nakuru works harmoniously with 
these people to ensure that these levies that have been implied on these people are too much on 
them.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , y ou reali s e that the County is not doing so well on Revenue Collection 
at this moment .  Why  are we not doing a good collection of these monies? This is because of a 
system whereby if you double  tax  people , m ajority of the m will evade  paying taxes.  M ost people 
are not  paying taxes because they feel burdened. S o,  if we can have a system whereby everything 
works harmoniously, revenue will be generated within the County .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker ,  I also urge the Finance Committee  to bring in the Finance Bill 2023 /24 ,  
so that we can bring a system whereby people are taxed in a way that the Government and in 
conforming to the laws of this land because at the moment, even as we await the next Budget, we 
do not know where we shall anchor the Budge t because every  Budget should be attached to the 
Finance Bill of a certain Financial Y ear.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , s ince we came to this Assembly, I think we have done a disservice to the 
people because of the levies that have been collected since the year 2020 before the COVID - 19 
pandemic, we are still working under a Bill that has passed with time. It is time ,  because I foresee 
sometime in the future, any resident moving to a Court  of our land implicating that we are not 
operating as a C ounty in a  way that we are supposed to operate ,  yet today we have th e power, we 
have the luxury to do all  these things.  
So Mr. Temporary Speaker, I wish to rise and support th is  resident ,  because he  is by all accounts, 
he has  the right to do so. Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Hon. Muraya  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker, I also want to thank you for giving 
me this opportunity and I also like to commen d my  Committee  through the Chairperson  and 
through our Clerk for a job well done. What I want to say or add is that by today, the Bodaboda 
Operators are not being penali s ed by not having paid one or two months because we sat down with 
the Executive and with my Chairperson, we gave them advice that by so doing, we shall attract 
what Hon. Alex has said , of  one person going to court and petitioning this Assembly for not having 
enacted or drafting a Finance Bill.  
So  Mr. Temporary Speaker ,  we have done our very best, and in the next few days, we shall be 
bringing the Finance Bill to this floor of the House so that Members  can be aware that we have not 
just worked on the Petition  but also working very much to make sure that we have the Finance Bill 
in this House and we shall all support it. Thank you  Mr. Temporary Speaker , I  do support.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Thank you, Hon. Members, for the comments 
that you have made .  I want to put it very clear to the  Committee  through the C hair that pursuant 
to the Standing Order 206, you are supposed to respond to the petitioner by writing ,  and I believe 
you are going to do that one as soon as possible.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon onourable  Members, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow morning at 9.30 AM  
The House rose at 3.50 PM  