COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 19th September , 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3:10 PM  
[Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa) in the Chair]  
PRAYERS . 
PAPER(S)  
COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF NAKURU QUARTERLY AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR THE 
PERIOD ENDED 30TH JUNE, 2023  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker  sir. On behalf of the Majority Leader, I 
wish to lay the Financial Quarterly Report  for the Financial Year 2023 . I wish to lay.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): I commit the Paper  to the Budget 
Committee.  We have another  Paper . 
PAPER(S)  
REPORT  OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND INVESTMENT ON THE REPORT  
OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINMANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE NAKURU WATER 
AND SANITATION SERVICES COMPANY LIMITED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30THJUNE, 2021.  
Hon. Michael Njenga: Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker  sir. I would like to lay the Report  of 
the Committee on County Public Accounts and Investment on the Report  of the Auditor General 
on the Financial Statements of the Nakuru Water and Sanitation Services Company Limited for 
the year ended 30thJune, 2021.  
I would also want to lay the Report  of the Committee on County Public Accounts and Investment 
on the Report  of the Auditor General on the Financial Statements of the Nakuru Rural Water and 
Sanitation Company Limited of Nakuru County for the year ended 30thJune, 2020. Thank you.  
MATTER OF COUNTY IMPORTANCE  
BURSARY ALLOCATION  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker  sir. I wish to rise on Order 36 , and I wish 
to adjourn on definite matter of County Importance. The matter entails bursaries.  
I wish that the House have a discussion on this very important matter on the previous bursar ies, 
how they were given out and also how the current bursaries will be given out, entailing details of 
previous records of any balances and how that money has been utili sed. 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Honorable Members  are you in support that 
we adjourn and discuss the matters of County importance . Those who are in support, show by 
standing.  
(Membe rs stoo d up in support)  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  I allow the Debate ; Hon. Alex . 
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker  sir. We come to a time when we reali se 
that the importance of education within our agenda as a Government. These Members increased 
their bursary allocation from a total of Kshs . 100 Million to a tune of Kshs . 322 Million.  
In the previous bursary allocation which happened in one tranche, it so happened that some of the 
monies that had been allocated; for instance, in my Ward, have not been delivered to my people. 
There was a mo de on how the bursaries were allocated and in one instance, this House remember s 
Hon. from…, I do not get his Ward very well but I see the Honorable Member within the House, 
and he rose in this House and requested for a Statement  on the matters that surround the bursaries 
last time.  
We are also in a very tight position because even when you look at the amounts that were allocated, 
Members  have increased the money but we used a system of E lectronic Fund Transfer  to transfer  
money  to the schools. This F inancial Year, we need to discuss and have a sober discussion that 
come January of next year, we shall not be getting excuses here that De la Rue  has not printed 
enough Cheque s so that we be definite on what we have.  
I think the Report  on Education Committee on this Bursa ry has been delayed for long. We need a 
proper discussion because each and every Member who has been elected or even nominated has 
something to do with these bursaries and if we do not get it right, we shall not have any excuses to 
the people. Let us  know how the system will run e ach and every part of this bursary and I would 
request that Members agree that if you come from Murindat Ward, let the cheques of Murindat 
Ward come from Murindat Ward cheques and no cheque to remain within the offices with the 
Executive. If you come from Bahati Ward, go with the Cheques  of Bahati Ward and deliver them 
to the people in one day whereby it will be impactful.  
I wish to ask the Members to consider this as a matter of County Importance .  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon. Rose from Kiptagich Ward . 
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker  sir. I am here to support the Motion 
on the issue of bursary and I really support every Ward with its bursary for easy management and 
easy following. Thank you.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon. Francis Kuria from Malewa West . 
Hon. Francis Kuria: Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker  sir. I rise to support this Motion, noting 
that education is the key to success. This is a lot of money that we are allocating to our  Children 
so that they can proceed with their education. We do not want a mistake where the allocation is 
being directed to a certain  Institution yet you find it by name but there is no money. I want we 
discuss as a House so that we can come to a conclusion and the way forward where we do not want 
to be failures. I therefore rise to support.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon. Mwathi  
Hon. Grace Mwathi: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker . Nimesimama kuunga mkono Mswada  
huu kwa sababu wahenga  walisema sio kosa kufanya kosa lakini ni kosa kurudia kosa. I would 
request what we did last time , should teach us what to do now. For example,  kwetu Bahati kuna 
watoto  wengi sana hata sasa wanaenda  shuleni  wanapata bado bursaries hazijaingia mpaka 
unachukua  “Cheque Number”  unamtumia lakini  akienda hapati pesa. Hiyo inatufanya hata sisi 
wenyewe tuonekane kama waongo maana Wanjiku huko nje anajua kuwa haukupatiana na ilhali 
ulipeana.  
Tumeenda kwa kiwango  cha kuwapa nambari ya Director  wa Elimu  ndio waweze kumpigia wajue 
kile ambacho kinaendelea na hilo sio jambo nzuri. Kwa hivyo naunga mkono Mswada  huu ya 
kwamba wakati huu tufuatilie bursaries  kwa uangalifu maana kwa sasa watoto wako nyumbani na 
ninajua hawa waheshimiwa wamepigiwa simu nyingi sana na wazazi ambao wako kwa Ward zao 
kuhusu watoto kufukuzwa nyumbani. Tunafaa tuketi, tujadiliane na tutoke na jambo ambalo ni la 
busara kama vile Mheshimiwa Alex  amesema kwamba kama cheque  ni za kwangu ama kwa 
Mheshimiwa yeyote acha kila mmoja abebe cheques zake , aende atayarishe mkutano na wazazi 
wake na Principal  wa shule na wapeane hizo cheques  kwa njia ambayo inafaa. Tunajua ya kwamba 
masomo ni kitu cha muhimu sana Lakini inafika mahali unaona hata kuna watoto wanakosa shule 
kwa sababu hawana bursary  na hawana karo za shule. Ninaunga mkono huu Mswada  ili tuweze 
kufanya hii kazi kwa njia ya ufanisi kabisa. Asante.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa ): Hon.  Bernard Kirui . 
Hon. Bernard Kirui : Asante sana Bwana Spika  wa Mda kwa hii nafasi ambayo nimepata. Pia 
nami ningependa kujiunga na wenzangu kuunga mkono Mswad a huu wa bursaries.  Kusema kweli 
bursary  ni kila  kitu pale mashinani;  inaweza kukurudisha kwa kiti ama ikumalize kabisa. 
Ukiangalia zile bursary  ambazo tulipewa juzi, h aya mambo ya Electronic Fund Transfer  
yameturudisha nyuma kama Waheshimiwa, mpaka sasa hivi wazazi wanalalamika kuwa pesa 
hazijafika kwa mash ule na ukienda pale kwa Kaunti wanasema pesa ime kuwa disbursed . 
Tunaomba kujitoa hapo na tuingie kwa cheques.  Juzi tulipewa za form one in form of cheques  na 
hakuna kesi yeyote , kwa hivyo tunaomba tutoke kwa EFT na twende kwa cheques.   
Jambo la pili ni kwamba kuna zile balances  ambazo tulikuwa tumepewa, mimi mwenyewe kama 
MCA  wa Barut  nilipatiwa balance ya shilingi  89,000  nikarudi kwa ground  nikajaza, wazazi waka  
apply bursary  na nikazirejesha. Miezi minne imepita sasa na hazijawahi toka na zingine 
tunaambiwa tupeane forms . Tunaomba Mwenye kiti wa Kamati  ya Elimu ashughulike ili zile za 
kwanza zilipwe zote tukielekea kupeana zile zingine za 2023 -2024. Asante sana.  
The Temporary S peaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon. Nickson Morogo.  
 Hon. Nickson Morogo : Asante Bwana Spika  wa Mda . Nimesimama pia kuunga mkono Mswada  
huu nikisema kwamba mambo ya bursary  yaweze kuangaliwa vyema kwa sababu ya metupatia 
madhara makubwa kuliko mazuri ambayo yangefaa kusaidia watoto wetu. Ninaunga mkono kuwa 
kila Wadi  iweze kusimamia mambo yake.  
Katika Wadi yangu ya Solai  ninachangamoto kwamba Ward  Committee,  Mwenye kiti na Katibu 
hawajalipwa zile pesa ambazo walikuwa wanastahili kulipwa ilhali kuna watu ambao walilipwa. 
Kama kila  Wadi ingepewa jukumu l a kujifanyia mambo yake haya ha yangefanyika. Kwa hivyo 
naunga mkono.  
The   Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa ): Hon.  Member for Kapkures.  
Hon. Robert Ruto : Asante sana Bwana Spika  wa Mda . Nasimama kuunga mkono huu mjadala 
wa bursaries  kwenda kwenye Wadi . Hii bursary  inasaidia sana wale watoto wanatoka  kwa familia 
ambazo ziko chini kifedha na ningependa sana iendelee hivyo ndio watoto wetu waweze kusoma. 
Kapkures  kuna slums  mingi na watu hawana uwezo wa kupeleka wanafunzi shuleni kwa sababu 
financial status  yao iko chini. Itanisaidia sana kwa Wadi  yangu ya Kapkures.  Asante sana.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa ): Hon.  Member for London Ward . 
Hon.Bernard Gatuso : Nachukua nafasi hii kukushukuru Spika  wa Mda kwa kunipatia fursa hii 
pia mimi niweze kuungana na wale wengine kuunga mkono hili jambo la bursary.  Kwanza kabisa 
ningependa kusema kuwa nataka kushukuru Mwenye kiti ambaye anatuongoza katika Kamati  yetu 
ya bursary kwa kuwa ameweza kutupangia mikutano mingi tukaweza kupatana na ile Department  
ya Education  na tuliweza ku  stream line yale mambo ambayo hayakuwa sawa kulingana na ile 
bursary ya kwanza ambayo tulipeana.  
Kuna yale tuliweza kupunguzia wazazi wetu ndio wasiwe na kazi nyingi za kufanya wakati ambapo 
wanafanya mambo ya kujaza bursary  kama vile kuhakikisha kwamba kama mtoto yuko shule ya 
mbali ataweza ku  scan zile documents  na ziletwe kwa ofisi zetu ili ziweze kushughulikiwa. Naunga 
mkono kwa sababu ninajua mambo ya masomo ni mambo muhimu . Na ndio tuweze kutoshanisha 
watu wale ambao wako sawa na wale wako chini ni kuhakikisha kuwa tumesomesha jamii na 
wakiweza kusoma wataweza kutusaidia hapo mbeleni na pia masomo yatawawezesha watafute 
rasilmali kwa njia moja au nyingine k ama wale wengine. Watakuwa very competent  kama wale 
wengine.  
Nachukua nafasi hii kusema kuwa haya  mambo ya bursary  tukiweza kupitia ile njia ya kupeana 
cheques  ziende shule badala ya kutumia h aya mambo  ya Electronic Fund Transfer  ambayo mpaka 
wa leo kuna familia ambazo bado zinalia pesa hazijafika shule na pia wanafunzi wanarudishw a 
nyumbani. Mimi naunga mkono mMsw ada huu na kusema ya kwamba tukubaliane kuwa zile pesa 
zipeanwe kwa shule ili watoto wetu waweze kusoma kwa njia ambayo inastahili. Asante.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa ): Hon.  Mercy Kilel.  
Hon. Mercy Kilel:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker for giving me this opportunity. The 
Members that have spoken before me have spoken in Kiswahili so I do not know whether while I 
was away a Motion passed that the afternoon session should be purely conducted in Kiswahili but 
I will continue in Engl ish because I know the Members understand well.  
I should commend them for speaking eloquently. I also wish to thank this House because as you 
are all aware in the past like two weeks I was bereaved and the Members in this House stood with 
me physically, financially and emotionally , so Mr. Temporary Speaker if I would not say this it 
will be a great disservice to the House. Thank you Members  for standing with me when I was 
bereaved.  
In regards to the Motion of the day, they say education is the passport to the future and as you 
know the Members that have spoken have said that in their Wards, for example Barut, I have heard 
Kapkures mentioned several  times,  but us the nominated Members do not have a specific Ward 
that we represent but that does not mean that we do not have students who are needy that  might 
need our help , so I do not know whether the Chairperson of Education has any plan s or an 
allocation that I had  mentioned sometimes back. That we the nominated Members of the County 
Assembly will have something to support the needy students that we represent in our various 
jurisdictions. So that is it Mr. Temporary Speaker , and I wish to commend the Members for 
supporting this Motion and speaking eloquently; thank you.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon. Muraya from Flamingo Ward . 
Hon. David Muraya : Asante sana Bwana Spika  wa Mda kwa kunipatia nafasi ili niweze 
kuchangia h uu Mswada ambayo umeletwa na Mheshimiwa Alex. Mimi ningetaka kusema ya 
kwamba mimi naunga mkono kikamilifu kabisa ; 100 percent na ningetaka tu tumie njia ambayo 
tumesema tutakuwa tukipeana cheques direct to the students  because we assume  hii njia ya 
kutumia  EFT Mheshimiwa Spika  wa Mda,  ni njia ambayo ilikuwa na utata sana.  
Even  today as we are speak  naopa mimi nimepigiwa simu na mmoja kuniambia ya kwamba pesa 
zake ambazo tulim gawia  hazijafika shuleni. Na pia ningeomba ya kwamba tuwe na majadiliano 
ambayo ni ya kina so that in future  tusifanye  mistake ambayo tulifanya awali tena ili tuweze 
kuhakikisha we give quality leadership  katika wale watu walituchagua, so that even in future  
wanaweza kutuamini ya kwamba sisi ni watu wale ambao waliwekwa kwa Bunge ili kuweza 
kuwakiklisha vizuri.  
Kwa hivyo ninaunga mkono kikamilifu . Hata hivyo naunga mkono juhudi za Chairman  wa Elimu 
katika  Bunge kwa sababu kwa mara ya kwanza tulikuwa na transition  hii ya serikali kutoka ile 
ingine ; amejaribu sana. Hata hivyo sasa amesikia vile tumeongea na ninajua in future  mambo 
yatakuwa sawa. Asante sana Bw Spika wa Mda. 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): I see that we have the Chair Education 
sitting elsewhere or the Vice Chairperson do you have a response for the Members?  
Hon. Peter Maina :  Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker , I must say that I am quite excited to have 
the opportunity to address you as Mr. Temporary Speaker for the first time ; so I appreciate. As we 
speak, I just came from a meeting with all the Stakeholder s in the Education  Sector within the 
County , and our main agenda was to discuss on how we are going to ensure that the disbursement 
process in the Financial Year 2023/24 will go smooth ly. As we speak , we have already simplified 
the Application Form, we have co nsidered it fit to expunge the section that has a requirement for 
beneficiaries to have the Local Administrators sign. We have received various complains from 
some Stakeholders that at some point beneficiaries have been harassed in those Local 
Administration Offices and therefore we saw the need to expunge it to simplify the application 
process.  
As we speak I have already updated all the involved Members, the elected Members , with a 
schedule that clearly outlines in details all the timelines for various activities like for instance Third 
Schedule shows when the forms should be applied, when the forms should be returned, when the 
Ward Bursary Committee should do the analysis and when the signing of vouchers  and cheque s 
should be done.  
We have taken another important step to ensure that this time round we w ill not  have the EFT 
thing. We have made plans in place to ensure that cheques  will be available for the Kshs 330  
million  that has been set aside for the bursaries. We have also agreed with the Department  that 
before the mega launch that will be done by the Governor in the second or first week of January, 
all the cheques  should be sorted out per Ward  so that once we launch, there w ill not  be any delay  
and immediately the launch is done,  all the cheques  should be released to various Wards.  
We have also been in consultation with elected Members  and also the Governor and we have 
agreed and seen it fit that we put Kshs.  2000 as the minimum amount that should be allocated to 
either Day School s or Children  in College s and in the Universitie s. I have also had a concern from 
one of the nominated  Member Hon. Kilel and we are going to engage the Governor’s Political 
Office and also the Department  to see whether there will be a Special Kitty for the nominated 
Members as promised earlier by the Governor. Therefore, that one will be checked into.  
Lastly, the Mheshimiwa  from Lakeview has raised some concerns and it is important that the Hon. 
Member provides and furnishes the Education Committee with the list of beneficiaries that he has 
claimed have not received their funds so that if there is such a challenge then we ar e able to take 
it up to the Department , do a follow up so that his concerns can be addressed. I do not wish to add 
any other thing unless there is a query I have not addressed; thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker . 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon. Kirui  
Hon. Bernard Kirui : Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker , maybe to ask Mheshimiwa  Chairperson 
Education. I think we had agreed on Kshs . 3000 for every  student and not Kshs.  2,000 ; you confirm 
on the figures.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Hon. Chair perso n. 
Hon. Peter Maina : Mr. Temporary  Speaker , where possible we would want the minimum to be  
Kshs . 3000 but you also reali se that different Wards  have different needs and therefore in areas 
where the Committee  and the area MCA will want to put Kshs . 3000 as the minimum, there is no 
problem but basically, we would want as many as possible to have Kshs . 3,000 as the minimum.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Thank you Chair,  Hon. Morogo do you have 
something?  
Hon. Nixon Morogo : Thank yo, Mr. Temporary Speaker  for giving me this opportunity. I had 
raised a concern on the Ward Committees who had not been paid; I ha ve done a lot of follow up 
through the Office of County Bursary Committee , so I would like to get an assurance from the 
Chairperson  because I am not comfortable being asked a lot of questions from the Ward Committee 
and we are to take another task to them yet we have not been settled. So, may I have assurance that 
they will sort out the issue.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Chair Education . 
Hon. Peter Maina:  Mr. Temporary  Speaker  this is clearly an administrative matter but let me 
commit for  Mheshimiw a for Solai that I have noted h is concern ; I will take up the matter with the 
Bursary Administrator and see to it that his Bursary Ward Committee Members have been paid in 
full. 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): In that matter I wish to direct the 
Chairperson Education to also arrange and table a Report  in the House on the matter . 
Hon. Peter Maina:  Mr. Temporary  Speaker , just a quick one ; actually this issue has been pre -
empted because basically  the Report  is ready and we were waiting to be scheduled so that the 
Report  can be tabled. Otherwise the Report  is ready. Thank you.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Thank you Chair, next order.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
Hono urable Members  this House stands adjourned until tomorrow morning at 9.30am.  
The House rose at 3.40 PM 
  
  
 
 