MARCH 23, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEB ATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday , 23RD   March 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10: 40am 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi):  Honorable Members welcome to the  morning 
plenary session. Clerk next order.  
PAPER  
    THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON FINANCIAL STATEMENT OF COUNTY EXECUTIVE 
OF NAKURU FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2020  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Honorable Members we have  a Paper, the 
report of the Auditor General on the Financial Statements of County Executive of Nakuru for the 
year ended 30TH June 2020 to be laid by the Leader of Majority pursuant to the provisions of 
Section 49(1) of the Public Audit Act Number 34 of 2015.  
Hon. Leah Sang:  Thank you Honorable Temporary Speaker , I am the Deputy Minority Whip 
and on behalf of the Leader of Majority Leader , I want to lay the report of the  Auditor General  
on the Financial Statements of County Executive of Nakuru for the year ended 30TH June 2020. I 
beg to lay.   
                                     (The Report was laid on the table)  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi ): Thank you very much for laying the Paper.  
Clerk  next order. We have another report, the report of the  Committee on Members Welfare , 
Catering,  and Library Services on the Nakuru County Assembly Members Office Bill 2021 to be 
laid by the Chairperson for the Committee  on Members Welfare, Catering, and Library Services. 
I think we have the Vice Chairperson Honorable Benazir Busienei . 
PAPER  
MEMBERS WELFARE AND CATERING COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE NAKURU  
COUNTY ASSEMBLY MEMBERS OFFICES BILL NO.7 OF 2021  
MARCH 23, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEB ATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 Hon. Benazir Busienei:  Thank you Honorable Temporary Speaker, I want to lay the Report of 
the Committee  on Members Welfare, Catering, and Library Services on The Nakuru County 
Assembly Members Office Bill 2021. I beg to lay.  
                                                 (The Report was laid on the table)  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi ): Thank you Honorable Benazir. The Report of 
the Auditor  General  on the Financial Statements of the County Executive of Nakuru for the 
Financial Year  ended 30th June 2020 is committed to the Public Accounts and Investment 
committee. So, Hon. Leah Sang you are a me mber of that committee. So that Paper remains 
committed to your committee. Thank you. So, thank you, Hon. Benazir , our next order!  
MOTION  
     THE NAKURU COUNTY ASSEMBLY MEMBERS OFFICES BILL NO. 7 OF 2021  
(SECOND READING ) 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon Phillip Wanjohi):  Honorable members, we have a motion that 
the county Nakuru county assembly members of fices  Bill number 7 of 2021 be now read a 
Second Time. Hon.  Benazir.  
Hon. Benazir  Busienei : Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker. I wish to move a Motion ; - 
THAT  the Nakuru County Assembly Members Office Bill number 7 of 2021 be now read a 
Second Time.  
In objecti ves and the reason s, the Bill seeks to provide a framework for effective discharge of 
duties by Members in making provision of members office space  and staffing of members’ 
offices … transition and financial provision, part one of the Bill provide for interpretation and 
general provision.  
Part two provides for office construction of members office under laid down guidelines and 
condition on how propert y can be leased  or constructed. From who it can be leased and the 
custodian of the lease agreement.  
 Part three provides for financial procedures in members’ offices. It sets guidelines of how 
expenditures is managed. That is who is signatories of account or under who propose s 
expenditure. It also provides an elaborate system for  financial  accountability.  
Part four for staffing of members offices, this part set aside guidelines on how recruitment is 
done, who determines the remuneration of members offices’ staff, qualification of such staff, the 
entitlement and procedure to be followed when staff time comes to an end.  
Part five provides for handing over of the offices , this part gives guidelines on what takes place 
during the transition period , a member exi ts and before another member takes over and who 
takes care of transition expenses and for what duration . 
MARCH 23, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEB ATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 Part six, provides for the miscellaneous provisions and more particularly the powers of the 
County Assembly Service Board and … on certain regulations.  Mr. Temporary Speaker Sir, I 
request Hon. Kamwana to second the Motion.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon Phillip Wanjohi):  John Mwangi  
Hon. John Mwangi: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir , I stand here to second the Bill 
because it aims at enhancing smooth operation of the office activities at the Ward level as well as 
to avoid the conflict between the County Assembly Service Board and the Honorable Member at 
the Ward level and therefore, t his particular Bill is going to be put into force. This is going to make 
sure that we are going to have a good relationship between the office staff and the board and each 
operation at the Ward level is going to run smoothly and when the Ward activity run smoothly, 
this means that the role that has been given to the Honorable Member is also going to be achieved. 
Therefore, I second. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. John Mwangi.  
(Question proposed that the Nakuru Count y Assembly Members Office s Bill number 7 of 2021 be 
now read a Second Time) 
Hon. Douglas Ayabei: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir , this Bill is timely because the way 
Members Ward offices are operating has not been really well coordinated. Coming into e ffect of 
this Bill, it is going to settle the grey areas in operation of Members offices. I like the part of 
transition because it has really put everything in black and white in the handing over of offices. 
During this term, I have seen Members who unfort unately cease d to hold office through demise. 
There are a lot of unclear ways of handing over. I remember when one Member passed on 
sometimes during our term, there was a lot of confusion on the handling of office of the Member. 
This law is going to guide on how the exiting Member and handing over of the offices is going to 
be handled so that we do not have confusion between the Members who are there . I remember 
when the Member died, there were some people saying the staff should vacate the office 
immediate ly. Others were saying they should remain until another Member comes. All that is 
because there was no law guiding the office staff of members.  
Where this law is proposing to construct member’s offices, there has been a lot of allegations by 
members of the public  that the re are members who are using their houses as ward office s. These 
allegations I think is going now to be cleared by this Bill because it is now clear on what type of 
office should be rented by members as the members ward offices.  
Thirdly  Mr. Temporary Speaker, it is going to protect the members from unwarranted accusations 
from people of ill will. Therefore,  I think this Bill is timely and I want to support it totally because 
I want to believe it is going to streamline operations and it i s going to ease members from many 
things which sometimes brought by confusion in the operation of the ward offices. I think also it 
is going to remove conflict of interest between members and maybe the operations of this office 
MARCH 23, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEB ATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 because we are going to have  a full-time assistance and it is outlined very clearly of how this office 
staff are going to be appointed. I want to support; thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. Member for Marioshoni.  Hon. 
Members the mover  
Hon. Benazir  Busienei : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker , I wish to thank my colleagues for 
their contribution in this Motion and I think ile yote wamekuwa wakisema ama kuhusu maofisi yao 
, naamini yote imenakiliwa kwa hii report . Kwa hivyo nashukuru sana kwa wote walio changia  
mjadala hu u.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you very much Hon. Benazir. Hon 
Members I now wish to put the question  
Question proposed that the Nakuru County Assembly Members Office s Bill No. 7 of 2021 be now 
read a Second Time) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(The Nakuru County Assembly Members Office s Bill No. 7 of 2021 was accordingly  read a 
Second Time) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Honorable  Members the House remains adjourned until 2.30 in the afternoon.  
(The House rose at 11.00am ) 
 
  