COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday  7th March , 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House Met At 10:20 A M 
[The  Speaker (Hon. Willy Mutai ): In the Chair].  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
CASA GAMES REGISTRATION  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Willy Mutai): Hono urable Members, you are hereby informed 
that the CASA Games preparations for the year 2023 are underway. You are hereby asked to 
register the sports dis cipline you intend to undertake, tracksuits and shoe size with Mr. Jacob 
Kesendany, Clerk Committee on Culture,  Sports and Community Services in the first floor, clerks ’ 
office.  
Hon. John Maritim: Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, we did not hear what you are telling us. Kindly 
repeat loudly.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Willy Mutai): Thank you Members. As per the request of the 
Hono urable Member, let me read and expound on the Communication.  
Hono urable Me mbers, you are hereby informed that CASA games preparations for the year 2023 
are underway. You are hereby asked to register the Sports Discipline you intend to undertake, 
tracksuits and shoe size with Mr. Jacob Kesend any, Clerk Committee on Culture, Sports and 
Commu nity Services in the First Floor, C ommittee C lerks’ Office.  
To expound on the same, you realis e that in our calendar, we have sports and we had requested 
before that you register. I want to believe that you are going to confirm th e Discipline that you are 
going to participate in and more  so, we also want to change the sports because possibly when you 
registered, you had not developed a certain interest in a certain Discipline so you are requested to 
make the necessary changes and you also present the sizes of the tracksuits as well as the shoes 
that you want. We want to prepare adequate ly for this competition s that are ahead. I believe I am 
now clear.  
What is it Hon. Muraya?  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I would  want to ask, how many 
games one is  supposed to register with the Clerk because there might be a variety of games and 
maybe we might be limited to some.  
Hono urable Members that  is a very grea t concern from Hono urable Muraya ; at least two games 
and we enco urage each and every individu al, regardless of any challenge, be it weight or 
tenderness, to register at least two games.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honorable Members, this House stands adjourned until today, 2:30 Pm  
House rose at 10:25 A M 
 