NOVEMBER 22, 2022                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
                                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 22nd November 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03: 10 pm 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
PETITION  
MAINSTREAMING AND EMPOWERMENT OF PEOPLE LIVING WITH DISABILITY IN SUPPORT 
PROGRAM WITH RESPECT TO FUNDS ALLOCATION IN THE APPROVED BUDGET  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): We have a Petition by Ambrose Kiplang ’at Lasoi 
Concerning  permission of persons living with disability on the mainstreaming and empowerment  
support program  with respect to fund allocation in the approved  budget estimates. Is the chairman 
for budget in the House?  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : The chairman  is in Hon. Deputy Speaker  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Mr. Chairman I would want to commit this Petition 
to your committee and we would like this matter to be expedited  very fast let it not take more than 
60 calendar days  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Okay Mr. Deputy S peaker  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): And if there is a member who can contribute on the 
same before we go to the next order, the floor  is open. Yes Minority leader  
The Minority Leader  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Mr. Speaker  I wish not to contribute because it is a 
Petition, but I hope what you have authorized the Chair for Budget to do that all Petitions should 
not take more than 60 working days and I hope that will be done by the chair  and the committee 
for budget. Thank you 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Minority Leader . Any other member ? 
Hon. Wilson Mwangi : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker, once  again I want to retaliate comments,  
I did this morning that  we need to expedite  these Petitions very fast because  when these Petitions 
are being brought  in this House, the members of public have big expectations from us. Therefore,  
if at all we are going  to have a Petition, which will last for more than 60 days Mr. Deputy  Speaker, 
NOVEMBER 22, 2022                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 we are really  not doing good  to our people. We are hopeful that the chairs of all these committees 
where the Petitions have been committed, will  expedite  this Petitions  fast so that we can give out 
the report in this House so that the members of public may know that this Assembly is really  
working. Therefore,  we would like to call upon all the chairs  whose Committees the Petitions have 
been committed to either  from the last Assembly  or in this third Assembly  to expedite. W e have a 
lot of work to do and this is what we were given the chance by wanjiku to do. Therefore Mr. Deputy  
Speaker let the report be brought in the House so that the public can be given back the report. 
Thank  you. 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Hon. Member.  
Hon. William Mutai : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir., I also stand to support my colleague  who has 
just talked about speeding up this discussion  in the various committees, I do remember very well 
that just before we came to this honorable House, this person Ambrose  Lasoi was going  round 
trying to solicit for support from various members that once you start your sittings, make  sure that 
you actually look into this request. To me I want to believe that 60 days are quite a lot though it is 
legally  stipulated  that it should be 60 days but I want to believe that it is too long but if it was 
possible for the relevant committees to do the discussions even within a week before we break for 
that very long recess . I think I am going to support and this will go along with upholding the 
respons ibilities that  wanjiku has given us to perform bearing in mind that the supplementary budget 
is also just around the corner, I want to believe that if we do this and adopt  as the House, there is 
a possibility of having their request getting to the budget o f 2022 -2023. Thank you very much Mr. 
Deputy  Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Hon. Member.  
Thank you, members , we shall be having a communication tomorrow concerning the issue of these 
Petitions and the office of the Speaker shall be able to give a good guideline on how to go about 
it. 
                                                                      ADJOURNM ENT  
The House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 9.30 am  
(The House rose at  3.25pm ) 