MAY 10, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 10TH   May  2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met a t 11: 00a m 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu) i n the Chair]  
PRAYER  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu ): Honorable Members  good morning. Welcome back, I know it 
been a difficult moment for many of us but God is good at all times, the grace of God is 
sufficient for whole of us  and we are back here for the last session. All things happened 
according to his will, those of you who succ eeded  and those who did not succeed G od have a 
plan for every one of you. I will give you time today to encourage each other because we are one 
family. Clerk next order.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
RESUMPTION AFTER LONG RECESS  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu ): Honorable Members I have a  Communication to make as usual 
and as our tradition when we open,  the speaker has to make some communications. Allow me to 
make this Communication - 
Honorable Members, it is my pleasure to  welcome you back for the final part of  sixth session of 
the Second Assembly that commenced in August 2017 . The County Assembly of Nakuru i s set 
to resume it regular sittings today Tuesday 10TH May 17, 2022 after a one-month  long recess 
period in accordance with the House Calendar. Noting that this being an election year the  
Members were extremely engaged during the one -month recess owing to rigorous political 
parties’ activities and nominations, which took place across the Country.  
It should be noted that we ar e at a verge of exhausting our C onstitutional term of office and we 
only have one month to accomplish the promises that we made to our people to whom  we have a 
social contract with.  This therefore means that we all must put more effort in the cause of 
executions of our Legislative Mandate to complete all pending businesses. It is  worth noting that 
Committee  sitting’s will be ongoing as usual, th e schedule of  Committee sittings remains 
unchanged to unsure that t here is a seamless operations in Committee’s Work without any 
interference . 
MAY 10, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 To this end, various House Committees are therefore urged to plan the pending Committee Work 
within the schedules. The key priority business on  resumption  will include all Budget related 
business activity including the consideration of the County Budget Es timates and the 
Appropriation Bill . The following pending business should be completed before the break for the 
sin-die recess on 8TH June 2022.  
These Bills  include ; 
The Nakuru County Evaluation and Rating Bill No 10 of 2019, sponsored by honorable  Peter 
Kajwang  
The Nakuru Housing Estates , Tenanc y and Management Bill No 4 of 2019 sponsored by 
Honorable Joseph Mungai.  
The Nakuru County Land Management Bills No 3 of 2017, which  was sponsored by honorable 
Stephen Ng’ethe.  
                                            PENDING STATEMENTS  
Honorable Members we have pending Statement s and I think it is important that this statements 
be availed,  
The Chairperson for the  Committee on Early Childhood Education and Vocational Training is to 
issues a  Statement requested by Honorable Joseph Murage concerning the status of  ECD 
Classroo m at Nyondia Primary and Nyakinyua ECD in Malewa  West Ward .  
The Chairperson  for the Committee  on Road s and Public Works to issue a Statemen t requested 
by Honorable Zacharia Kahiro concerning the distribution of Conditional Grants by the Kenya 
Roads Board within the County.  
The L eader of  Majority to issue a  Statement requested by Honorable Jackson Githua concerning 
distribution of Headquarter Projects in the Count y.  
The Chairperson for the  Committee on County Roads and Public Works Honorable Machembu 
to issue a statement requested by Honorable Jackson Githua concerning construction of Stage ya 
Haramu - Geshimo Kiambogo road in Mau Narok Ward.  
The Chairperson  for the  Committee on lands and Physical Planning to issue a statement 
requested by honorable Daniel Mutai concerning land subdivisions in Mosop Ward. The 
Chairperson for the Committee on Environment, Energy, Water and Natural Resources to issue a  
Statement requested by Honorable Grace Mwathi concerning quarry activities in Bahati Ward.  
                                        PENDING PETITIONS   
 Honorable Members, we have P etitions that have been pending in this H ouse. And his magic was 
that these petitions be expedited and be discharge of.  
MAY 10, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The following P etitions are still pending:  
1. Petitio n by Nakuru stakeholder’s forum intervention of the County Assembly to ensure 
workers  engage d at the suspended Itare  dam are paid their standing dues. That is  in the 
labor gender, you th and social welfare.  
2.  Petition by John Ndune Mwangi concerning suspension and dismissal of defunct Nakuru 
municipality. Suspension  of workers and local m unicipality. This P etition is before labor, 
gender, youth and social services.  
3. Petition by residents stakeholders of Mawanga market in Kiamaina Ward, the formation of 
new market. Committee of  trade tourism cooperative and planning.  
4. Petition by residents of  Mwaki Mugi sub location concerning construction of Kabatini 
Ward social hall in the area as resolve d during the public participation under the budget 
and appropriation committee.  
5. Petitioned by Joseph Ngugi seeking r eview of revenue allocation of L are award to match 
the population and geographical size catering Lare and Naishi which were merged to form 
Lare ward. This is before the Finance Committee.  
6. Petitioned by John N. Muthoni seeking the assembly’s intervention on rapid water 
disconnection by NAWASCO in Menengai ward this is under Energy Environment and 
Natural sources.  
7. Petition by Mirera Maruti concerning community in Hell's Gate ward seeking the 
intervention of county assembly with regard to pollution of a bakery industry, Located 
within the residential area these under Energy Environment and Water and natural sources 
committee.  
8.  Petitioned by p yrethrum processing company of Kenya PPCK seeking the intervention of 
county assembly with regards to awarding 100% waiver to PBCK on outstanding land rates 
rent, accumulated penalties and principal rate arrears within the Nakuru municipality. 
Covering Nak uru east and west sub counties amounting to 83,607,263. This petition is 
before the Finance Committee.  
9.  Petitioned by Nakuru County Youth seeking the intervention of the county assembly 
regarding Revoking t he appointment of Mrs. Sylvia Ac heng Onyango as an  executive 
committee member for youth, Gender and sports. This I think was discharge by the 
appointment committee.  
10. Petition b y Torobwek community of Nakuru C ounty seeking the intervention of county 
assembly regarding the resettling and legitimizing their e xistence in the county. That 
petition is before Lands housing and Physical Planning.  
Honorable Members, I wish to thank you for all the spirited wo rk that has culminated in this H ouse 
largely achieving its core business objectives.  
To this end the A ssembl y boasts of passing a total Bills, Motions and other Budget Policy.  
MAY 10, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 It is my hope that the next assembly will emulate the good example set by you Honorable 
Members. I welcome you back and wish you a period of fruitful deliberations. Asante sana.  
I know we  have a challenge, some of the chairs are vying for other seats, especially the labor which 
has a lot of business. So, we request the vice chair for that committee to really expedite  on these 
matters.  
At this juncture I want to open up for anyone with a c omment on the communication before we go 
to the next business.  
Hon. Daniel Kiriethe:  Thank you so much. For this mome nt. From the onset I want  to 
congratulate you for baggin g the Jubilee ticket in Nakuru E ast. And also congratulate Hon. Kamau 
for bagging N akuru West UDA and a lso other members like Hon.  Mwathi, myself and all other 
members who are not here who will be in the ballot come August, Honorable Kamwana also 
bagging Jubilee ticket, Hon. Cecilia also in Jubilee. I congratulate all of you. Kwa wale am bao 
hawakupata  there always tomorrow we live to fight another day.  
 Speaker sir, on the spirit of brotherhood, I can remember last time when we were vying you 
supported us so much with resource caps, lessos and posters. Having stayed with you for the last 
five years I think you can also extend the same hand to those members vying with Jubilee, UDA 
and also independent because we are all your children. So, Mr. Speaker, sir, we are look ing forward 
for your assistance  during these hard moments. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): Well noted. Hon. Kamau Githengi. On that note, when we get 
there, I ask for your vote for Deputy Speaker.  
Hon. Kamau Githengi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I was on that issue of Itare Dam. As a 
Committee, we had done our level b est to know about our casual laborers who were not being paid 
but at the end of the day, the total function was performed by the Nat ional Government. I think 
that P etition should have been taken to the National Assembly but not to the County Assembly 
becau se the County Assembly and even the Executive were not involved in the functions of Itaare 
Dam. My Committee has sole mandate to do the follow up of the casual laborers who were not 
being paid. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): I concur with you H on. Kamau Githengi but a petitioner needs to 
be informed. The Clerk to that Committee should inform the petitioner to forward that P etition to 
the National Assembly. We strike it from our case list. Hon. Maru.  
Hon. Rachael Maru: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to thank the petitioner because you find 
that in our area, most of those people who were working for Itaare Dam have not been paid up to 
this time. They have really suffered a lot. I really appreciate for  bringing the P etition in this 
Assembly thoug h we have discovered that it is supposed to be in the National Government but I 
really thank you for considering those people. Thank you.  
MAY 10, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you Hon. Maru. Hon. Wanango then I come to Hon. Mutai.  
Hon. Simon Wanyoike : Thank  you Mr. Speaker sir,  on my side, I take this opportunity to 
congratulate Honorable  Members wale walipata tikiti  after nominations, starting with you. Pongezi 
sana.  Huu ni wakati mgumu sana . This final lap ni wakati mgumu sana kwetu sisi  Members sababu  
sasa hapa  we are mixed up. Tuko na Hon. Members who lost na wale wameshinda na ukiangalia  
hata vile nyumba imekaa , utaona huzuni kidogo sababu sio kawaida umekalia ile kiti na kwa  
mawazo yako, unaona kuna vile hautarudi kwa hii nyumba. Nataka niambie  Members there is 
Always tomorrow kwa wale hawakupata na hata tukitoka nje, tusipotee kwa Wanjiku. Wanjiku 
huwa hasahau. I remember when I was elected in 2007 tukiwa na akina Keriethe . By then, I was a 
councillor . Mzee mmoja by the name  councillor Wachira aliniambi a miaka mitano  is a trick of an 
eye. Wengine huwa wanachaguliwa wanaona kama miaka mitano ni 100 years  lakini huwa inaisha 
haraka sana .  
 Unajipanga na kama huna pesa, ujue utatoa wapi. Wakati wa kulia hapa and I said, Mr Speaker, 
hizi siku za mwisho hata tukienda kwa Gavana kulia, huwa hawatusikizi kwa sababu they know 
we are going. Kwa hivyo ni wakati wa mtu kujipanga lakini Mr Speaker ukiwa one of us, please 
take care welfare ya MCA’s wale wako hapa. Tusichezewe na mtu  
(Applause ) 
Hata kidogo eti kwa sababu tunaenda. Sisi ni MCA’s hadi tarehe 9 August. Mishahara yetu lazima 
itoke, allowances zetu lazima zitoke na ni lazima tuangaliwe vile inastahili. Nobody should joke  
or play na honorable mem,bers. Na sisi members we should not forget our role ya over sight  kwa 
sababu kuna wakati Executive huwa inaenjoy, it is this time, between now and Auygust sababu 
they know we are busy with our campaigns and they are ready to do anything sababu oversight, 
hatuko, tuko busy in our campaigns. Kwa hivyo hata kama tuko kwa uwanja, let us not forget our  
role ya oversight.  Pia kamati zetu especially the Implementation Committeee , mimi wakati 
tulikuwa recess, nilikuwa nasoma wale watu walikuwa shortlisted  kwa ECDs naona tu 
tunalalamika hapa, tunalalamika kwa wards tukiuliza  walikua wamecgukuliwa walimu wangapi. 
Kwangu in Lakeview Ward , wale waliaply, none of them amechukuliwa na nikiangalia wale 
wamechukuliwa ni people from other areas . Najiukliza kwani iko namna gani by the way nilikuwa 
nimesema nitaenda kortini kupinga hiy o kitu sababu haki ya watui wangu itapatikana wapi kama 
sitasinmama kuwatetea. Let us not forget our role,  tusimame kama bunge mpaka siku ya mwisho. 
God willing, we shall be back in this House  na mimi najua tutarudi kwa uwezo na nguvu za 
mwenyezi Mungu. Wa le hawatapata, tutawaombea mwenyezi Mungu wakirudi mashinani. Mimi 
nilitoka kwa hii nyumba 2017 sababu sikuchaguliwa lakini nilisoma kitu, I did not run away from 
my people. Nilikaa na watu wangu and what I was doing  nikiwa MCA, niliendelea kufanya hata 
nikiwa nje mpaka ikawa ngumu sana kwa yule aliyekuweko sababu everywhere, Wanango alikuwa 
anaonekana. Wakati ilikuja, watu walisema hata hatuchezi na hatutaki kuambiwa lolote we know 
our man is Wanango. Na kama uongozi uko ndani yako, haiku ndani yako sababu  umechaguliwa. 
Uko ndani yako when you are elected and when not elected. Go and serve  Wanjiku and God will  
MAY 10, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 reward you and there is always tomorrow  na tutarudi kewa hii nyumba wote. God bless you, thank 
you. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you; Hon. Mu tai 
Hon. Daniel Mutai : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I want to thank you this afternoon and also thank 
God for giving us opportunity to be here. Indeed we have just come from a very cruel battle, 
wanasemanga  politics is a dirty game. Therefore we saw it live because we have got more than 10 
aspirants with different kinds of pains painting you from the head to the toe. Therefore when you 
go to the field and it becomes so difficult but anyway the outcome is oka y that we still have hope. 
Somebody has witnessed here kwamba  there are people who came from Independent so trust God 
he can give us a way because now at least some sanity has come to the ground. Therefore indeed 
we had good time serving the people and bei ng together. We still trust God that he will help us to 
come back. I want to point out that in Mosop ward in a report of statements, you are aware that we 
had requested for investigation into the subdivision of land. Our area is becoming urbanized each 
day and subdivision of land is ongoing because high prices of the trade of selling and buying. This 
subdivision is done in places where we do not have public utilities. So our main concern is that 
this subdivision should encompass public utilities like ECD, o r primary schools, dispensaries. I 
want the committee to really look into it because people will suffer because right now we have 
request for purchase of land for those utilities like water tanks or bore holes because people 
subdivide just completely maybe  300 acres without any regard for public utilities being set aside. 
So Mr. Speaker I expect that to be addr essed before the close of this A ssembly. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you Okay we may go to the next order  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honorable M embers this House stands adjourned to 2.30 pm today.  
                                           (The H ouse rose at 11.30am ) 
 
 
 
 
 