DECEMBER 15, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of  
Nakuru.    
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Thursday , 15TH December 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10: 3 5am 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
 
PAPER  
APPOITMENT COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE VETTING OF COUNTY EXECUTIVE 
COMMITTEE  MEMBERS NOMINEES  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  There is a Pape r to be laid by the leader of Majority Party.  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Alex Langat ): Thank you Honorable Speaker, I want to lay the  
Report of the Committee  on Appointment on the  Vetting for Appointment  of the County 
Executive Committee Member s Nominee to their respective County Departments . Honorable 
Speaker I wish to lay the Paper  before the House, thank you.  
                                                 (The Report was laid on the table)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you the Leader of Majority Party . Next order.   
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
HOUSE DEBATES THE APPOINTMENT COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE VETTING OF COUNTY 
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MEMBERS NOMINEES  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): We have a Motion  from the Leader of Majority Party.  
The Leader  of Majority  (Hon. Alex Langat ): Honorable Speaker , I want to move a  Motion ;- 
THAT  notwi thstanding the provisions of Standing Order 49 (Notices of Motion), this House  
resolves to debate the Report of the Committee on Appointment  on the  Vetting for Appointmen t 
of the County Executive Committee Members Nominees to the respective County Departments . 
Thank you, Honorable Speaker .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): A Member to second the Motion.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi : Thank you Honorable Speaker , I rise to second the Procedural Motion as 
presented by the Leader of Majority  on the  Report of the  Committee on Appointment  on the  
DECEMBER 15, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of  
Nakuru.    
 
 Vetting of the Members of the County Executive Committee Members Nominees to their 
respective Departments. Honorable Speaker I second.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you, the Procedural Motion is that notwi thstanding the 
provision of Standing Order 49(Notices of Motion ), this House  resolves to debate the  Report of 
the Committee on Appointment on the Vetting  for appointment of the County Executive 
Committee Members Nominees to the respective County Departments. The Motion is open for 
debate.  Honorable Karanja.  
Hon. Stanl ey Karanja: Thank  you Honorable Speaker , due to whatever the Leader of Majorit y 
has said and seconded by honorable Wanjohi who is the Minority Leader, I ask if we can put the 
question because we do concur.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Thank you Honorable Speaker, I think I also echo the sentiments  of 
Honorable Karanja  that the Motion that was moved  by the Leader of Majority  and I can see also 
the Leader of Minority  seconded the Motion , I beg that you put it into question.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): The Honorable Majority Whip.  
The Majority Whip (Hon. Hamisi Fadhili):  Thank you Honorable Speaker, I rise to support that 
you put this Motion  to question and I want to tha nk my brother Honorable Karanja. You know he 
is the one who likes giving us very long lectures on speeches and cracks our ribs and I have seen 
he has shaved his hair so I see that as some wisdom being detected there. I think this time we 
support him and we  follow what he has just proposed. I ask you also to put it to question, thank 
you. 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honorable Wathiai.  
Hon. David Macharia: Asante sana Bwana Spika, nasimama kuunga mkono Mjadal a huu. 
Mimi nasema kwamba tuuulizwe ile swali h uatunaulizwangwa tumalize hii mambo haraka 
haraka hapa badala tuendelee kukaa hapa na naona kila  Mtu amekubaliana na huu Ripoti . Ni 
swali ndio tunangoja tumalize hii maneno haraka alafu twende pande ule mwingine. Asante sana 
Bwana Spika . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  I put question that , that notwithstanding the provisions of 
Standing Order49 (Notices of Motion ), this House reso lves to debate the Report  of the  
Committee on Appointment on the Vetting  for appointment of the County Executive Committee 
Members Nominees to the respective County Department.  
(Question put and agreed to)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Next order?  
MOTION  
HOUSE ADOPTS THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON APPOINTMENT ON THE VETTING 
FOR APPOINTMENT OF THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MEMBERS  
The Leader  of Majority  (Hon. Alex Langat):   Thank you, Mr. Speaker , I rise to move a Motion ;- 
DECEMBER 15, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of  
Nakuru.    
 
 THAT  pursuant to the provision of Article 179 (2) (b), of the Constitution, as I read together with 
Section 30(2) (d) of the County Government Act number 17  of 2012 , this House adopts the report 
of the Committee on Appointment on the vetting for appointment of  the County Executive 
Committee Members, wh o are  actually the nominee to their respective county department s.  
Mr. Speaker, allow me sir, to actually thank the Appointment Committee for the diligent work that 
they have done and the efforts that they have put to vetting  these individuals who will serve the 
Nakuru County in their various departments.  
The diligence that was involved, the critical analyzing of the documents right from when we looked 
at their CVs, we tried to understand their qualifications, the  various places who these members 
have actually worked before,  the types of experience, and their suitability, including critically 
looking at their ability to meet the requirements of chapter six,  and the personal integrity . 
 It was a tedious job. And I also wish to really pass my appreciation to the whole committee, 
including also the work that the Secretariat of this honorable house has done and the inputs that 
they have put.  The list of our nominees roughly, in totality the y were about 10 of them. And we 
looked at each individually.  
Mr. Speaker, in summary, I would want to just pass a bit of the recommendation, that the 
committee, during the vetting exercise, actually made some very critical observation that the 
nominee sat isfied the requirement of Chapter Six and the  leadership and integrity  Act which is a 
key issue, Mr. Speaker, when one is being appointed to any public office . 
We also found out that the nominees actually demonstrated vast knowledge and experience in their  
respective fields. I therefore, Mr. Speaker, sir, want to pass that having conducted an approval 
hearing of the nominee pursuant to Article 179, (20 ) (b) of the Constitution, Section 35 of the 
County Government Act 2012. The public appointments, that is t he County Assembly Approval 
Act of 2017.  
The Committee recommends that the county assembly of Nakuru approves the nomination of the 
following  
1. Jacqueline Mong ’ina Osoro to the position of CECM  
Health Services within the county assembly.  
2.  Stephen  Muiruri K uria to the position of CECM Trade, Culture and Tourism. Mr. Speaker  
3. John Karanja to the position of CEC M Lands Physical Planning, Housing and Urban 
Development.  
4.  Zipporah Wambui to the position of CECM Education, Youth and ICT, Mr. Speaker.  
5. Leornard Kip koech Bor to the position of CE MM Agriculture, Fisheries and Cooperatives.  
6. Roseline Wanjiru Mungai  to the position of CEC Public Service Management.  
7.  Josephine  Atieno Achieng to  the position of CECM Sports, Gender and Culture Services.  
DECEMBER 15, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of  
Nakuru.    
 
 8.  Dr. Nelson Maara to the position of CEC M, Water Environment, Climat e Change and 
Energy.  
9.  Stephen Iribe Njogu to the position of CECM Finance and Economic Planning. And lastly, 
Mr. Speaker that this House approves  
10. Engineer Michael Kamau Karanja to the posi tion of CECM Infrastructure.  
I thank you so much, and I thank the whole House for their approval in advance. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. I request the House to approve.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): … Thank you. A member to second.  
Hon. Isabella Makori: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I second.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Motion is that pursuant to the provision of 
Article 179(2 (b) of the Constitution read together with Section 30(2 (d) of the County Government 
Act number 17 of 2012, this House  adopts the report of the Committee on Appointment on the 
vetting for appointment for the County Executive Committee Member nominees to the respective 
county departments. The Motion is open for debate.  
Hon. Mwathi then Hon. Karanja, in that order.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support the report of the appointment 
committee because today marks the history of this House. We have been waiting for this report 
and we know this is the right time for it. We were given the profile  of these nominees and we have 
gone through them and we can see they are equal to the task and you know, we can never do 
anything without the CECMs. I support. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Mheshimiwa. Hon. Karanja.  
Hon. Stanley Kar anja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to take this opportunity to thank the 
Appointment Committee. I know that it is not easy. When I look at the recommendation, the 
observations that the Committee did; recommendation number 5, it says that the nominee s satisfies 
the requirement of Chapter Six of the Constitution. That one alone is very important because the 
Constitution is very clear that we need somebody who passes that one, is not a thief, he is upright. 
Also, I echo the committee when they said that t he nominee s demonstrated vast knowledge and 
experience in respective areas that they were nominated in , that is now the g ist of what we came 
to do here. In all those departments and I have checked, some have worked in the Counties, some 
were Members of Par liament who had taken responsibilities of CDF; you have seen engineers. 
With that vast knowledge, the County will go far and therefore, I will not belabor on all what the 
committee has said. If you look at the members of the Appointment committee, they kno w exactly 
what we are looking for. I know Hon. Palang’a was in the other Committee in the last regime 
where the report came up and said that after re -looking at what the experience and whatever the 
members had and education qualification, they brought 4 an d the other 4 did not pass. Therefore, 
when I see Hon. Palang’a there, I know that that one has been taken care of.  
DECEMBER 15, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of  
Nakuru.    
 
 When you look at the Minority Leader who has also been a teacher for a very long time, I know 
that we are dealing with an academician; some body who knows the psychology, sociology and 
knows the knowledge of individuals. Therefore, I know this one is taken care of.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Mwangi, you want to inform the House or 
Mheshimiwa?  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Mheshimiwa.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Do you want to be informed, Mheshimiwa?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Mr. Speaker sir, let him inform  me so that I know the paradigms of his 
information. Let us give him that chance. Maybe he will not get another one.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Mwangi  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir , by the fact that I am standing to inform him, 
I am not saying that he does not know but I was informing you that members here want to 
contribute and you are taking a lot of time. I  was informing you that you be brief so that we can 
also make and give our contributions. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Karanja, kindly do your final submissions.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir , when you are dealing with a virgin land, you 
take a lot of time to do it … therefore he is coming as secondary. I was trying to analyze so that the 
Members know the competence of the Committee that was set aside to come up with this report. 
If you look at the doctor who is also the Majority Leader, he cannot mislead us because he looks 
humble and he is a man of God so things are okay. As I summarize, when you are also there Mr. 
Speaker na pia wewe ni mzee wa kanisa. Mambo haiwezi haribika . Therefore,  this report is as 
good as the Members who came with the report. That is what I was saying and so your information 
is well taken care of. I was just trying to open your mental vacuum so that I fill it with something 
that people came up with. I concur that this report is as good as this House. Thankyou.  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Thank you. Hon . Hassan Duale. We want to believe that you 
have taken an affidavit with the effect that Duale is your name.  
Hon. Hassan Abdi : Yes. Mr. Speaker I am in the process  of taking an affidavit. I also want to 
take this opportunity to support this Motion and I believe that also the Appointment Committee 
have done a tremendous job. I w ant to tell this House that as Nakuru county government and as 
the citizens of this county  we have wasted like three months and there is nothing that has been 
happening in this county. January our students are going back to school and now we are going to 
have bursaries for them. They will be going back to school very happy. I want to mention 
something about the submission of memorandum, this is the report I am reading from the 
Appointment Committee. All the Petitions that were sent to this House support these nominees 
that means the residents of Nakuru were tired and wanted services. I have not seen any Petition 
DECEMBER 15, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of  
Nakuru.    
 
 that someone was rejecting or not supporting the nominees. It is time that Wanjiku get what they 
deserve by receiving the services they have always needed. Last but not least, is about the 
address that the Governor gave some time back, th ese are the people who are going to invest on 
the manifesto of the Governor and we also wish to support them and support this report from the 
Appointment Committee. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): thank you. Hon. John Maritim from Kamara.  
Hon. John Maritim : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the Motion on the report of the 
Appointment Committee and also support  the report from this Committee. I have seen they are 
six Members and they are very intelligent. From Hon. Palang’a  going to Hon Ro se, they are the 
senior most people and I believe they did a good job. You the Speaker being the chairman, God 
descended to Nakuru County. People out there have been complaining a lot about what is 
happening but now that we are through with the vetting,  I believe that all the functions of this 
county will go on well. We are now on the right track.  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Hon Hellen Chemutai. Hon Peter Njoroge has really been on 
his microphone. The last person will be Hon Rose Chepkoech then later the  mover will respond. 
In that order.  
Hon. Hellen Chemutai : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for this opportunity. I rise to support the 
report  of the Appointment Committee and also thank the Committee for the good job that they 
have done. I can say that freedom is  coming and it is coming today to this House. Since we were 
elected in our wards,  we have stayed for so long without working for our electorates and we 
believe that we are going to be working everyday beginning today. I know that you have also 
done a good job as the chairman of the Committee and we know that this House is happy and 
appreciative for the good work. Thank you so much.  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Hon Peter Njoroge  
Hon. Peter Maina : Mr. Speaker, in my view I think as a county we are behind the schedule 
because like many other counties we needed to have the CEC Ms in place like three months ago. 
You realize that a lot of time has been wasted. Our electorate are beginning to get agitated 
because some of the roads are not in good shape.   
Some of our dispensaries do not have drugs and off course January is around the corner and many 
students will be wanting to have bursaries so that their fees are waived and without the CECM s in 
place, I think this county is in trouble. Therefore Mr. Speak er, I would want to express without 
much ado, Mr. Speaker, I support  
(Laughter ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon Peter Njoroge. The Hon. Rose and then we move 
to the Leader of Majority party  
DECEMBER 15, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of  
Nakuru.    
 
 Hon. Rose Chepkoech : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I th ink our county will be coordinating well 
and implementing of the projects will be ongoing. Another thing is about budget and issues to do 
with planning. It will be easy because the CECM will be around. Thank you  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, t he Hon. Leader of Majority Party  
The Leader  of Majority  (Hon. Alex Lang’at): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, going by the debate 
and reading the mood of the House, allow me to thank this House in advance for positively 
accepting this particular report and I wou ld want it to go on  record that we as a County Assembly 
of Nakuru, we are law abiding Assembly. My colleague has just alluded that we are actually behind 
schedule and time. Mr. Speaker,  we know it was not because of our own making but because some 
of our colleagues and friends who had actually dragged this House to the  courts. It actually took 
time, Courts made their r ulings, and as you are aware, when the ruling came back to us, allow m e 
sir, to also thank her Excellency the Governor because when she was asked to reconstitute her list, 
she went head and reconstituted a new list that she brought back to this House. We thank her for 
also being law abiding and we also take this opportunity to thank also the petitioners because as 
you realize today, the Committee on Appointment has sat in a very open environment, they have 
also been able to scrutinize the list in a very open environment without the petitioners again taking 
us to court , this o ne, Mr. Speaker, is a clear show that while they are outside there, they also 
appreciate and reciprocate and accept the kind of list that has been  brought  and the wisdom and 
various considerations which according to them was missing earlier. This list as c onstituted of 
each and every sub county being given a CEC M without duplication Mr. Speaker sir. So in the 
wisdom of Her Excellency the Governor and also in the wisdom of the committee; having looked 
at what has happened, the Wanjiku  who sent us to represen t them in this House even as we pass 
the list, are going to receive value because every part of the Nakuru County has been taken care of 
by this list other than the qualifications, the knowledge, experiences and the act that they have 
been able to meet the  Chapter six of the constitution . Therefore,  allow me at this juncture to thank 
this Honorable House and once more request them to be able to pass these names ; so that this 
Kenyans who equally qualify because indeed we did not look at it in terms of tribes  but we want 
service delivery. That they may go and deliver the services to the wananchi regardless of the tribes 
and regardless of where they are coming from that they may also be given an opportunity to go 
and serve in their various dockets. Mr. Speaker,  I request this House that they may be able to adopt 
this list once again.  
(Applause ) 
Thank you so much Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you I now propose question  
(Question proposed that pursuant to the provisions of Article 179 (2) (b) of the Constitution , as 
read together with Section  30 (2) (d) of the County Government Act N o. 17 of 2012, this House 
DECEMBER 15, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of  
Nakuru.    
 
 adopts the rep ort of the C ommittee on Appointment on the vetting for appointment of the County 
Executive Committee Members nominees to t he respective county departments ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(Applause ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Thank you , Honorable  Members this House adjourns up to  14th February 2023 at 9.30am  
(The House rose at 11.00am ) 
 
 
 