COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 15TH March 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 15:40 PM 
[Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
COUNTY ASSEMBLIES FORUM (CAF) LEADERSHIP  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Hono urable Members today we are having visitors in our  House . 
We are hosting the County Assemblies Forum (CAF) Leadership, they came to visit us as one of 
the Stakeholders.  
PAPER  
COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF NAKURU COUNT Y MEDIUM TERM DEBTS STATEMENTS,  
2022/2024 TO 2025/2026  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Paper  to be laid by the honorable Keziah Okumu on 
behalf of the leader of the Majority Party Honorable Alex Langat.  
Hon. Keziah Okumu: Sorry honorable Speaker, the Leader  of Majority Party is in the House.  
The Majority Leader (Hon. Alex Lang ’at): Thank you Honorable Speaker, with me here is the 
County Government  of Nakuru County Medium Term Debts Statements . This is for the period 
2022/2024 to 2025/2026. I wish to lay the same before the floor of the House.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you  the Leader of the Majority Party , next order.  
STATEMENT  
NJORO SEWERAGE TREATMENT PLANT.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Statement to be sought by honorable John Macharia 
Gachiri from Rhonda Ward. 
Hon. John Gachiri: Thank you Hono urable Speaker, Pursuant  to Standing Order 47(2) (c) I rise 
to request for a Statement  from the  Chairperson of the Committe e on Environment, Energy, Water 
and Natural Resources concerning the management of NAWASCO  Njoro . Sewerage Treatment 
Plant. One of the Nakuru  Water and Sewerage Company Plant  which is Njoro Sewerage Treatment 
Plant is located in Rhonda Ward . In the  past years there have been complains by the surrounding 
Community  regarding the management of the Plant .  
To be specific, the residents have complained of imme rgence of  corrosive chemicals  that have 
severely affected the roofing materials of almost all th e household s within the vicinity. Hono urable 
Speaker , Sewerage Treatment and management is crucial to the surrounding community  and the 
environment  in general. As we may all be aware if not well taken care of the chemicals  and other 
harmful substance produced can turn catastrophic  to the community  around the Plant . I therefore 
request the Chairperso n for the Committe e on Environment, Energy, Water and Natural Resources 
to respond to the following - 
1. Whether the Department of Environment , Energy, Water and Natural Resources is aware 
of the adverse effects of the  chemicals emanating from the Plant to the surrounding 
environment  
2. Whether there has been any  Study carried out to ascertain and the negative effect of the 
Sewerage Plant to the surrounding environment  including health risks  
3. Steps taken to reduce or minimize the effect of the Chemicals  emanating from the sewerage 
Treatment to the surrounding environment.  
Hono urable Speaker, I am so grateful  and thank for the time.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you the honorable Membe r for Rhonda Ward. The 
request for the  Statement is well received and it is committed to the Committee on 
Environment, Energy , Water and Natural Resources. The Chairperson  to take note and report 
back to this  House after 21 days. Next order.   
 
MOTION.  
COUNTY FISCAL STRATEGY PAPER (CFSP) 2023.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Before we proceed with to the Motion, the Pape r that was 
laid by the Leader of Majority Party , the County Government of Nakuru County Medium Term 
Debts Statements . This is for the period 2022/2024 to 2025/2026 is committed t o the 
Committee  on Budget  and Appropriation s. We procced with the Motion  by Honorable Alex 
Mbugua, the Chairperson of the  Committee on Budget and Appropriation s. 
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Honorable Speaker , I have a  Motion on the County Fiscal 
Strategy Paper  CFSP 2023. This Pape r is prepared  pursuant to Section 17 of the Public Finance 
Management Act 2012 (PFM) and the County Government Regulations 2015 . It is the 10 th 
County Fiscal Strategy Pape r to be prepared under Devolved System of Governance and the 
first to be prepared under the new County Administration . Honorable Speaker, the County 
Fiscal Strategy Paper 2023 sets out the Fiscal Strategy and Policy initiatives  of the current 
Government for the mid term period a s espoused in its Development Agenda as contained  in 
the soon to be finali sed Third County Integrated  Development Plan (CIDP)  2023/2027. The 
County Fiscal Strategy Paper 2023 is prepared against a backdrop of global slow down 
characterized by the ongoing R ussia /Ukraine Conflict , Global Inflation and effects of post  
Covid and Climate Change related to Supply Chain Distributions. In view of the above, the 
Administration  is cogni sant that the Fiscal  outlook is faced by a number of things related to 
performance of the Global  and Domestic Economy Budget Execution Risk , dwindling fiscal 
space due creation of new entities and potential impacts of the unfavorable  weather that poses 
risk to Food Security .  
In this regard, the  County has identified appropriate mitigation measures to counter the Internal 
Institutional Risks among others that includes reforms that will ensure improvement in the 
Budget  absorption  by addressing the Budget Cycle implementation ch allenges in the Bill of 
Quantitie s preparations  phase and Procurement. Resolutions of Pending Bills and Human 
Resources, institute revenue value chain and enhancement strategies, improving efficiency and 
expenditure control measures during the period.  
Hono rable Speaker , to address the Development  objectives and deliver the expectations of the 
Nakuru residents, the administration has identified five Policy  Initiatives  for the next Mid Term 
Fiscal Strateg y period which are also aligned to the Third County Int egrated Development Plan 
2023/2027. These includes  
1. Leveraging on growth in Productive Sectors  
2. Promotion of access to quality and affordable Healthcare Services  
3. Operationali sation and expansion  of County Fiscal and Social Structures  
4. Creating an enabling environment for Socio -Economic recovery and Private Sector 
Growth  
5. Enhancing Governance and Accountability  through County Public Service Reforms  
Honorable Speaker , the County Government purposes to maintain a balanced budget with 
expend iture equaling the Revenue Projections . The projected Expenditure  will thus total Kshs 
18.174 billion , the Expenditure will comprise of Kshs 12.91 billion which is 67.63% for the 
Recurrent Expenditure and Kshs 5.883 billion which is 32% for Development Exp enditure . The 
Development Expenditure will include Kshs 1.65 billion which is 47% of the Ward Development 
Kitty as pursuant to Nakuru County Revenue Allocation Act 2028 and the legal compliance of 
2023 County Fiscal Strategy Paper. County Fiscal Strategy P aper was submitted in accordance the 
Public Finance Management Act Section 117 on the 28th February , 2023 to adhere to the County 
Treasury guidelines. Further, the County Fiscal Strategy Paper 2023 was subjected to Public 
Participation from the 30th January to 3 rd February 2023 at the Agriculture Training Cent re ATC  
in Soilo as requirement by law that the  County take into views among others in preparing the 
CFSP. You will notice that as we proceed recent economic dev elopment have been catered for 
from page 11 all the way to page 38 where I want to move with Members concerning Departmental 
Ceilings .   
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Muraya  
Hon. Joseph Muraya: [ On a Point of Order]. According to our Standing Order 209 (3) , (4) and 
(5) which says that – upon being laid before the Assembly  the County Fiscal Strategy Paper shall 
be deemed to have been committed to each Departmental Committee or Sectorial without question 
put, for each such Committee to deliberate upon according to their respective mandate and make 
recommendations to the  Budget and Appropriation s Committee. In part 4 it reads, in considering 
the County Fiscal Strategy Paper the Budget and Appropriation s Committee….  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Order ! The Honorable Chairperson you may resume your seat.   
Hon. Joseph Muraya: Part four reads in considering the County Fiscal  Strategy Paper , the Budget 
and Appropriation s Committee shall consult each Departmental Committee and table a Report 
containing its recommendation on the Statements to the Assembly  for consideration. In part 5 it 
reads, the Report prepared by the Budge t and Appropriation s Committee Pursuant to Paragraph 4, 
shall include a schedul e of ceilings of resources recommended for the County Government 
Entities, Departments  and Assembly . Now my question is to the Chairperson  for the  Committee 
on Budget and Appropriation s or I will be guided by you honorable Speaker whether th is County 
Fiscal Strategy Paper was committed  to all the Departmental Committees  for consideration and 
recommendation.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Order Members ! The Hono urable Member for Viwandani Ward 
who is Hono urable Mwangi, whenever the Fiscal Strateg y Paper is tabled before this House , as 
you have read it is considered that it has been committed to all the Sectorial Committees. I 
remember that day I directed that all the Chairpersons of Sectorial Committees to take note, 
organi se their Committees  to meet with the Committee  on Budget and Appropriation s so that they 
can bring the Report to the  House . It was the work of the Chairperson s from Various Sectorial 
Committees to engage with the  Committee on Budget so that they can bring Reports t o this House . 
On that I can confirm that we directed as such and the Chairperson  on Budget  can continue with 
the Report.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Honorable Speaker , I will not be bedeviled  on that, I will go to 
the Sector Ceilings . Pursuant to Section 2 6 (6) of the Public Finance Management Act 2012 , 
County Government Regulations 2015 and Section 129 (2) ( b) of the Public Finance Management 
Act 2012, I recommend that the following be the Budget Ceilings binding in their preparations of 
the Financial Year 2023/2024 Budget as shown in the next Annexure 1 of this Report .  
I will start with the first Department which is Agriculture, Livestock Development, Fisheries and 
Veterinary Services , the Committee  proposes a Sub-Sector Ceiling  be of  Kshs 964,287,910 
comprising of Kshs 362,963, 105 for compensation to Employees and Kshs. 143,710,894 for use 
of Goods  and Services  and Kshs. 456.6 million for development. This allocation  is 5.30% of the 
Total Budget. On the Department of Housing, Urban Development and Physical Planning  the 
Committee  proposes that the Sub-Sector Ceiling be Kshs. 577,769,374 comprising of Kshs. 
96,560,546 for compensation to employees and Kshs. 77,379,898 for use of Good  and Service s 
and Kshs. 403.8 million for development. This allocation  is 3.18% of the Total Budget . Included 
in these ceilings is money for operationali sation of Molo  and Gilgil Municipalities. In Education 
Department , the Committee proposes a Sub-Sector Ceiling of Kshs. 1.13 billion comprising of 
Kshs. 512, 925,062 for compensation to Employees  and Kshs. 441.1 million for use of good and 
services and Kshs. 182.0 for Development. These allocation…  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): What is it Honorable Kajwang?  
Hon. Peter Kajwang:  The Chairman is addressing the House and his Hansard Microphone is off.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): The Sergeant at Arms to confirm whether  Microphone is off or 
on. 
Hon. Alex Mbugua: I am asking for the amplification of sound because I think too….. thank you, 
Hono urable Speaker. We stated that in the Department of Education  this was 6.2% of the total 
budget. In that Hono urable Speaker…  
AGNES  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : …is Kshs. 165 million translating to Kshs. 3,000,000 per Ward. These W ard 
bursaries will go a long way in assisting our needy students . Kshs. 65 million for rolling out School 
Feeding Programme and Kshs. 122 million for Vocational T raining Centres around the County.  
 
YOUTH, CULTURE, GENDER, SPORTS AND SOCIAL SERVICES  
Honourable Speaker, the Committee proposes that this sub  sector ceiling  be Kshs. 374,097,097 
comprising of Kshs.113, 740,713 for compensation to employees, Kshs.  161,533,277 for use of 
goods and services and 98,823,107 for development. This allocation is 2.06 percent of the total 
budget.  
Included in these ceilings Honorable Speaker, is Kshs. 27.5 million disability fund and Kshs. 27.5 
million for sports. Infrastructure  
Honorable Speaker, the Committee proposes to that this sub  sector ceiling be Kshs. 824 .99    
comprising of Kshs.126.9  for compensation to employees, Kshs.  22 9,937,964 for use of goods 
and services  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): is it in terms of millions?  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: yes, it is in terms of millions. As I proceed, and 468,0for development. This 
allocation is 4.54 percent of the total budget.  
 
WATER, ENV IRONMENT, ENERGY, CLIMATE CHANGE AND NATURAL RESOURCES  
Honorable Speaker, the Committee proposes that this sector ceiling be Kshs. 635.3comprising of 
Kshs. 230.2for compensation to employees, Kshs.  99,4 for use of goods and services and 305.6for 
developme nt. This allocation is 3.50 percent of the total budget.  
TRADE, INDUSTRIALIZATION, COOPERATIVES AND TOURISM  
Honorable Speaker, the Committee proposes to that this sector ceiling be Kshs. 411,503,737 
comprising of Kshs. 71.2 for compensation to employees, K shs. 137.9for use of goods and services 
and 202.2  for development. This allocation is 2.26 percent of the total budget.  
Included in these ceilings Honorable Speaker, is Kshs. 50 million for the County enterprise and 
cooperative revolving fund to support sm all and medium sized enterprises and the Kshs. 100 
million for aggregated industrial parks programme to promote County development along value 
addition and innovation.  
 
 
 
 
HEALTH SERVICES  
Hono urable Speaker, the Committee proposes to that this sector ceiling be Kshs. 6.8b comprising 
of Kshs. 4 .07b for comp ensation to employees, Kshs.  1. 7b for use of goods and services and 971m 
for development. This allocation is 37.63 percent of the total budget.  
Included in compensation of employees Honourable  Speaker is an amount of Kshs. 155,118,336 
for phased confirmation of Health Worker s on contract starting with the group engaged in 2016 
(156 Health Workers) upon the expiry of their contracts.  
OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR AND DEPUTY GOVERNOR  
Honorable Speaker, the Committee proposes to that this sub -sector ceiling be K shs 472,098,010 
which comprises of K shs 94.9mfor compensation of employees, K shs 276.7m for use of goods 
and services and K shs 100.4m for Development Expenditure. This allocation  is 2.6 percent of the 
total budget.  
COUNTY TREASURY  
Honorable Speaker, the C ommittee proposes to that this sub -sector ceiling be Kshs. 3,471,523,455 
comprising of Kshs. 539.3m for compensation to employees, Kshs.  540.4m for use of goods and 
services and 2.3b for development. This allocation is 37.8 percent of the total budget.  
Honorable Speaker, included in the County Treasury development is the Ward Resource envelope 
of Kshs. 1,650,000,000, Debt resolution of Kshs. 350 million and mortgage amounting to K shs. 
130 million among other secto rs priorities.  
PUBLIC SERVICE, TRAINING AND DEVOLUTION  
Hono urable Speaker, the Committee proposes to that this sub  sector ceiling be Kshs. 893,283,608 
which comprises of K shs 531.0m for compensation of employees, K shs 299.8m for use of goods 
and services and K shs 65.3m  for Development Expenditure. This allocation is 4.93 percent of the 
total budget  
Honourable Speaker, included in these ceilings is the Medical and General Insurance provision of 
Kshs. 194 million  
COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD  
Honorable Speaker, the Committee proposes to that this sub  sector ceiling be Kshs. 82.4m which 
comprises of K shs 30.3m for compensation of employees, K shs 45.0 for use of goods and servic es 
and K shs 7.0m for Development Expenditure. This allocation is 0.43 percent of the total budget  
NAKURU CITY  
Honorable Speaker, the Committee proposes to that this sub  sector ceiling be Kshs.109.5m which 
comprises of K shs 13.5m for compensation of employe es, K shs 40.9 for use of goods and services 
and K shs 55.0 for Development Expenditure. This allocation is 0.60 percent of the total budget . 
 
NAIVASHA MUNICIPALITY  
Honorable Speaker, the Committee proposes to that this sub  sector ceiling be Kshs. 96,3m whic h 
comprises of K shs 10.3m for compensation of employees, K shs 35.9m for use of goods and 
services and K shs 50.0 for D evelopment Expenditure. This allocation is 0.53 percent of the total 
budget  
OFFICE OF THE COUNTY ATTORNEY  
Honourable Speaker, the Committee proposes to that this sub  sector ceiling be Kshs. 77.6m which 
comprises of K shs 18.3m for compensation of employees, K shs 53.3m for use of goods and 
services and K shs 6.0 for Development Expenditure. This allocation is 0.43 pe rcent of the total 
budget.  
COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
Hono urable Speaker, the County Assembly have complied with the recurrent ceiling while waiting 
for the determination by the Senate.  
The Committee proposes to that this sub  sector ceiling be Kshs.1.2b which compris es of K shs 
437.9m for compensation of employees, K shs 618.3m for use of goods and services and K shs 
120m for Development Expenditure. This allocation is 6.64 percent of the total budget.  
Honourable Speaker, included in these ceilings is the staff mortgage amounting to Kshs. 80 
million.  
 RECOMMENDATIONS  
Hono urable Speaker, the Committee makes the following further recommendations  
i. The County to fast -track reforms that will ensure improvement in the budget absorption 
by addressing the budget cycle implementati on challenges in the BQs preparation 
phase, procurement, pending bills resolution and Human Resource.  
 
ii. The County to institute Revenue Value Chain enhancement strategies. Taking cogni sance 
of the strained fiscal space.  
 
iii. The County has one - Level Five  facilit y, 15 Level  Four  facilities, 43 Level  Three  facilities, 
141 Level  Two facilities and 289 Level  One facilities. The County Government does not plan to 
construct new Health Facilities as the data from the Health Departm ent shows that the County has 
reached the target of having a 5 -kilomet re radius distance from one Healthcare facility to another 
except for Rongai and Kuresoi North that do not have Level Four  facilities.  
With that I will ask Members to move  to annexure 4  budget ceilings Fi nancial Year 2023/24 W ard 
Allocations and ask Members that is what will be submitted for public participation. Thank you 
Mr. Speaker. I wish to ask honorable Ngware the Deputy Speaker to second the Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  The Honorable Deputy Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I rise to 
second the  Motion. And Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to thank the Members of that 
Committee, the Budget Committee for the  good work that we have been doing for this County for 
their input and also the input of a very able Chairman. And on this note Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
second the Report.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you. The Motion is that this House adopt the Report of 
the Committee on Budget and Appropriation s on the County Fiscal Strategy Paper 2023. The 
Motion is open for debate. The Honourable Member from Elb urgon. 
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am  privileged to be here in this Ho use for 
the second time. And I am happy Mr. Speaker because we have had one of the progressed Fiscal 
Strategy Paper that has been brought to this House. Mr. Speaker, it has considered all the issues 
that were raised by diff erent Departments . Mr. Speaker before you gave your ruling, I want to say 
that once the Paper was committee  including the Executive Departments, they called the 
Committ ees to explain to them and to inform them what they want to do . Mr. Speaker, I am happy 
because I have seen that the Health Department has been given the lion's shar e of which Mr. 
Speaker, I can continue to plead and say it is not enough . Mr. Speaker, I however on the way 
because I know we are going to enhance our systems of collections of re venue , Mr. Speaker, and 
I do believe  that whatever we have been given rather the Department has been given is going to 
give the best platform for making sure that in the future, there will be much to be collected in that 
Department Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speake r however, there are critical parts of this Fiscal Strategy Paper that need to be critically 
analy sed because it negates from the principles of democracy, Mr. Speaker. And that is why Mr. 
Speaker, I go to an annexure  four;  whatever has been provided there for our Wards to me, I would 
say it is taking us back Mr. Speaker, some miles behind . Mr. Speaker, if you look at per capita 
what those people we represent are going to get vis  a vis what we have been given Mr. Speaker, I 
would say there is an error somewhere . And Mr. Speaker, I wish to request that this House be 
considerate when we will be passing th ese ceilings  so that this money that has been allocated to 
various Wards, inclu ding the highly populated Wards they can be given a prope r hearing, so that 
Mr. Speaker we can  progress. m 
Mr. Speaker,  I want to move you to Order 56 (1) on amendment to Motion ; unless otherwise 
provided in the Standing Orders any amendment to a Motion whi ch a Member wishes to propose 
in accordance with these Standing Orders may be moved and if necessary, seconded at any time, 
after the question upon the Motion has been proposed. And before it has been put Mr. Speaker, I 
want to request you Mr. Speaker i f you look for instance some Wards, especially where we come 
from, we  are under  the processes and principles that have been guiding the philosophies of 
democracy in the Country.  
Mr. Speaker what we were saying is an issue of one man , one shilling. Other peop le came up with 
other philosophies of Kazi ni kazi , pesa mfukoni , but if we go as per what has been provided here 
that one will not be achieved. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I want to request the House that rather 
than using these sensors that are being pro vided here, that to my assumption, it has some errors. 
Mr. Speaker, we still abide by the senses of towline. Mr. Speaker, that mea ns the status quo should 
remain, we proceed because next year  we are going to have boundary reviews, Mr. Speaker and 
the popul ation is going to be matched according to their Wards. And because I know Mr. Speaker 
that actually the Wards are going to get the proportionate share  that be fits their Wards that is going 
to be healthy.  
Mr. Speaker, we cannot continue by appropriating fu nds to go to the lands. Mr. Speaker, we are 
not looking at the size of the lands. Mr. Speaker, we look at the size of population. Decision s in 
this County Mr. Speaker, are made based on individuals. That is why it is not the size the square 
kilometres that goes to vote Mr. Speaker, it is individuals in this Country Mr. Speaker . Therefore, 
Mr. Speaker, I request and I humb ly request, and I beseech this House to be considerate ; some of 
us who represent some Wards that have sl ums, women and men usually come to our office to look 
for bursaries  and with what we have been given here today Mr. Speaker , I can assure you, the 
individuals and members of public fr om Elburgon will not be able to get budget enhancement with 
this kind of allocation . Mr. Speaker , I request and I humbly request the House to abide by the 
principles of democracy and to give those Wards that have highest number of individuals their 
proport ionate share of the number . Mr. Speaker, I beg to submit to the House and to request the 
House to be considered . Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  The Hono urable Member from Elb urgon you have raised a very 
significant matter. And you r eferred us to that annexure. And it is the law. Of course, in Nakuru 
County, we have an Act that governs how monies for development is divided amongst the Wards 
and so unless until that law is amended, we are not able to effect that through maybe an amendm ent 
or some sort of in this House. It is a law ; it is an Act. So maybe what needs to be done is to look 
to the parameters because for the population, the law is 30% for areas square kilomet rers; in area 
it is 10% that is considered  
ERICK  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): … so unless now there is an amendment to that Act, then the 
allocation stands as indicated in that Fiscal Strategy Paper. That does not mean that at any one 
given time, any Hon. Me mber, including Honorable from Elburgon can pick an amendment to that 
law so that in the subsequent Fiscal Strategy Paper, the ceilings are going to be done as the law 
then would have been changed. That was a view from what the Hon. Member ….  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Point of Information Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Yes.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Mr. Speaker sir, I am cognisant of the Bill and the Act on what it 
prescribes but the estimated population of some of the Wards are not what gazzeted w as. The 
pointing case is one Ward that is called Kihingo Ward. The Ward is said to have 25,000 residents. 
Currently, what has been provided here is 16,000. If you are bound by that, then it means that the 
Bill, people of Kihingo will be affected to tremend ously by such allocation.  
Secondly, on the issue of square kilometre and that is why I said on the issue of lands. My Ward 
does not equate to what has been provided here and therefore, if you look at the Kenya Gazette 
and you look at the size of our area and the estimates of the square kilometers that has been 
provided, it also brings shortfalls and that is why I am informing the House that when we will be 
making this decision and also being considerate of our Act, I would wish that we be given a room 
as far as these ceilings per Ward are concerned so that at the end of the day, the per capita will be 
at least equivalent to the expectations of each and every citizen in the Republic and also in Nakuru 
County.  
Therefore, it is just to inform the House and al so you as the Chair to look at it in a nutshell and to 
see whether what was gazzeted by KNBS and what we have here is in tandem. If it will be in 
tandem, then it means in future, we will be requested to amend before they pass the budget. We 
also risk a cha nce of some of the Members here going to court to block this allocation which does 
not sound well. Because this is an Honorable House, we can deliberate it today and to quash that 
KNBS census results that were provided. Thank you for allowing me to inform the House.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. This is the way would be. The allocation for the 
Ward, that ceiling, would remain as it is for the purposes of this Report. However, the Chairman 
Budget and the Committee will be tasked to look at the issues that have been raised by the 
Honorable Member from Elburgon so that when the Budget estimates would be coming, you will 
be able to be in agreement from the various Wards so that no Ward would be disadvantaged. Hon. 
Chair for Budget, take note.  
Hon.  Member for Malewa West.  
Hon. Francis Kuria: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Give credit where it is due. I would start by 
commending the good job that the Budget Committee has done. If you look at annex 4 on Ward 
Allocation, I was trying to figure out; some of  the Wards have very large areas and when IEBC 
were doing the boundary, some locations are very far from one area to the other. For example, if 
you look at Eburu Mbaruk, the allocation there and the square kilometer, you will find that it has 
621 square ki lometers and practically, you know Eburu Mbaruk borders Elementaita on the other 
end and you find maybe to tarmac or to murram one road from the main road to one location is 
about 15 or 20 kilometers.  
With this allocation, the Ward Fund, either IEBC to re view boundaries again so that this allocation 
can change, basing that if the Honorable Member of that area is going to do a road work with this 
allocation, maybe he will do 2 or 3 kilometers because there are other developments that are needed 
to be delive red on that area. I therefore request that still, unless IEBC does the review of 
boundaries, they need to be considered in a special way noting that those Wards are in town, get 
other sources of funds maybe they are under Municipality. We have the World Ba nk, we have the 
City Board so those who are in rural areas have no one to consider them. I therefore request the 
next allocation we be considered, I personally being I am a victim. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member for Keringet.  
Hon. William Mutai: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I first of all want to congratulate the Committee 
for this integrated and very comprehensive Report that they have given. I want to appreciate a lot 
of good things that I have read. However, there are just a few is sues that I feel like they should be 
pointed out.  
Checking on the annexed Report on the Ward Allocation, I think though we are not going to change 
the Act, there are certain regulations that are supposed to be put into this Act, possibly if not now, 
in the near future. Look at this issue of area square kilometer. According to me, there are quite a 
lot of things that are supposed to be looked into. For instance, the terrain of the land. The area can 
be small but if the terrain of the land is rugged, coming to the construction of infrastructure and 
particularly things to do with the bridges, it can really be very expensive.  
Looking at the ecological factors like the climate, it can also be a very great challenge because 
there are certain areas that receive ab undant rainfall for about 8 to 10 months in a year whereas in 
some other areas, they might be receiving rains for very few months. This brings a lot of challenges 
when it comes to the construction of the infrastructure because rainy areas mean that the roa ds 
must be made in a more expertize manner than in areas that does not receive a lot of rainfall.  
Notwithstanding to mention about the nature of the soil. In certain areas like the areas that are 
affected by volcanic activities, you find that these areas have sandy soils and making a road in a 
sandy soil area is very cheap as compared to areas that hav e sloppy soils. I am specifically quoting 
an area where I come from; Keringet region, which is in Mau Region. When you even put a lot 
murram, within six months the soils will have swallowed the murram. That is something 
miraculous but it happens.  
I want t o categorically put it straight that there has to be a lot of considerations when doing these 
allocations. More so, I want to mention about the population. Somebody has mentioned here that 
the data on population has a lot of errors. Where I come from, the registered number of voters 
stands at 22,000. I can see the total population here is 47,000. Simple science tells you that there 
is something wrong here because, less the number of children and those who have not attained 18 
years is not included.  
I beg t hat the Committee can review and update its data on this so that we can have a better 
allocation. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Mutai. Hon. Wathiai.  
Hon. David Wathiai: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Our proposal was to increase the  Ward Fund 
from Kshs. 500,000 to Kshs. 1 million per Ward but according to the ceiling, I have seen that it 
has not been factored. This is not going to go down well with Members because it is going to 
hinder our ability to spread our wings and nurture more  talents in our Wards. I beg to support the 
Motion but with an amendment. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):Hon. Member from Olkaria.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. From the onset, I wish to appreciate the 
presence of our guests wh o happen to be amongst them, my age sets in terms of time, Hon. 
Manyasa and Hon. Mwaura welcome to this Assembly. We are privileged to have you here.  
I wish to give my input as follows. I will start by appreciating you for your experience and guiding 
this House accordingly. I just want to draw my concern on page 12, where the Chair and the 
Committee have noted some concerns in regards to our own source of revenue collection. It talks 
of the amount having been collected at Kshs. 1 billion against the annual revised budget of Kshs. 
3.5 billion, representing 28% performance in terms of underperforming. Just on the same again, I 
am looking at page 41 where it is talking about the allocation of Kshs. 3.4 billion under the same 
Vote Head in terms of the Treasury. I am comparing the allocation of amount of money to the 
Department and the amount of revenues that are being collected. I think collectively, there is need 
that there must be some commensurate in terms of the amount of money allocated to such a 
Department and amount of money we are as well collecting from the same. Going forward, I think 
we need to beef up the own source revenue which may result into enhancing our allocations per 
Ward.  
I wish now to mention and appreciate the Committee, especially on the i ssue of Climate Change 
and Environment. We are all aware that we formed these committees in our respective Wards on 
climate change mitigation. I am alive to the fact that indeed, we all need to collectively work on 
enhancing and making sure that we are env ironmental friendly. This amount of money will go a 
long way in ensuring that we operationalise those committees and we are alive to the fact of climate 
change effects.  
Sometimes back, I heard one of the Leader mention that it is the rain that brings tree s and there 
was an argument of whether the trees will result in bringing the rains. It is upon us to ponder in as 
to whether we need to have trees, we need to have environmental impact issues into consideration. 
I wish to appreciate that if this is going t o be undertaken the way I have estimated, that would be 
good.  
I wish to appreciate the issue of the bursary enhancement. This is an area that we need to be 
progressive. We have had so many students that are staying within our homesteads without going 
to school. However minimal it is, in my view, I wish to appreciate that the enhancement of Kshs. 
1 million will at least assist and cater for some few students within our areas.  
However, and through the Chair, this should not be the limit. We really need to f ocus on this 
because to me, I still believe that this is a very minimal figure to that effect. However, if we have 
been given that, I think it is good to appreciate.  
The Feeding Program. I think it is good and this is in line in the Governor’s manifesto. S he has 
talked about this several times when we have had meetings. We will now narrow down and I wish 
to call upon the Chair for Education to get to understand where these schools are as we get into 
the criteria of the schools identification. This is a good  program that will assist us.  
As I conclude; on the issue of sports, back to the Chair of Sports again; we have had some 
challenges in terms of operationalising this kind of funds. Last year and the other year, we have 
been here struggling and trying to un derstand why is it that these figures are being reduced from 
time to time. I want to challenge the Chair as well to ensure that this money is operationalised and 
we have these games within our areas without any changes whatsoever.  
I will not sit down with out mentioning matters in regards to the Lands Department which I Chair. 
There has been allocation of Kshs. 20 million to operationalise the Municipalities of Molo and 
Gilgil. I said here and I want to reiterate that when we upgrade these Centers to Munici palities, it 
does not matter whether we come from those areas or not. This will definitely attract some funding 
from the World Bank which will again go a long way in doing some development. I wish to 
applaud you on this and I wish to support that Members l ook at this as a progressive County Fiscal 
Strategy Paper for us growing forward. Now that we are here for the first year, we will progress 
on this. I beg to support.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): I am going to give the order in which Members are going to 
contribute. We will start with the Member for Waseges and then Member for Dundori and lastly, 
the Member for Viwandani.  
Hon. Elijah Murage: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I will support the Report with amendment but 
it is a sad day for Waseges because we h ave lost Kshs. 3 million. Our population was 33,904 and 
our current population is 30,758. With Kshs. 3 million per year, that I can do a borehole and with 
the 5 years, I would have done like 15 boreholes. We are going to review this and I will be one of 
the Members who will go to court because loosing Kshs. 3 million …  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member, are you threatening the House or what?  
Hon. Elijah Murage: Mr. Speaker sir, I will be talking with my Lawyers and we are going to 
proceed to the court because loosing Kshs. 3 million will affect me politically and it will affect my 
people of Waseges. I am their voice and I have to speak so I support this Report with amendments.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Member for Waseges.  
Hon. Member for Dundori.  
Hon. Gathuita Mwangi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I wish to welcome our visitors. I want to 
support the Motion but with some amendments or rectification …  
SHARON  
Hon. James Gathuita : First I want to support the Motion based on the issue of education because 
the bursary has been allocated quite some good amount although it is not enough. Based on the 
last bursary we allocated, I tried to subdivide the amount of bursary that was given which was 2 
million against the population that I had of around a thousand people. In real sense, every student 
was getting around Kshs 256. That was very disappointing but with this kind of improvement then 
we are moving ahead.  
The second thing is about environment. As the Vice Chair of Environment and Water, we have 
gone with the Budget Committee for the review and there is a need for an increase in this amount 
of Kshs 635 million because it is not enough. We need to Mr. Speaker through the Chair of Budg et 
and its Committee to have a review. Climate is an issue that affects a lot of people. Wangari Mathai 
said that if we destroy nature then nature will destroy us. It is time for us to reverse that thing and 
take care of nature.  
As a Committee for Environ ment and Water, we want to have that budget reviewed. I tried to look 
at the issue on Ward Development Fund and there was a point of clarity because there is a County 
Treasury Development Ward Resource Environment and I want to say that I did not understan d 
about that environment and envelope. Is the Kshs 1.6 billion coming to my Ward? I rest my case.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to first of all congratulate my friend and 
my neighbor for presenting this County Fiscal Estimate in a good way. Thank you and 
congratulation. Secondly, the reason why I stood here and demanded to know whether this Repor t 
was committed is because of some lamentation from the Departmental Committee Chairs. Hon 
Palang’a, Hon Njuguna from Elburgon are all crying and if this Report was….  
(Laughter ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The two Honorable Members are you crying? Orde r! Order! 
Hon. Muraya we need to confirm if they are crying or not. The two Members to resume their 
seats.  
Hon .Joseph Muraya : I will clarify Mr. Speaker. I am not saying that they are crying per se. They 
are not crying physically but they are crying and l amenting emotionally. You Members are crying. 
The reason why I am saying they are crying is because of their complaints. Mr. Speaker have you 
given Hon Njuguna a chance to inform me. Maybe I do not want to be informed…  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Point of information Mr. Speaker.  
The speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Order! Order! Have your seat Hon. Mwangi. Hon Njuguna, Hon 
Mwangi is asking if the information is to him or to the House.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : It is to the House Mr. Speaker. Hon Mwangi was addressing  the House 
and not addressing me but since I have been mentioned I want to make it clear that the decisions 
of the Committee usually come back to this House for amendments and for further scrutiny. 
Members of the Committee can vote at the Committee level b ut they doing so on behalf of the 
House and that is why we have come to appeal to the House. It does not mean that we are crying. 
We are moving the appeal to the House because it is the biggest House and the supreme part of 
this County. The Member’s train is not in his rail and Hon. Palang’a will confirm this. What we 
are moving is amendments because of the people. If it were for my case I would not have a problem 
with that but because the Committee passed whatever it passed, the House still has the power t o 
overturn everything.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Palang’a do you have any more information apart from 
what the Hon. from Elburgon has said.  
Hon. Peter Palanga : Of course yes Mr. Speaker if I am allowed. Just to inform Members as well, 
the reaso n why this House is called a House of rules is because we follow the rules and procedures 
laid down. When I was coming to this Assembly I met one Honorable from Viwandani Muraya 
trying to indicate that he is going to overturn everything here and the conver sation was..  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Palang’a is that information helpful to this House?  Order! 
Hon Muraya and Hon. Palanga order! We are not able to prove whatever discussion that went on 
in your side meeting. So maybe Hon Palang’a the infor mation that you need to give to this House 
is what is happening now, not what happened elsewhere.  
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: Mr. Speaker I want to rest my case by saying , when the Hon. Member and 
we appreciate that we are in different levels of understanding a nd different schools of thought for 
example and that is why I started by saying that you will guide this Assembly. The County Fiscal 
Strategy Paper was committed to the Assembly and the Hon. Member we want to give you a leaf 
for not understanding this. You  even did not know that that particular Paper was touching on that 
the insinuation that we are crying, we were complaining because some of us are very informed and 
well experienced and we knew very well that we are going to meet here to discuss this. The P aper 
we are discussing about was well committed to the relevant Committees and if you fail as the Chair 
by then then you will have to wait for the next CSFP.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am here to be guided and informed by my senior 
but al so as the Chair of one of the Departmental Committees he ought to have called his Members 
and commit the Paper to them so I still stand and remain that the Paper was not committed to the 
Committee and there is no Paper…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Orde r! Hon Muraya I gave you some time and airtime so that 
you are able to debate not whether it was committed or not.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to appreciate the Committee because if you 
remember last time the Committee on Health had c ome to Naivasha when we had an issue of 
maternal death. When I look at the allocation in the Health sector, I am happy that now the facility 
will be equipped and it will no longer be a structure as it is now. Again when I look at the Sports 
and Culture and  I hope the Chair Sports is ready to give us a Report after the day elapses. I think 
we are going to improve in nurturing talent and having our youths enjoy the allocations we are 
giving. I beg to sit down and support the Motion.  
(Laughter ) 
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. I know this matter is a CFSP and it only happens 
once. It has a lot of interest but we also are cognisant of the fact we have other businesses of this 
day so Members this is the order that we are going to take. The Hon. Kamau from Kihingo, Hon 
Robert and then Hon. Mercy Kilel. In that order.  
Hon. Simon Karanja : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. First of all I want to take this opportunity to 
thank the Committee Budget and Appropriations for the good work they have done under the very  
able leadership of Hon. Alex. From the onset I am here to support but with amendments to what 
has been presented by the Chair Budget and Appropriations. My amendment comes in because as 
Hon. Njuguna said Kihingo is one of those Wards that have been affect ed. Looking at the figure 
that we have here as per the census 2009, the total population in Kihingo was 26,000 plus. The 
same body that carried out the census in 2009 was the same body that carried out the census in 
2019 and having a variance of 10,000 peo ple in 10 years then I wonder as a Representative of 
those people in Kihingo where these 10,000 people are. Where have they gone because even if we 
are putting together those people who have died and those who have migrated from Kihingo in 10 
years then it  means in every year the people moving out of Kihingo either through various factors 
is 1000 and that cannot be.  
Therefore I am saying and humbly requesting the Committee for Budget that when they are 
revising this kindly consider this because the populat ion is one of the parameters that is being used 
to share these resources. If we are talking about negative variance of 10, 000, then I do not know 
what even the people of Kihingo will say. They are saying here that we have a total population of 
16,000 that  is not true because the number of registered voters in Kihingo are 60,000 then it means 
that nobody else is in Kihingo apart from the registered voters only. Sorry that is not the case. The 
number of candidates in standard six and eight are over 2,000 wit hout mentioning from nursery all 
the way to the other classes.  
Therefore this figure as per the Kenya Bureau of Statistics is not right and the reason as to why I 
am appealing to the Budget Committee because they are using population as one of the paramet ers, 
I humbly request that Budget Committee should consider Kihingo because this is the actual 
population and I am saying so because we do not have any Departmental Committee in this House 
that has the mandate to go do the statistics here. Even if it means  I go help the Kenya Bureau of 
Statistics to go carry out their mandate then I am ready to do it. We are losing over Kshs 4 million 
every year which translates to over Kshs 16 million. As the Hon. Member from Waseges said that 
Kshs 16 million is not a smal l amount of money. I am humbly requesting Budget and 
Appropriations Committee to consider this. Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
The speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Robert.  
Hon. Robert Rutto:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I rise to congratulate my friend the Chair Budget 
and the Committee at large for the good work they have done. Despite the fact that this Report 
might have some errors but they have really tried to give us a good Report. In the Depa rtment of 
Education there is a Kshs 1 million bursary in each Ward that in itself will in turn give good results 
in our Wards.  
Nakuru City on page 41, has been allocated Kshs 09, 508,504 million and for development they 
have given Kshs 55 million as I had  said earlier, I come from Kapkures Ward and it is within the 
Nakuru City and ironically it is the underdeveloped Ward in the County Government. I therefore 
congratulate them for giving the Nakuru City the Kshs 55 million so that Kapkures can definitely 
benefit from the amount and be developed as well as the other Wards. I rest my case, thank you 
and I support the Motion.  
Hon. Mercy Kilel : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the Motion and to congratulate the 
Chair for Budget. First of all, I wish that  we adopt the ladies first phrase in this House so that we 
can sought of have the ladies contribute before the men because they tend to overshadow us in this 
House. If it is about the race of standing up some of us cannot outshine some of the Members in 
this House.  
Anyway, as Members speak about issues of development on roads and agriculture it is good but I 
want to specifically touch on the issue of gender based violence centres. This is a very good thing 
and I congratulate you Mr. Chair for that because the statistics show that many women and young 
girls are suffering. I come from a village where the school dropout rate is high, gender based 
violence is high and many girls are dropping out of school and women are suffering in the villages. 
If we continue to adopt this then I know that women are going to be protected because this is a 
social matter that should be looked into. I am a Member of the Implementation Committee so I 
will make sure that I look into it and that it is implemented. Congratulations to the Budget 
Committee and this is a very good Motion. Thank you.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Deputy Majority Leader and then the Hon. 
Member from Kiptagich  
Hon. Rose Gathoni : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Langu ni kushukuru Kamati iliy o fanya hii kazi 
kwa juhudi na ni kazi bora ambao tumeiona. Ikizingatiwa kwamba nilikuwa muhula uliopita katika 
hii bunge kama nominated MCA na sasa niko kama  elected MCA  ninashukuru. Kwa wageni mimi 
naitwa Rose Gathoni Njoroge MCA kutoka Gilgil. Kwa sabab u ya mda na kwa sababu ya 
wenzangu  ningependa kuongelea hii S ekta ya Youth Culture Sports and Social Services. Hii Sekta 
huwa ni kama inahujumiwa kiasi kwa sababu iko na taasisi tano ndani yake. Tuko na  Youth, 
Culture, Gender, Sports and Social Services. Hizi ambazo tunapewa katika hii Sekta ni kidogo 
sana kulingana na ile kazi inastahili kufanya. Pia hapa ndio tunawahusika wengi sana ambao 
wanasaidika katika hii Kaunti yetu. Tuna vijana wengi sana na miradi yao ni mingi.   Culture vile 
vile imebaki nyuma . Gender vile vile imebaki nyuma na Michezo sana sana michezo ya walemavu.  
Hapa ningeomba tu wakati mwingine ujao hii Sekta ikuwe ndio inafuata  Health maana nimeona  
Health wameangaliwa na macho ya huruma. Kwa hivyo langu tu ni kusisistiza ya kwambva hii  
Depar tment iangaliwe vyema na tutaweza kupeleka Kaunti yetu mbele. Asante sana.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech : Mr. Speaker sir, let me commend the Department of Budget for the good 
work they have done although we have some issues about climate that requires 2% of Development 
Fund so that our Partners can…  
 
     
 
SIELE  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech : …kindly give us support. Another thing is about ceiling in Environment 
Energy and Water. It is too low yet we had to employ more casuals in our Wards. Another thing 
is about the w ater springs, boreholes in our Wards. They need to be equipped and more funds are 
needed. About Agriculture there is National and Rural Inclusive Projects (NA RIP). We are 
requesting that they extend to other Wards because we have some Wards that have been supported. 
Another thing is about Agriculture Sector Development and Support Projects (ASDSP) and the 
last one is Kenya Livestock Commercial Project that is (KELCOP) that has a lot of funds. So, we 
are requesting the Partners to move to other Wards. Thank you, Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you the Hon. Rose from Kiptagich. We are going to go 
through this order so now before we finish this Business the Hon. Doreen Totona, the Hon. Kamau 
then we hear from the Hon. Chairperson to repl y. 
Hon. Doreen Korir : Thank you so much Mr. Speaker. First of all I want to welcome our visitors 
led by the Chair CAF who is the Speaker of Elgeyo Marakwet, karibuni sana . Hon. Cate they did  
not inform us early we would have prepared a cup of tea being the Chair of the Welfare Committee 
so karibuni sana . Mr. Speaker sir I want also to commend the work of the Committee on Budget 
led by our able Chair Hon. Alex Mbugua. They did a very good job bea ring in mind they work for 
long hours and also did a lot of sacrifice . Thank you so much. I want to commend on the issue of 
Health Service s; being a Member of the Health Committee, I reali se that even during the speech 
of the Governor, she mentioned so muc h on the issue of the confirmation of the Health Workers 
especially the workers who have been working on contract basis for so long. You reali se that most 
of those workers since 2016 have been mostly working on contract basis and it is so much 
demoralis ing working and renewing contract each and every moment , after every 5 years you 
renew the contract.  
Most of the Health Workers and also the nurses have been complaining so mu ch about this issue 
and I realised  that the Governor coming so well to confirm thes e workers ; to put them on the 
budget and I also want to thank the Health Committee for that consideration. I think we are one  
County that has  been training most  Health Workers , giving them training and thereafter equip them 
with the skills and after that t hey are get confirmed in other Counties. So you reali se it is important 
you confirm our Health Workers so that they can be motivated and work towards delivering their 
services well.  
On the issue of recommendation made by the Committee on the bulletin no.3 , Mr. Speaker, there 
is this issue of the Counties as one Level 5 and 15 level 5 and 15 level 4 but you reali se that in 
Rongai Constituency and Kuresoi North Sub-County, they do not have Level 4 Facilities ; so we 
really beg that during the next Financial Year , as the Committee on Budget we consider those two 
Constituencies because you reali se that the Wanjiku  or the people in those Constituencies  walk  
long distance s to get the services from Health Facilitie s. I therefore beg to support this Report and 
thank you so much.  
Hon. Eliud Kamau:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I would also liker to commend the Committee 
on Budget for the good work. I think this Fiscal Strategy Paper has touched on most areas and 
when you  look at Lands and Urban Development where I am the Vice Chair, we see we have a 
problem of land across our County. Mr. Speaker, I think also we have been given ceilings which I 
think is good but not enough. We have seen that we have two Municipalities , Gilgil and Molo 
would be operationali sed so that they can give space for other upcoming Municipalities. I would 
also like to go to annexures 4 where we now have the equitable share for Ward Development. If 
you look at the formula that is use d, sometimes we see Wards vary from each other and if you look 
at why and according to my projections, some Wards’ population do vary . We have some Members 
from the urban areas and the population is enor mous  and change at any given time.  
Also, if you look  in terms of acreage, we must look if this formula must be included. We just talk 
about population ; we want to know what that Ward contributes to our revenue because if we just 
talk about population, for instance I come from an area where in terms of acrea ge it is a big one. 
We want to look at how productive is that area because if you look at my budget, almost 80 percent 
of it goes to roads and most of them are used by lorries that come to collect sand, and even when 
you look at the revenue, it is being di stributed equally in all Wards. So in future there are things 
that need to be considered and so I rest my case. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Hon. Chairperson Budget respond  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Thank you Mr. Speaker a nd the Hon. House; I must appreciate the current 
debate on the floor of this House and I think this is the way to go where democrats engage purely 
on ideas. On the formula Members have really gone on annexure 4 of this topic. On my table there 
is a formula  that we are devising as a Committee on the Nakuru County Revenue Allocation Bill 
2018. I know all these issues that ha ve been raised by the Hon. Members here, will be addressed - 
be it on topography, the geographical area positioning, the poverty index, th e area acreage, the 
population and all the other matters that this Member have talked about.  
Mr. Speaker, a Member has talked about the low budget ceiling on the Youth and Sports ; we must 
appreciate that World Bank has really partnered with us in the impr ovement of our facilities for 
instance we have the Afraha Stadium upgrade by the World Bank at the moment. We have other 
Entities that are also engaging and we must appreciate the fact that we are short of revenue within 
this County. So, we must all move t ogether in proper generation of this revenue.  
I must appreciate that various Committees are within this House appeared before us starting with 
County Treasury where some of the Members from the Finance Department have come in and 
presented their case very  well to us and their issues were put under consideration. The Board within 
this Assembly also appeared before the Committee and the Committee on Health was one of the 
first to welcome us and they even took us for a treat whereby they explained very well t he diverse 
things that are affecting this Committee. The Trade Committee was also present . In summary, all 
the Stakeholders explained to us on the matter of Sports . I think Policy Paper will be laid down on 
how the Sports Fund is managed so that we see that there is improvement also with increment of 
the revenue sources.  
On the part of population as quoted by Majority of Members, the Committee was guided by special 
issue, the Gazelle N otice no.8024 Nairobi, the 9th August 2 021 it was published in the entire Nation 
under population with this budgetary ceiling setting. I wish to thank your Office, the Office of the 
Clerk, the County Treasury and also the Members of the Budget Committee because they took 
long hours, they delibe rated and have given what Nakuru deserves. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank the Hon. Chair I want to propose a question to the Motion  
(Question proposed that this House adopts the Report of the Committee on Budget and 
Appropria tions Committee on the County Fiscal Strategy Paper 2023 ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
MOTION  
HOUSE RESOLVES ADJOURNED DAY 15TH MARCH 2023 AND TO RESUME ITS NORMAL 
BUSINESS ON 4TH APRIL 2023 . 
There is a motion by the Leader of Majority Party  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang’at):  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I arise to move this 
Motion that Pursuant to the provision of Standing Orders 31(4) this House resolves adjourned day 
15th March 2023 an d to resume its normal Business on 4th April 2023. Mr. Speaker sir, I beg to 
move and request Hon. Rose to second. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,  
Hon. Rose Njoroge : Mr. Speaker sir, I do second  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Motion is open for deba te; the Hon. Rose I have 
been told that maybe for this sitting the arrangement that ladies first.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for recogni sing the ladies in the House. We 
were wondering whether we are not visible  but I can see things are in order. For the Motion, I 
support because we are Representatives of the people and we need to go back, check and supervise 
roads, water projects that are t here and stay with the people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker sir,  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Hon. Palang’a  
Hon. Peter Palang’a:  Mr. Speaker my contribution is very simple, this is in line with our calendar 
that we resolved here. So, is would b e awkward of us coming back to discuss what we resolved 
here. Therefore my urge and request, to save us time, put it to question we move forward.  
(Applause ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. John Maritim  
Hon. John Maritim : I arise to support the Motion on the recess. I believe Mr. Speaker sir, this is 
a planting season and I know that most of us are farmers and we are grateful for according us this 
opportunity. Thank you, Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Th e Hon Muraya and then the Hon Kuirui  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya : I think Mr. Speaker even if I stand here, I would just ask you Hon. 
Members you are all here as we set our calendar. So, Hon. Speaker I would say put this Motion to 
question to save us time.  
The Spea ker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon . Kirui  
Hon. Bernard Kirui : Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I just want to support this recess Motion that i t is 
good for us because it is going to give us enough time to meet our electorates and tack le some 
issues from ou r Wards and therefore I support. Thank you . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Members I want to put it to question to the Motion  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
Before we adjourn, Hon. Members, I told you earlier that the CAF Leadership is vis iting with us 
and we have our representatives to the Counties Assembly’s Forum the Hon. Kajwang and the 
Hon. Catherine who form part of the Governing Council are in the House this evening. We are 
happy to have the hon. Chege Mwaura  kindly if you could be upstanding, who is the Secretary 
General for CAF and also the Member Ngara Ward, County Assembly  of Nairobi County. Thank 
you, the Hon. SG we are also glad to have the Hon.  Okwiri who is the Organizing Secretary, she 
is a Member of County Assembly for Siaya then we have the Chairperson the Hon. Sabuley who 
is the Speaker Elgeyo -Marakwet. Welcome and thank you.  
So immediately after the sitting Hon . Members, we request that the other Hon. Members will find 
place that we are going to h ave and I request Members that you remain seated ; we are going to 
have an open forum and finally that all the matters that this House wanted to raise with CAF we 
can find opportunity to talk to them.  
(Applause ) 
However, because the CAF Leadership is exten ded, maybe we could have their Leadership 
upstanding for the purposes that those that those I did not mention, it is good that I recogni se you 
not only in the Kamukunji but also in the Plenary. If maybe the others that I mention ed, you could 
us the mic , mention your name and the position you hold.  
Hon. Zakaya Manyasa :  Thank you Hon Speaker, Hon Members of the House, I am from Vihiga 
County Assembly and a Member of CAF.  
(Applause ) 
Hon. Edna Obara :  Thank you Hon. Speaker I am from Nyamira County, Member of CAF  
Hon. Dr Isaiya Mureithi Mbogo : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I am a Member of County Assembly 
in Kirinyaga County in a Ward called Kabare . I am MCA form Martha Karua’s Ward and I am 
also the Chairp erson Committee Health and a Member of GC in CAF.  
Hon. Abdulhakim Shehe:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I represent Persons with Disabilities of Tana 
River County Assembly and I am glad to be here. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, Hon. Members  who are visiting, with us. Hon 
Members this House stands adjourned from today 15th March 2023 to 4th April 2023 at 9.30 am.  
The House rose at 5.35pm  
 
 
 
 