NOVEMBER 29, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
  
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday 29th November 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 2:50 pm 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
RESOLUTION TO PETITION THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY ON COUNTY WARD S  
EQUITABLE DEVELOPMENT FUND 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The County Assemblies Forum (CAF ) is the coordinating  body 
of the 47 County A ssemblies in Kenya . The primary m andate of CAF is to promote networking 
and synergy amongst the 47 Assemblies, coordinate Intergovernmental Relations and enhance 
good  practice in Legislative Development.  
Reference is made to the Executiv e Committee meeting held on 25th November 2022  in Mombasa 
County,  where it was resolved  that CAF petitions the National Assembly for the County Wards 
Equitable Development Fund t o be incorporated in the proposed Constitutional  Amendment Bill 
before the National Assembly by Hon. Stephen Mule, MP  and Hon. Gichimu Githinji , MP, 
alongside other proposed funds namely ; the National Government Constituency Development 
Fund (NG -CDF), National Government Affirmative Action Fund (NGAAF), Senate Oversight 
Fund and the Economic Stimulus and Empowerment Fund either prior to the publi cation of the  
said Bill or before it is referred to the Senate in accordance with the  rules of Parliament.  
In this  regard, the Forum requests each County Assembly to move a M otion to pass the Petition 
(herein annexed ) as it is( without amendments) for uniformity purposes, as a show of solidarity 
and return a copy of the signed Petition and a copy of the Hansard Report back to the Forum by 
3rd December 2022 for submission to Parliament.  
Thank you for your continued supp ort and cooperation.  
Signed by the Secretary General, CAF , Hon. Chege Mwaura . 
NOTICE  OF MOTION  
NOVEMBER 29, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 THIS COUNTY ASSEMBLY RESOLVES TO PETITION THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY INDIVIDUALLY OR 
COLLECTIVELY AS COUNTY ASSEMBLIES FORUM  (CAF)  ON COUNTY EQUITABLE DEVELOPMENT 
FUND  
The Speaker (Hon.  Joel Karuri): There is a Notice of Motion from the Member  of the County 
Assembly Forum Hon Peter Mwamba Kajwang.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang : Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. I beg to give Notice of the following Motion – 
THAT,  pursuant to Articles 37 and 119 of the Constitution of Kenya, this County Assembly 
resolves to petition the National Assembly individually and collectively as the County Assemblies 
Forum (CAF) vide the annexed draft  petition  for the National Assembly to i ntervene and ensure: 
- 
1. THAT , the County  Wards Equitable  Development  Fund be incorporated in the 
proposed Constitutional Amendment Bill before the National Assembly by the Hon. 
Stephen Mule, MP  and the Hon. Gichimu Githinji, MP  alongside other proposed funds 
namely the National Government Constituencies Development Fund (NGCDF) , 
National Government Affirmative Action Fund (NGAF), the Senate Oversight Fund 
and the Economic Stimulus and Empowerment Fund either prior to the publication of 
the said Bill or before it is referred to the Senate in accordance with rules of procedure 
of Parliament.  
2. THAT,  the proposed Constitutional Amendment Bill  in amending Article 204 of the 
Constitution should provide for the following with respect to County Wards Equitable 
Development Fund: - 
(i) That each County Government shall allocate funds comprising  of a certain 
percentage of the respective total County’s Annual Budget Estimates or as shall 
be advised by the Commission on Revenue Allocation (CRA) during the 
enactment of the County Allocation of Revenue Act to cater for County Wards 
Equitable Developm ent Fund;  
(ii) That all monies allocated to County Wards Equitable Development Fund shall 
be considered as funds allocated to Wards pursuant to Article 206 (2) (c) to be 
administered in accordance with the provisions of an Act of Parliament; and  
(iii)That Parliament  shall enact a legislation to provide for the administration of the 
County Wards Equitable Development Fund.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Thank you . Hon. Kajwang before you proceed to take your seat, 
as the Chairperson  of CAF in our A ssembly maybe you may need two minutes to give a little bit 
of what the M otion or the P etition seeks to achieve.  
Hon Peter Kajwang : Mr. Speaker  I want to recogni se the presence of Madam Catherine who is 
also my partner. As we are all aware that CAF is the Body that is agitating for the welfare of all 
NOVEMBER 29, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 the Assemblies nationally and that Members are elected or appointed to represent their various 
Assemblies  in this great F orum. I want to say that I am honored for having be en appointed to  
represent  the interest s of Nakuru County Assembly in this great Forum.  
One of the things that this Forum is working on is the one that has now come before the flo or of 
the House which is about Ward Development Fund. Members we are not coming from a point of 
zero as Nakuru Coun ty had the Ward Development Fund  enacted in our County. Members of CAF 
thought that we need to approach  it whole somely in the entire Country so  as it stands right now,  
the money that is brought to the Counties as you know 30% is meant for Development and 70% is 
meant for Recurrent Expenditures.  
Of the 30% that is meant for development as  it sta nds in our law today in Nakuru C ounty 45% is 
always directly to the Wards fo r development in the Ward , then 55% is left for the Governor to 
deve lop his own pilot projects . Now we are saying that we want a lot to be entrenched so that we 
get this percentage to the expected funds that every County is expecting to receive from the 
National Government so we are not talking about the audited funds , but we are talking about what 
we expect as Nakuru , a certain percentage of that money should go to the Wards. That is how it is 
and I think we have had a lot  of conversation s in regards to th is issue and we have gotten to a point 
where we feel that we need to work together with all other County Assemblies so that we can 
present our Petitions to the National Assembly in regards to our demands.  
Another thing that CAF is working on closely is to  make County Assemblies have financial 
autonomy. You know that Hon orable Members right now if we need to get cash that runs this 
Assembly, our projects and our programs we make requisitions through the Department of Finance 
and through the CO of Finance. We felt that this is not being fair to the Assemblies and as 
replicated from the National Parliame nt, they have autonomy of funds. Funds are dispatched 
directly from the Controller of Budget to the National Assembly. They do not need to go through 
other Departments. I can inform  that this conversati on is at a very advanced stage and very soon 
our praye rs are going to be answered . Another thing that we are expecting from CAF that has 
formed part of the agendas is also the issue of pension. Pension is given to other legislations be it 
Parliament, Senate but it has never come to the County Assemblies so we  are pursuing that we get 
allocations for pensions. Members Can I get an applause for that.  
                                                        (Applause)  
We are also following up on the issue of Car Grant that is a reimbursement. We reali sed that we 
got a circular that this money is meant to be taxed whereas in other Legislative Arms this money 
is not taxed so the question was what changes when it comes to the County Assemblies? The 
Executive membership  of CAF ha s already informed the relev ant bodies  like the KRA, the CRA 
and this talk  is already gaining momentum and we are very sure that our argument will hold the 
day.  
NOVEMBER 29, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 We are also looking at the salaries. It is regrettable that our salaries we re revised to our 
disadvantage which for us we thought that it is not legal for them to revise someone’s salary to 
their disadvantage. We said that this need s to be r einstated and that salaries be pegged on certain 
parameters. In Parliament and also in the Senate their salaries are p egged as a percentage of the 
President’s salary. The Members of Parliament earn 40% of th e President salary why can we not  
also earn 40% of the Governor’s salary. These are the conversations that we are making right now 
in CAF and I believe that it will see the light of the day.  
We are pursuing relevant Authorities so  that we bring back the issue of Plenary Allowances and I 
think we are getting very positive response from the people who are involved. The  elephant in the 
House which we are working on seriously  is to entrench this body called  CAF into the Constitution. 
Right now we are operating lik e a welfare but if we can place it in the Constitution it is  going to 
work the same way as Parliamentary Service C ommission. That means we are going to have a 
bigger voice and a better negotiation ability in all matters that we are following for the welfare of 
the Members. I have just moved a Notice of Motion and I  ask this A ssemb ly to kindly and humbly 
support it all the way until it gets to a Motion so that we join all our brothers and sisters from 
elsewhere in the County to push for this noble welfare issues. Thankyou.  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): T hank you Hon . Kajwang. Next order.  
ADJOURNMENT  
The House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 09:30  am 
(The House rose at 3:25 pm) 
 
    