FEBRUARY 23, 2022 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday, 23RD  February, 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 11.00am  
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Alfred Mutai) in the Chair].  
PRAYERS  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon. Alfred Mutai):  Clerk kindly take us through … 
                                            (Hon. Stanley Karanja stood in his place)  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Alfred Mutai): Yes, what is  it Honorable Karanja ? 
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I do stand here on Standing O rder number 2. 
Yesterday there was a communication that was made by the chair regard ing resignation and the 
interpretation of the Constitution. According to my understanding there was that Bill that was  
passed that regulate s Political Parties Act amendment Bill. I do request that before the effect of 
the communication on House through your chair to organize for a lawyer so that we can be able to 
get the interpretation of what the Constitution says and what the Political Parties Amendment Bill 
says on resignation.  
According to my l ayman understanding, is that from the time politicians start paying for 
nominations fees, and the date of nomination is quite interpreted and it is quite clear that maybe 
by 28th of February and whe n persons should have been in a political party that is on 26th March. 
According to my own interpretation, the period in between is a transfer window such that, by 26th 
you have joined a political party and by 28th you must have recognized a party on which  to run 
with. So, I am seeking a legal interpretation of the communication because as a member , I need to 
know  because to me that communication was unorthodox, it was rushed, it was for personal 
political favors other than the good of the members of this House.  
We do follow the precedence of what the Senate does and what the National Assembly does. If so, 
we ought to have seen Hon. Muturi who is also the Honorable Speaker of the National Assembly, 
also resigning. So, the chair yesterday, either for political gratification or for something else, I 
consider it unorthodox, rushed and for p olitical self -expediency. I do not want to use harsh words 
but it was not well guided.  
FEBRUARY 23, 2022 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Alfred Mutai):  Thank you Honorable Karanja. Honorable Philip, 
Mauche.  
Hon. Philip  Rotich : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I also rise he re to second my brother 
Honorable Karanja, and we need to know as to why the Speaker was rushing to communicate 
before the other 47 County Assemblies. Nobody has even mentioned such a thing, the National 
Assembly has not, the Senate too. So, what my brothe r has said we also think it was somehow 
malice or intimidation to the members of this County Assembly. So, we as Members need to get 
propre interpretation. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Alfred Mutai):  Okay, Honorable Lakeview.  
Hon. Simon Wanyoike:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I want to support my point, 
(inaudible)… Sababu sisi wote  we are in Kenya …(inaudible)… tunafuata siasa za nchi siku baada 
ya siku . Na juzi kuna  Member wa Assembly from Kiam bu who decided to resign sababu anataka 
ku vie  for MP. But after two days, Chebukati alifanya  communication very clear ya kwamba  there 
is no MCA  anastahili kuresign kwa sababu anataka kiti Fulani, uko kwa kile kiti mpaka tarehe 
tisa mwezi wa nane , so whoever advised the Speaker hatujui ni nani  or the Chair anaserve nani , 
we need him to come back atuelezee vizuri , we do not need intimidation now because we are past 
that, na wakati huu amabo tunaelekea uchaguzi  we need to be sober. As my colleague h as said we 
need a lawyer to interpret to this House what we need to do, because we cannot have Kiambu 
County doing this, Nyeri doing this and even the National Assembly and sisi hufuata chenye  
wanafanya . We have seen Speaker Justine Muturi juzi ametoka  Jubilee akaingia  DP, hatujaon a 
akiambiwa aresign, kwani  Nakuru County are we sitting in Somalia not in Kenya?  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Alfred Mutai):  thank you, honorable Kamau from Shabaab.  
Hon. Daniel Githengi: Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I think the com munication which was made 
yesterday was violating our fundamental rights, if we scrutinize Article 102 of our Constitution it 
states very well. The term of each House of parliament expires on the date of the next general 
election. I just wonder where our s peaker got this information and yet if we scrutinize Article 177 
(4) it says a county Assembly member is elected for a term of five years and It is well noted in our 
Constitution.  
 Now I just wonder why the Speaker can come in this House and tell us that we are supposed to 
resign while our time has not yet expired. It should be noted very well, when  we joined UDA  that 
was our right in the Political Parties Act, as per stated in Article 38 of our Constitution.  
Anybody has a right to join whichever party you admire to join. There is no single person who has 
that right of dictating the party we are supposed to join. I think the Speaker who communicated 
the same  is supposed to come in this House and apologize for making a statement, which is 
unworthy, a statement which at the end of the day is of total discrimination.  
FEBRUARY 23, 2022 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 I would also like to quote Article 186 which is State very well the functions of the county ass embly 
and the functions of the National Assembly are all set in the fourth schedule. And even in the 
National Assembly members are not resigning, I do not see the reason why we as MCAs should 
be requested by our Speaker to resign.  
Just to mention, the Speaker who communicated the same should know he is the moderator in this 
House and he is not supposed to pretend or behave like a judge. We should leave judges to do their 
job and we as members of the County Assembly should perform our duties. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Alfred Mutai): Thank  you Honourable  members for you r 
concerns, since what you have all raised goes along the line of the legal, I will now for record 
purposes I will task the Assembly to come up with a legal interpreter on yesterda y's 
communication. Also, I know you Hon orable  members you are also members of County 
Assemblies Forum. If you will also engage your legal team also for the interpretation of the same 
then I think you will get the best advice on the same.  
Clerk next order!  
                                                                   BILL  
      THE NAKURU COUNTY SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL NO. 1 OF 2022  
(FIRST READING ) 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Alfred Mutai): Honorable Members, I will commit this Nakuru 
County Supplementary Appropriation Bill number 1 of 2022 to the Committee on Budget and 
Appropriation.  
Hon. Joel Karuri: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. Yesterday, we did our report to  give 
the basis for the usage of monies as recorded in the report. It is always the procedure in 
commonwealth states that there must be a law to be able to make available the monies and to give 
authority in the usage of monies as it is in the report. I wan t to table the Bill; that is the Nakuru 
County Supplementary Appropriation Bill number 1 of 2022. I beg to table.   
                                                    (The Bill was laid on the table)  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
HOUSE RESOLVES TO REDUCE THE PUBLICATION PERIOD OF THE NAKURU SUPPLEMENTARY 
APPROPRIATION BILL NO. 1 OF 2022  TO ONE DAY 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Alfred Mutai): I call upon the Chair of Budget to kindly step 
forward.  
Hon. Joel Karuri: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I want to move a procedural Motion in 
regard to the Bill that I have just tabled; - 
FEBRUARY 23, 2022 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 THAT  notwithstanding the provision of standing order 119 that this House resolves to reduce the 
publication period of the Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Bill number 1 of 2 022 to 
1 day. It is clear and as the procedure of this House and this House runs on the premise of Standing 
Orders and the premise of the Constitution and the Acts and the County Government Acts. We are 
supposed to debate a Bill in 7 days but then I must be able to inform the House the reason for this 
procedural Motion were done with the report yesterday and what is remaining is for the repor t and 
the monies to start being used and being available for service delivery and implementation of 
development projects and other services. It is only this Bill. If we are going to wait up until next 
week, it would mean that we are going to spend another whole week that those 7 days would have 
been used for the accenting of this Bill by the Governor so that now we can be able to finish this 
process. The rationale for this supplementary is that the Honorable Members together with the 
people that they repres ent in this House wanted to have an opportunity to change some of the 
projects that they felt that at the time they were making the Budget, the needs and the objects have 
changed and so they wish to change some of the projects to suit their needs currently . Members of 
the public were given that opportunity together with their representatives who are the Members of 
this County Assembly and that has happened so that our people cannot be denied that right, they 
cannot be denied that opportunity because it is t heirs for the taking. The sovereignty of this nation 
belongs to the people and that is one of the reasons  that this supplementary came. The other reason 
is that there were issues surrounding the money for the roads that had been appropriated elsewhere. 
That money was needed to be reinstated in the roads department so that they can be able to 
undertake the roads and development project that they had started and others that they had mapped. 
When we come to the Department of Health, they also had issues that t hey wanted to move one 
vote or the other within their department so that now they can be able to put their needs correctly 
and so Mr. Temporary Speaker those were the reasons. So, as you can see, if we are going to be 
late, that would mean the issues of pr ocurement , the issue of getting projects done they are scant y. 
As much as we are doing these projects for posterity and for the future, we know that we are 
politicians and so if there is anything can be done between now and the time that rains comes, 
some of the roads have to be done between now and  when rains start and that would be a welcome 
move. So, this is the reason why I am moving this procedural Motion on behalf of the committee 
on Budget and Appropriation so that the members can allow that we reso lve that we debate the 
Supplementary Appropriation Bill in one day instead of doing that in seven days. Mr. Temporary  
Speaker I am going to invite Hon. Kiriethe Ndigirigi to second that we reduce the publication 
period of the Nakuru County Supplementary Ap propriation Bill No. 1 of 2022 to one day. Mr. 
Temporary  Speaker I beg to move the Motion.  
Hon. Daniel Kiriethe : Mr. Temporary  Speaker I second the Motion. As you know the 
Supplementary Budget is long overdue it was supposed to come somewhere around Decemb er and 
now we are in February. I support and second and I request your office Mr. Temporary  Speaker to 
liaise with the Governor’s office to fast Track the procurement process because it is taking so long 
for them to procure any project. You can also use your office to talk with the Governor’s office to 
FEBRUARY 23, 2022 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 come out from the centralized process of procurement and take procurement process back to the 
CO’s so that it can have all projects rolling before we go to party nominations in April. I s econd 
the Motion Mr. Temporary  Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Alfred Mutai): Thank you Hon orable  Member s. I propose the 
question  
(Question proposed that notwithstanding the provisions of the Standing Order 119 this House 
resolves to reduce the publicati on period of the Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation 
Bill No. 1 of 2022 to one day. ) 
Honorable  Members the Motion is now open for debate. Hon . Karanja from Naivasha East  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Mr. Temporary Speaker let me first of all thank the Budget  Committee 
led by Hon Karuri. We have been waiting for this budget the way the followers of Jesus waited for 
the Holly Spirit to come. We have been asking the chair what was wrong but was also not in a 
position to understand . I think the circumstances were  beyond his touch. Therefore,  when now it 
does come,  we do not want to waste time but also what Hon . Ndigirigi was asking, you know some 
of these things  is very hard. You move from what was illegal, the centralized, he is asking when it 
is too late and the  only thing that I can ask him is to persevere. He decided to hang himself let him 
die a slow death  
(Laughter ) 
So, Mr. Temporary Speaker let us go on a nd let us do this one very first unless he changes the 
government of the day. I support  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Alfred Mutai): Thank you.  
Hon. Members silence means consent.  
                                                          (Question proposed)  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Honorable Members this House stands adjourned until today 2.30 in the afternoon.  
(The House rose at 11.25am ) 
 
  
         
 
FEBRUARY 23, 2022 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
  