MARCH 23, 2022                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday  23rd March  2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3:00pm 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi):  Good afternoon Honorable Members, Wajumbe 
Hamjambo !. Honorable Members welcome to the afternoon session. Clerk next order.  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi):  Honorable Membe rs we have a Statement 
response . Hon. Njuguna Mwaura Chairperson of Committee on Health Services to issue a  
statement requested by Hon.  Daniel Kiriethe concerning the late payment of  casual  staff at 
Igwamiti  Dispensary in Wase ges Ward. Honorable Simon Wanyoike,  Member for the Health 
Committee.  
Hon. Simon Wan yoike : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, on behalf of the Chair Health 
Committee I wish to read the statement, which  was requested by Honorable Member from 
Waseges on 1st March, 2022.  
On 1st March, 2022, pursuant to the Standing Order No.47 ( 2)(c), Honorable Daniel Kiriethe 
Mwangi from Waseges Ward requested for a statement from the chairperson Committee on Health 
Services concerning the delayed payments of staff at Igwamiti  Dispensary in Was eges Ward.   
Mr. Jackson Mutai Koros of ID N O. 8070049  and Janet Kwamboka of ID NO . 13047502 are staff 
working at Igwamiti  Dispensary  in Waseges ward as support staff and the two officers have been 
contracted by the hospital board and have not been paid their dues for one year since January 2021 
to date.  
It is on this note that, Hon. Daniel Kiriethe Mwangi sought for a statement on the following issues ; 
1. Whether the County Government of Nakuru is aware of the aforementioned matter.  
2. What the County Department of Health Services is doing to make sure that the salary is 
paid and measures put in place by the Hospital Board to avert future delay.  
Upon receipt  of the requested statement,  the committee did write to the Chief Officer , Health 
Services and received the following response ;-            
MARCH 23, 2022                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 That Department is aware of the two cases from the Igwamiti  Dispensary, as well as other casual 
workers of Level  2 and Level 3 Health facilities.  
 
This has been occasioned by the fact that the Level 2 and 3 Health facilities do not collect any fee s 
and charges . The facilities depend on grants from DANIDA  and fore gone user fee  reimbursement 
by the National Government. These funds have not been disbursed this Financial Year rendering 
most facilities incapable of paying the casual w orkers . 
However, as a department we have come to c ushion them by processing their dues. The payment  
is in the internet banking  awaiting requisition of funds from the controller of Budget. This will be 
effected as soon as the funds are available. We are also looking for ways to enhance revenues in 
our facilities by sensitizing the locals and the health f acilities on ho w well they can tap into the 
other streams like Linda Mama Initiative. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi):  Thank you Honorable Wana ngo for that 
response and I hope that Honorable Kiriethe is now sorted out and will be able to respond to the 
issue  in question. Thank you so much. Clerk next order.  
Honorable Members we have the Committee  of the Whole and I would want to ask whether the 
mover is in, before we proceed. The mover of the Motion Honorable David Malel … 
                                  (Hon. David Malel not in the House)  
 with the absence of the mover we also have the sponsor of the Motion , Hon. Wilbur Amara.   
It is also important that before we proceed,  we confirm whether he is in the House … 
                                            (Hon. Wilbur Amara not in the House)  
 So therefore,  Honorable Members with the absence of the mover of the  Motion and the sponsor 
of the Motion , the Committee of the Whole House on the Nakuru County Assembly Members 
Office Bill No.7 of 2021 has been deferred to a later date. Clerk next order.  
                                                 ADJOURNMENT  
Honorable Members the House remains adjourned until Tuesday ne xt week at 9.30am.  
(The House rose at 3.10 pm) 
 
   
 
 