MARCH 22, 2022                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 22ND    March 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3:00pm  
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
COUNTY ASSEMBLY  OF NYERI STAFF VISIT 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Honorable Members, I have a Communication 
to make. We are expecting the arrival of Staff Members, Heads of Departments from the County 
Assembly of Nyeri who will be joining us shortly in the gallery.  
MOTION  
HOUSE ADOPTS THE BUDGET COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE 
 MEDIUM -TERM DEBT STRATEGY PAPER 2022  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Honorable Members we have a Motion to be 
moved  by the Honorable Joel Karuri, the Chairperson for the Committee on Budget and 
Appropriation, th at pursuant to the provisions of Section 123 of the Public Finance Management 
Act, 2012. That this House adopts the report of the Committee on Budget and Appropriation on 
the Medium -Term Debt Management Strategy Paper, 2022 laid before the table of the Ass embly 
today 22nd March 2022 during the morning sitting.  
Hon. Joel Karuri:  Thank you Honorable Temporary Speaker, I gave a Notice of Motion in the 
morning. I thank you for according me on the behalf of the Committee on Budget and 
Appropriation this time to  move the Motion ;- 
THAT  this House adopts the Report of the Committee on Budget and Appropriation on the 
Medium -Term Debt Management Strategy Paper, 2022  
From the onset, I want to thank the office of the Speaker, the office of the Clerk and Secretariat of 
the Budget and Appropriation Committee for the work well done and the hard work that they did 
to make sure that the report is ready in time. It is good to comment on the document, it highlights 
what the County owes suppliers, what the County owes to other institutions, and when we look at 
MARCH 22, 2022                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Nakuru County it has a total debts and pending bills amounting to Kshs 2 billion which is classified 
into two categories ; 
The debts inherited from the Defunct Local Authorities that were compiled by the Transition 
Authorit y and debts incurred by the County Government since inauguration that has been 
approximated to Kshs 1.8 billion. This document comes before the main Budget and the Budget 
Estimates because in it we find the Legal Framework and the authority to be able to a ppropriate 
money to pay for the suppliers and other people and institutions that the County owes money.  
It is important to, despite looking broadly the sources or classification of the debts, it is important 
to comment and indicate that the County Pending Bills and debts arise from the sources highlighted 
below. To set the record straight we are on page 8 of the document, there are liabilities that were 
inherited from the Defunct Local Authorities and this has been a major debate on whether if you 
have a de bt it becomes the first charge if you at some any point you are going to find and get 
money.  
The question has been now the County Government inherited assets from the Defunct Local 
Authorities whether the same should not apply when inheriting and taking ca re of the liabilities. It 
is general accounting principle that if you inherit assets then it goes without saying that you also 
need  to take care of the liabilities. That is how we found ourselves in taking care of liabilities that 
were inherited from the D efunct Local Authorities.  
The other sources of pending bills are from the County Departments originating mainly from 
shortfall in Budget Financing. Claims from Development Retentions Account, claims from Third 
Party Deductions. So that we put in perspecti ve, if we are talking about the Defunct Local 
Authorities, it is good to itemize on page 9 that there were Statutory Debts that were totaling to 
Kshs 295 million. There were suppliers and contracts amounting to Kshs 18.5 million. There were 
Legal Fees that were totaling to Kshs 304 million and water bills from the water utility 
(NAWASCO) that was totaling to Kshs 248 million.  
Away from that, which is totaling to Kshs  865, 973,305. After looking into that , there  are ot her 
debts that have been incurred since the inauguration of the County Government on March 2013. 
These debts have been categorized into two - there are Pending Bills that were compiled by the 
Auditor General in the External Audit Report of 2019 June that wa s covering the period 2013 - 
2019 classified as either eligible or ineligible for payment.  
It is worth noting that a Pending Bill Committee was established to oversee the process of clearing 
pending bills contained in the External Audit Report. During the p eriod under review, an amount 
of Kshs 1.3 billion has been cleared where a balance of Kshs 1.295 billion remains outstanding as 
illustrated in table 2 on page 10 of the document. Other pending bills incurred by the County 
Government of Nakuru amounted to a pproximately Kshs 787 million and out of these Kshs 450 
million is recurrent and Kshs 337 million is development -pending bills. That is well indicated and 
illustrated in the table 3 on page 10 of the document.  
MARCH 22, 2022                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 I am reading that because the Members had an o pportunity to interact with the document from 
10:00 am in the morning. As alluded earlier, there Statutory Debts and these Statutory Debts are 
debts that were owed to institutions like LAPFund, LAPTRUST, NSSF, Accucurial Deficits and 
it is worth noting tha t these money were owed by the defunct local authorities and these money 
whether LAPFUND, LAPTRUST,NSSF were owed to the workers of this great county.  
There are those who have retired and those who are still in service and it is totaling to Kshs 295, 
415, 851 those are the statutory debts. when we talk about the defunct local authorities, it is 
important to have a further breakdown on that. The monies that relate to LAPTRUST , which used 
to be a retirement entity or institution that was charged or specializ ed in keeping monies for the 
workers, the monies that were owed to this entity is as follows:  
The defunct Municipal Council of Nakuru owed these Trust Fund, Kshs 71.9 million.  
The defunct county council of Nakuru owed these lab Trust Fund Kshs 22.8 million.  
The different Municipal Council of Naivasha owed lap Trust Fund Kshs 23.4 million,  
The defunct town council of Molo which was the smallest in terms of operations and coverage, 
was Kshs 3.8 million.  
LEGAL FEES.  
The county inherited legal f ees amounting to Kenya shillings 30 ,427,453 that arose from legal 
representation to the defunct local authorities, the Committee advised to confirm whether these 
cases and these legal fees inform of the pending bills, whether they comply with advocate 
remu neration order of 2015. The reason for this, was that how do you even check whether certain 
lawyer or certain legal firm overcharged their services? And so, from 2015 there is that advocate 
renumeration order that now tries to moderate the monies that are paid to advocate firms  
In addition to inherited legal fees shown above the county since inception of devolution has been 
involved in many legal cases, leading to high legal fees demanded by advocates representing the 
county. You realize that  if there is an  entity that gets sued every day, every week, every month is 
the county. There are issue surrounding land, the issues surrounding staff grievances by the staffs, 
and all those.  
 This is one of the issues  that has generated a lot of debate. And it led to the creation of the Office 
of the County Attorney to see that the county does not depend wholly on the commercial legal 
services. The duty of th e office  of the county attorney is to see that the county is capacitated to 
represent the county in court.  
 But it is good to report here that the county attorney's office is still suffering from  low staff 
placement. And so, in the coming budget, they have requested for monies to employ legal officers 
at least 15 lawyers so that they can be able now to represen t the county fully in courts of law.  
MARCH 22, 2022                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The committee looked at the standing bills from the county departments. And it is important to 
note is earlier said, though, from recurrent and other development projects and so, we cannot look 
at all those debts withou t looking at what are the risks to the county.  
 One of the risks  is that we may find ourselves in serious damage o f the county government 
reputation, particularly in the ability to meet its financial obligation. We want to thank the county 
government of Na kuru through the Treasury and also the committee that we are walking away 
from that risk because there was a time that if you are supplier and you wanted to get financing 
and you present LPOs from the county government of Nakuru , there are chances that you  could 
not be funded , but right now, the banks in Nakuru and even nationally, they are accepting a local 
purchase orders from the county government of Nakuru, showing that we have successively moved 
from that red zone.  
 However, with a huge debt, our compe titiveness, in sourcing for supply of public goods and 
services, if we are not going to continue with this trend, at some point the suppliers may run away 
and at times, we are not able to meet service delivery to our people.  
If, for example, the contracto rs and other suppliers. They do not bid for the works that the county 
advertises. There is a strategy of dealing with the debt and pending bills.  
DEBT SERVICING  
The county government of Nakuru in the budget 2021/ 2022 has set aside Kshs 163 million for 
settling outstanding debts of which out of the  Kshs  163 million Kshs 108million was to furnish tax 
arrears owed to KRA, if there is any debt that must be prioritized, I am Not saying that other debts 
are not important. But the thing about KRA we have seen tha t they are serious at times they can 
attach your accounts to the detriment of the whole county government.  
The county should also seek to restructure the current debts and pending bills in order to spread 
the debt burden. The major area of restructuring wo uld be on substantial debt held by the county 
but for small debt prioritization will be undertaken based on the fiscal liquidity and space. County 
departments are required to prioritize program taking cognizance of resource constraints as 
recurrent bills a re arising from all the departments, will have to be cleared as a fast charge , this 
will not only prevent accumulation of pending bills over the years, but it is going to instill 
discipline to the spending habits by all departments.  
The committee observed  that in our past recommendations, we have persistently requested that 
there be a forensic audit of the pending bills, to be done to ascertain the authenticity of the same 
but the county treasur y has made no commitment to date to carry out the forensic aud it.  
If memory serves us, right. When we were  debating the budget for 2021/2022 , this issue came up 
and at that time, the Kenyan National Audit Office (KENAO) from  Auditor General were working 
on that report, the final of the final report, so that now we can be able to say with the finality, what 
MARCH 22, 2022                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 the county owes to its suppliers and other contractors. And we requested for  that when we were 
going through the debt strategy. These paper the document that was forwarded from the executive. 
But as o f now, the final report has not been forwarded to the county treasury from KENAO so it 
is still work in progress.  
RECOMMENDATIONS  
The committee has recommended  the office of the Auditor General to undertake a forensic audit 
to ensure that all the debts, p ending bills and contingent liabilities is undertaken to ascertain 
accuracy and credibility of the amount before any payment is made.  
The committee has allocated K shs 200 Million to cater for the debt resolution for the FY 2022/23.  
The committee  directs th at any appropriation forthwith to the debt resolution will be subject to the 
overdue report of the forensic audit.  
The county inherited a huge debt  from the defunct local authorities. Taking cognizant  of the 
amount involved it is recommended that the coun ty invites the former Clerks and Treasurers of 
the defunct local authorities to shed light on the nature, purpose and status of the inherited debts 
to ensure that the debts are fully authenticated  
The county to ensure that the reported debts inherited from  the defunct local authorities is 
reconciled with the liabilities and debts reports submitted to the transitional authority by the former 
clerks and Treasurers.  
The County Executive Committee Member shall prepare and submit an annual report to the County 
Assembly on public debt not later than three months after the end of each financial year pursuant 
to section 194(1) of the PFM (county government) regulation 2015.  
The county should provide details of any payment made out of the debt resolution budget. Furt her 
they should provide schedule detailing and reconciling any payment, reduction and increment of 
debts, pending bills and liabilities including contingent  liabilities.  
The county should negotiate for waiver of interest and penalties settle statutory cred itors especially 
deduction from salary, LAPFUND , LAPTRUST , NSSF.  In this regard the county can negotiate 
payment modalities favorable  to the county government.  
The county should ensure prudence in the use of resources and strengthen fiscal discipline to 
ensure that resources are used only for the allocated projects and programmes.  
There is need to strengthen the debt management office to ensure prompt report s are submitted as 
required. Further the county debt office to develop a program for pending bills a nd loan payments  
MARCH 22, 2022                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The county treasury is advised to be realistic in their local revenue forecasts as some pending bills 
emanates from shortfalls in local revenue collections that have a significant bearing on the budget 
framework.  
Comprehensive, accurate and timely information on the public debt is critical in managing 
investors’ sovereign risk and the cost of debt. The County is directed that debt information be 
published more regularly to enhance transparency and accountability in  debt management in 
accordance with the best international practice.  
I want to welcome Hon. Eddy Kiragu to second the Motion.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. Karuri, Chair for Budget. Hon. 
Eddy Kiragu, Member for Flamingo Ward .  
Hon. Eddy Kiragu:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I join you to welcome  our guests and 
to tell them they should feel at home. I also want to join our Chair of the Committee on Budget in 
supporting this document. This is a very important document. I t informs us what we should allocate 
both in the County Fiscal Strategy Paper and in Budget estimates. It is a very important document 
and it must be taken as it is. I also appreciate the management of the Assembly from the Speaker 
to the Clerk for giving us all that we needed to ensure that we are coming up with a good and a 
well appreciated document. I will take you through to page 19, specifically about recommendation 
and I will concentrate on 2 of the recommendations. Recommendation number 1 is that the  
Committee wants the office of the Auditor General to undertake forensic audit to ensure that all 
the debts, pending bills and contingent liabilities is undertaken to ascertain accuracy and credibility 
of the amount before any payment is made. For that rea son, we are requesting the County treasury 
to fast  track and speed up the process so that they can ensure that our contractors and suppliers are 
paid their dues. Paying them their dues will promote our economy and ensure good service is given 
by the suppliers. At the same time, we should not kill both local and international suppliers and 
contractors for that sake. I will also go to recommendation number 6 where The County Executive 
Committee Member shall prepare and submit an annual repo rt to the County Assembly on public 
debt not later than three months after the end of each financial year pursuant to section 194(1) of 
the PFM (county government) regulation 2015. This will enable us to undertake and be advising 
the treasury in regards to  the graph pertaining the revenue collection so that at the end of the day, 
we shall seek solution and ensure responsibility so that development can be part of this great 
County. I join you my Chair in support of this. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. Eddy for seconding the 
Motion.  
I wish to recognize the presence of heads of departments from the County Assembly of Nyeri who 
are in this House. I will mention their names so they can wave to the Honorable Members.  
1. Jane Wanjiku  
MARCH 22, 2022                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 2. Josiah Mathenge  
3. Lucy Bitutu  
4. Matthew Kibue  
5. Peter Karuru  
6. Brenda  Wanjugu  
7. Susan Sebastian  
8. Patricia Kagi  
9. Elizabeth Kogi  
10. Robert Kaniaru  
You are most welcomed to County Assembly of Nakuru.  
(Question proposed that pursuant to  the provision of standing order 123 of the public finance 
management Act 2012, the House adopts the report of the Committee on Budget and Appropriation 
on the Medium -Term Debt Strategy Paper 2022 laid before the table of the Assembly today the 
22ND  of Ma rch, 2022 during the morning sitting ) 
Motion is open for discussion.  
Hon. Isaac Wahome:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir , I wish to join you and welcome our 
visitors from Nyeri County. For clarity of this House, my mother land is Nyeri. I was born at a 
place called Wamagana in Giakanja and my MCA is called Hon. Kanyugo. He is the Majority 
Leader of these visitors that we hav e in the gallery and they also have a Member by the name 
Jambo Kenya from Iria ini. You may feel welcome. One of your own is at the ...  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi) : So, Hon. Jambo Kenya are you telling us you 
are a foreigner in Nakuru?  
Hon.  Isaac Wahome:  Hon. Temporary Speaker, I wish  to inform that all Nakuru people either 
originated from Murang’a, Nyeri, Kiambu and some we met them here so we are proud to be part 
of the Nakuru people. Even the Nyeri people are happy that they are well repr esented here. Thank 
you very much. If I may proceed, I first of all want to appreciate the able chair, Hon. Karuri, the 
entire Budget committee of which I am a member for this good document. It was well  explained  
and the Honorable  Members of course well interacted with the document like if you go to page 8, 
we have been taken through the sources of this debt s. May be to note is that some emanated from 
the defunct local authorities’  shortfalls in budget development intention. Suppli ers and contractors 
and I felt that for these suppliers and contractors, it is demotivating that since 2015 up to date, we 
have suppliers and contractors who have  not been paid. However, I appreciate the committee 
MARCH 22, 2022                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 because at the subsequent years we have al ready allocated Kshs  200 million but I want to 
emphasize that these resolution s of the committee , should at least be well implemented by the 
County Government Executive. For instance the county, page 19, on the recommendations, the 
County inherited huge de bt from the defunct local authority and taking cognizant of the amount 
involved, it is recommended that the county invites the former clerks and treasurers of the defunct 
local authorities to shed light on the nature and purpose on the status of the inheri ted debts. Noting 
that there was a pending bills committee, I would wish that we revisit the report or if the report is 
not there, then we may also go ahead and have another pending bills adhoc  committee may be to 
fast tract on this because I believe if we  invite these clerks and treasurers of the former defunct 
local authorities, we may revisit and maybe downscale the debts. You realize that we have resolved 
that we should negotiate a waiver of interest and penalties specially  to settle the statutory debts  
especially deductions from salaries, lapfund, laptrust. This should also be undertaken by the 
committee as soon as possible and of importan ce is that the Treasury should be advised to be 
realistic in their local revenue focus and pending bills which may e manate from shortfalls in local 
revenuer collection. When we mention local revenue collection, we need the assistance of other 
committees like Finance so that they ensure that whatever our local revenue we project , we should 
ensure that we implement or eve n enhance in the subsequent years. Maybe probably for the two 
or three years we were affected by challenges of Covid -19 but from now and going forward we 
should revisit the issue of shortfalls on local revenue and I believe by implementing this, th ese 
challenges of having high debts will be things of the past. Having said that, I beg to support.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. Jambo Kenya; Hon. Virginia 
member for Hells Gate Naivasha. Hon Jambo kindly put off your mic. Thank you  
Hon. Virginia Wamaitha:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker , I will start by congratulating the 
committee for the work that they have done but I would like to request that whenever we have 
such a document, or such a report, let us have the document three or fou r days earlier so that the 
rest of us members who are not members of the budget committee, we can be able to interrogate 
the document. Like now since morning, I think we cannot be able to interrogate the document 
properly and you may see that members might  not be able to contribute from an informed point. 
Now I will go no. 29 on outstanding bills from the county departments. The committee has 
indicated that the committee noted that in their submission of the 2022 medium term debts strategy 
paper, the pendin g bills schedule from respective county departments were not provided to enable 
the committee satisfies on the authenticity of the bills. I think from the departments, that is where 
we can be able to see if the contractors who have not be en paid, which deb ts had not been paid so 
with the absence of this from the relevant departments, it leaves a lot to be desired and I can join 
Jambo Kenya and support that we need an a dhoc  committee to deal on the same. Also,  we have so 
many people who are contractors and suppliers who are still owed by the county and with this 
document, I hope they will get paid and also like the issue of Nakuru Water Sewerage Company 
Limited, they are owed Kshs  247 million. This is a lot of money and this why sometimes people 
in Nakuru are complaining that they don’t have water. If the company is owed such an amount of 
MARCH 22, 2022                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 money, how do you expect the company to run. So, I hope whatever has been suggested in this 
document will be taken into accou nt and the relevant departments to work on this. They should 
work on it as soon as yesterday. Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker , I beg to support.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. Virginia for your contribution. 
Mover  
Hon. Joel Kar uri: Mr. Temporary Speaker, thank you members for your input and we are taking 
keen interest on the recommendations and suggestions. From what Hon. Wamaitha from Hells 
Gate has said, it is that we as a committee, we have recommended that the pending bills,  moving 
forward, they are not going to be paid through treasury. For example if it is a shared department 
of Health and they were able to in say in a certain financial year that they accumulated so much 
that was not in the budget, that would mean that in t he next financial year even before they plan 
for anything else whether development or recurrent, they are first of all going to pay the pending 
bills or for what they accumulated as pending bills that was not budgeted for. Because we have 
seen that there i s an appetite to continue and a very perpetual sort of appetite in coming up with 
these recurrent pending bills because when you compare the recurrent pending bills and 
development pending bills, you find that the rate at which the recurrent pending bills are 
accumulating since the inauguration of the county government, it is high. Of course,  we know that 
the 70/30 percent rule applies but it is also interesting that going to the future, the departments will 
be taking care of their pending bills and that wa y we are going to curtail these unbudgeted 
spending. I also take consideration that in future we are going to really try and circulate the report 
in good time so that members can be able to interact with the document because some of these 
documents they ar e significant in terms of financial implications in the county concerned. So, we 
have taken keen interest on that and I want to request the members that they support this document 
so that now we can proceed with remaining part of budget process. Thank you mar Temporary 
Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. Karuri, thank you Hon. 
Members for your contributions. Now Hon orable  Members I propose the question ; 
(Question proposed that pursuant to the provisions of Section 123 of the Public Finance 
Management Act 2012, this House adopts the report of the Committee on Budget and 
Appropriations on the Medium -Term Debt Management Strategy Paper 2022 laid before the 
table of the Assembly today 22nd March, 2022 during the morning sitting ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
                                                        ADJOURNMENT  
Honorable  Members the House remains adjourned until tomorrow morning 9.30 am  
(The House rose at 3.50pm ) 
MARCH 22, 2022                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
       
 
 