COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 25 th April 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03:1 0 PM 
[Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS . 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon: Elijah Murage):  There is a Motion  from Hono urable Njuguna 
Mwaura , the Chairperson  Committee on Health Services . 
Hon. George Tallam : [On a P oint of Order] . Mr. Temporary Speaker, we do not have quorum in 
the House and this Motion is very important ; we cannot discuss  a very important Motion  without 
quorum.  
QUORUM  
NO QUORUM  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon: Elijah Murage):  The Sergeant -At- Arms kindly confirm if we 
have quorum . Kindly ring the bell for ten minutes.  
(The quorum b ell was rung for 10 minutes)  
Hon. Francis Kuria: I want to pass some information that most of the Hono urable Members are 
not in the Assembly  premises, some have other Departmental Committees ’ Site Visits and that is 
why you find we have few numbers and even if the Sergeant - At - Arms  rings the bell , no Member 
will appear because technically they are not available.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon: Elijah Murage):  Resume your seat Hono urable Wathiai . There  is 
a Communication I want to make and then I will give you time. Hono urable Francis  you are out 
of order because Members  are not allowed to go for any Departmental Meetings during Plenary 
Session time. Serge nt- At- Arms ring the bell again for five minutes.  
(The quorum bell  was rung for five minutes)  
Hon. George Tallam : [On a Point of Order] . Mr. Temporary Speaker,  I think Hon ourable Francis 
Mungai was referring to the Hono urable Member s who are not here ; they are not in Departmental 
Meetings , they are outside this town.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon: Elijah Murage):  Hono urable George Tallam , you get my 
statement ; they are not supposed to be out during the Plenary Session time and that is not  
procedural and this House  is a Hous e of rules and regulations. Hono urable Wathiai.  
Hon. David Wathiai : Hono urable Temporary Speaker, I think we ha ve enough Members here 
and we can now go on  with the business of the day. Currently I think we can handle any business 
brought to the floor of the House and I beg the House to continue with its normal business.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon: Elijah Murage):  Hono urable Megek . 
Hon: Hellen Chemutai Megek: Thank you Hono urable Speaker, the Member of Malewa West 
Ward is not in decorum and he is taking the opportunity to say that Member is  not in the House . It 
is my wish that we proceed with the Motion , thank you.  
Hon. George Tallam : [On a Point of Order] . Hono urable Speaker, as I had said earlier this is a 
very important Motion  and if you look at the  Motion it is about  Healt h so if you can have  the 
Sergeant -At- Arms  count the Members  present because we are suppos ed to be over twenty -five 
Members and as it is, we do not have the numbers in the House . I think we can adjourn the Motion 
until when we shall have enough Member s in the House.  
Hon. Francis Kuria: Hono urable Speaker, I want to inform Hono urable Megek , I think  the 
Sergeant – at -Arms can confirm whether I am in decorum. I think my colleague Hono urable 
Megek is resting her eyes here. You can tell the Sergeant -At- Arms to confirm whether I am in 
decorum, thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon: Elijah Murage):  Let us not concentrate on that issue because I 
can see you are now in decorum. Hono urable Wathiai  
Hon. David Wathiai : Hono urable Temporary Speaker , I want to echo what Hono urable  Hellen  
said, t he Member  for Malewa West. The Member  is from out of town and you cannot even know 
where their Ward s are ; sometime s they confuse us. He came into the House having his neck tie 
inside his Jacket . This is a House  of rules and we cannot let this kind of behavior continue in this  
House . We pray t hat we follow the rules.  
Hon. Virginia Wamaitha: [On a Point of Information ]. Hono urable Temporary Speaker , I do not 
think that there is any Member  of this  House who is illegally here or who is not a Membe r of the 
County Assembly  and I would like Hono urable Wathiai to withdraw his remarks that Members 
who come from out of town . Is Naivasha part of Nakuru  County ? Is Lanet part of Nakuru town 
and is that particular  Member not a  Member of this Hono urable  House? Thank you Hono urable 
Temporary Speaker.  
Hon. David Wathiai : Hono urable Temporary Speaker, when I said that  there  are some Members  
who come from out of the town I meant the City Cent re which holds the Central Business District 
of Nakuru County which comprise s of Nakuru East, Nakuru West and Nakuru Town West and I 
meant the  Members that come from far away locations like in Maiella, Waseges and also  Kiptororo 
in Kuresoi . I had no intentions of making a colleague from Naivasha feel like I am against other 
Hono urable Members . I request that you protect me Hono urable Temporary Speaker .   
The Temporary Speaker (Hon: Elijah Murage):  Both of you should resume your seats, Sergeant 
At Arms confirm for me whether we have quorum.  
(Lack of Quorum ) 
 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon: Elijah Murage):  I will invoke Standing Order Number 37 and I 
will adjourn the  House because we do not have quorum . This House stands adjourned until 
Tomorrow at 9:30 am.   
The House adjourned at 03: 20 PM  
 