 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday  18th April 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:15AM 
[Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa ) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  Hono urable Members , I wish to bring to 
your attention the various pending business before Committees.  
Pursuant to Standing Order 205, the following Petitions were read and committed to the relevant 
Committees and are required to respond to the petitioners by way of Report s in not more than sixty 
calendar days.  
PENDING PETITIONS  
1. Petition by the Torobeek Community of Nakuru County  Seeking the intervention of the County 
Assembly regar ding to resettling and legitimis ing their existence in the County - Lands 
Housing and Physical Planning  
2. A Petition by residents of Kiplemeiwo village, Kiptagich Ward, Olenguruone Sub-County 
seeking the County Assembly through the relevant County Executive Department to under take 
a fresh plot allotment public participation exercise of the plots in Kiplemeiwo village - Lands 
Housing and Physical Planning  
3. Petition by the displaced person s living in Parkview Sub -Location, Mwariki Barut Ward, 
(Bordering Lake Nakuru National Park) due to rising water levels caused by Climate Change 
which was committed to Committee on Environment, Energy, Water and Natural Resources.  
Similarly, pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 47(2 ) (d), the following Statements were 
requested from various  Chairpersons and are still pending;  
PENDING STATEMENTS  
1. The Chairperson Committee on Disaster Management to issue a Statement requested by Hon. 
Simon Wanango Concerning the Naivasha Sub -County Fire Station  
 
2. The Chairperson Committee on Disaster Management to issue a Statement requested by Hon. 
Stanley Karanja concerning the status of the Emergency Fund .  
3. The Chairperson Committee on Early Childhood Education and Vocational Training to issue 
a Statement reques ted by Hon. Cecilia Karanja concerning the status of Mogoiwet and Lenglet 
Early Childhood Education Centers in Visoi Ward and payment of the contractor.  
4. The Chairperson Committee on Environment, Energy, Water and Natural resources to issue a 
Statement req uested by Hon. Grace Mwathi concerning unsecured quarries that pose danger in 
Bahati Ward .  
5. The Chairperson Committee on Budget and Appropriations to issue a Statement requested by 
Hon. David Wathiai c oncerning the distribution of Hawkers Vouchers under th e Youth 
Empowerment Program . 
6. The Chairperson of the Committee on Environment, Energy and Water Resources to issue a 
Statement requested by  Hon. Antony Kamau  concerning stalled Water Pan Project in Mzee 
Wanyama , Nakuru East Ward .  
7. The Chairperson of the Committee on Finance to issue a Statement requested by  Hon. Ali 
Hassan Abdi Concerning the implementation of Access to Government Procurement 
Opportunities (AGPO) in the County Government of Nakuru .  
8. The Chairperson of the Committee on Environment, Energy, Water and Natural Resources to 
issue a Statement requested by Hon . John Macharia Gachiri  concerning the management of 
NAWASCO Njoro Sewerage Treatment Plant. 
All the Committees and Chairs that have been mentioned kindly note and ens ure that you fast rack 
and do the necessary  
I saw Chair Lands and  Housing. Do you have an update on how far the two Petitions  have gone?  
Hon. Peter Palang’a : Mr. Temporary Speaker, the first Petition  on Torobeek Community for 
resettlement, w e even had a meeting last week with the Senate because apparently, the issues of 
resettlement and giving an alternative land would not  have not been handled  single handedly by 
the Assembly and since  the very community  had done the Petition to the Senate as  such. We had 
a meeting last week and the Members can  attest to that, thanks for those who attended.  
We had the famous  Okiya Omutata leading the team and Senator from Baringo. So we are in the 
process of coming up with a Report on the same. So, Mr. Tempor ary Speaker, as you reali se some 
of these issues cannot be handled overnight. But we are on it  and luckily, I want to announce and 
report here, that even the Senate itself is really keen on this. And we will the refore  combine and 
report this.  
On the other  issues of  Kiplemeiwo Report Mr. Temporary Speaker, we had a visit as well as a 
Committee. And there are a number of issues that are coming up on the same in terms of how the 
balloting was done . The issues that really came up after our visits, we have henc e invited these 
people ; the Sub-County Admin, the Ward-Admin, the Surveyors and the likes so that we f urnish  
ourselves with a well-informed  Report . They are  appearing before our Committee on Thursday, 
which is day after tomorrow  Mr. Temporary Speaker so that of  this then we will have an all-
inclusive  Report.  
So that is the far w e have gone, we are on this and we are keen, we will read we would not  like to 
give a shoddy job, Mr. Speaker on this. And again, Mr. Temporary Speaker, it  is important to note 
that at some point we are affected by the programs of this particular house. For example, when we 
have the whole house and other meetings at times they interfere, but we are keen on delivering the 
same quality job. Good job by the committee. Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  Thank you, Chair. Thank you for the update. 
And also for committing to do a very thorough job.  Is Hon. Rose the Chair Environment in or the 
Vice Chair?  
All right, so as I said earlier  all the Chairs kindly note all the pending businesses and work on 
them. Next Order ! 
PAPERS.  
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT BUDGET IMPLEMENTATION REVIEW REPORTS FOR THE 
FIRST HALF OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022.  
We have a Paper to be laid by the Majority Leader.  
Hon.  William Mutai:  Mr. Temporary Speaker, on behalf of the Majority Leader, I  beg to lay a 
Paper on the County Government Budget Implementation Review Reports for the first half of the 
Financial Year 2021 /2022.  
Pursuant to the provision of Article 228  (9) of the Constitution of Kenya 2010 and Section nine of 
the C OB Act 2016. Mr. Temporary Speaker, I beg  to lay . 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  We commit the Paper to the Budget 
Committee, Chair Budget  kindly  note. 
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Mr. Temporary Speaker,  I will not e. 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  Thank you Next  order.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Members, this House stands adjourned up to 2 :30pm in the afternoon  
The House rose at 10:30 am  