FEBRUARY 16, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATE   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday 16th February, 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10.10am  
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi) in the Chair]  
PRAYERS  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi):  Honorable Members welcome to the morning 
session, clerk next order?  
PAPER  
              AGRICULTURE COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE NAKURU COUNTY LIVESTOCK  
                                            SALES YARD      BILL NO. 10 OF 2019  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon . Philip Wanjohi ): Honorable members we have a Paper; Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture on the Nakuru County Livestock  Sale Yard Bill No . 10 of 2019 
to be presented by the vice chairperson Committee on Agriculture Honorable Wilson Wachira.  
Hon. Wilson Wachira:  Thank you Mr . Speaker  Sir, on behalf of the Chair person Committee on 
Agriculture, Hon. Daniel Kiriethe  table the report on Nakuru Co unty Livestock Yard Bill 2019, I 
beg to table.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi):  Thank you honorable Wils on Mwangi for 
laying the paper. Clerk  next order?  
                                                                  MOTION  
               THE NAKURU COUNTY LIVESTOCK SALES YARD BILL NO. 10 OF 2019  
                                                          (Second Reading)  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip  Wanjohi):  Honorable Members we have a Motion  that 
Nakuru Livestock Yard Bill No 10 of 2019 be now read a Second Time, Honorable Wilson.  
FEBRUARY 16, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATE   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Wilson Wachira:  Mr. Temporary Speaker  Sir, we have a Motion of the Nakuru County 
Livestock Sales Yard Bill No 10 of 2019, whereby the committee has brought this Bill in a 
matter of promoting the livestock farmers in Nakuru County.  We are going to create the 
livestock yards in most areas which is arid or semi - arid whereby most farmers do livestock 
farming . 
As we had  tabled this Bil l , we have  many goodies that will come with the Bill in most cases as 
we know most of the  livestock farmers in those areas have been selling their animals at a very 
low price or at a throw away price because there is no control of the bus iness.  
This Bill will enable the surrounding farmers and the people sur round ing those areas , mostly to 
create business and employment . When we make those yards,  we are going to have our youths 
who are going to be employed in those stalls, in terms of clean ing the stalls and also maintaining 
them in the yard. Creating these yards will enable the County Government of Nakuru  to create a 
lot of revenue.  Having  in mind that most of the arid areas which are neighboring Baringo County 
who have a lot of animals that would be brought  in those yards from those counties. Meanwhile 
the County Government will be able to c ollect  a lot of revenue in terms of licensing.  
Also, in terms of control of diseases in those yards, we are going to make s ure that those animals 
that have diseases will be able to be eliminated and we sell animals of good health. W e have 
been having a very big problem of animal theft and in this Bill, we have officers who will be 
manning those yards who have  been given the authority to remove any animal that has been 
stolen from either in the locality or animals that have been stolen outside our county . 
So, we have many goodies that h ave been brought by this Bill which should be able to promote 
livestock farmers who have been suffering for quite a long time . Thee farmers have been 
yearning to have yard s to make their business easier.  
Some of the farmers hav e been traveling far areas like Narok where they have yards.  
This Bill will enable our farmers to be traveling to the nearby yards. It will also help in terms of 
the animals that die when they are being transported.  
This Bill will be a milestone in terms o f promoting the livestock farmers who are within our 
county and promotion of business entrepreneurs in our county.  
We also have the amendments that will be read later, maybe in the Committee of the Whole.  
I now give this opportunity to Hon. Karanja Wamari amu to second. Thank you.  
FEBRUARY 16, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATE   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Phillip Wanjohi):  Thank you Hon. Member. Hon. Karanja from 
Naivasha East!  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker. Let me first of all start by thanking 
the Agriculture Committee that through deliberation , consultation and public participation did 
come up with this Bill. 
 I know the members may be have gone through this Bill. And it is good that the members do  
this Bill and what it purports to do for the sake of the people of this great county of Nakuru.  
If you read the Bill well, the way it is structured , from the Short Title and powers of the County 
Service Board, establishment of livestock  sales yards. In  my ward. I have already established 
sales yard. This Bill has come at a time that this county really needs this Bill. let me take 
members through this Bill in terms of seconding it.   
During the sales yard nobody can go to the sales yard and purport to be either selling or 
auctioning without keeping records and documentation , reason being that each operator of 
livestock sales yard shall keep those records so that now the consignment you will be able to tell 
the animals I'm selling the car from the animals d id come from Kitui or Elgeyo Marakwet.  
 Therefore, as Hon. Wajeff has alluded we will now be curbing what we have been having, cattle 
rustlers  nobody can purport to be a cattle rustler  and be allowed to come to a yard.  We will have 
eliminated this vice s ystematically  because normally what happened is one steals the animals 
takes them to the market and sells, right now in Nakuru, you will not be able to do that with this 
Bill. 
 if you go to part three where there is Administration you have details of the i nspector. the 
inspector who is supposed to make sure that the rules and regulations are followed in the yard , 
that is page 7  
The powers and details of an inspector ;- 
1.  The inspector shall ensure that the livestock sales yard conform s with the requirements 
under the Act. You will not have a market that is littered because now we  have now set 
the standards , that you cannot take now your animals anywhere.  
You cannot take them to  the basement , you cannot sell them at the side of the road 
because now there are s et rules.  
2. To ensure only  licensed  traders operate in the yard  and that is where the catch is. And 
here members ought to know that you cannot now wake up because your cow has 
invaded somebody’s  cabbages you now rush it to a yard, now there are rules that yo u 
have to be licensed. And this where I want to take Members so that if they want 
amendments they know where the catch is , you cannot wake up and go and say well …  
FEBRUARY 16, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATE   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 3. Ensure  the animals transported to the livestock yard  meet the required standards , you 
cannot sell a sick cow that you have been unable  to treat or it is  to die , now you will need 
the require d letter and  documentation. If anybody decides to sell a sick cow it wil l be 
confiscated and destroyed . I do not know where Chebichi is because she was fond of 
selling sick cows  
(Laughter)  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Phillip Wanjohi):  Hon. Karanja we do not have Chebichii in the 
House we only have Hon. Chebichi.  
Hon. Stanley K aranja:  yes Hon. Chebichii Mr. Temporary Speaker I know you will say 
something here because  it will not be allowed and that is why I want Hon. Chebichi to take note 
of that. For you to be able to sell, you must have that license. That license will last for  only 2 
years. Therefore, if you are a notorious auctioneer or somebody who is operating a yard and you 
have been given a license and you have not conformed, your license will expire in those 2 years. 
In page 9, there is that handling and tying of animals.  Subject to paragraph 3 below, the person 
shall handle an animal in a livestock yard by;  
1. Lifting it off the ground.  
The way we lift the animals, for example a chicken. You are not supposed to lift a chicken by 
one wing. Sasa ni unaichukua vizuri kama mtoto unaiwekelea kwa kikapu . I know now from 
Marioshoni, you will be able to know that. You cannot now pick the animal b y dragging the way 
we are used to do. Hio sasa haitakuwa . The other thing is that no person shall;  
1. Tie up or muzzle any animal or calf.  
Kwa hivyo, ikiwa njau ndogo, huwezifunga. Hakuna kamba. Ni uipeleke polepole.  
2. Tie any poultry by the neck.  
3. Tie any poultry by the neck, leg or wing.  
You know vile huwa tunafunga kuku miguu halafu unainamisha kichwa, unafungilia kwa 
baiskeli eti unaipeleka  Kisumu. You will not be able to do that.  
In control of livestock, no person  shall use excessive force to control any livestock in any sales 
yard. This is whereby some people who are taking the animals have an instrument that can inflict 
shock. Hautakuwa unafanya hivyo . Kama ni ngombe, utakuwa unaipeleka vizuri kwa sababu 
hata hio  ng’ombe ina  animal rights. Any stick or other instrument that can hit calves. 
Tunapeleka calves polepole. Hakuna kugonga.  The last one is the penning and caging of 
livestock where I wanted the Members to take note. It shall be the duty of the livestock sa les 
yard operator to ensure that no animal is kept in a pen, cage or hatch which is unsuitable for the 
FEBRUARY 16, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATE   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 size or species. Huweziweka ng’ombe na mbuzi kwa yard moja. Kama ni ng’ombe, upande yake. 
Kama ni mbuzi, upande yake.  
In page 11, any pen in which any c ows or pigs are kept is of sufficient size. Any cage or hatch in 
which the poultry or rabbit is kept is of such a design as to enable the poultry to stand in their 
natural position. Hii yenye tunaletewa kuku eti unamlalisha ndio watoshee wengi; ni lazima k uku 
aweze kusimama na kutembea . When a livestock is penned, those of one species are kept in 
separate pens. That is why we are saying that this Bill uplifts those rights that we have been 
denying our animals. Unajuawengine tunasema ya kwamba eti kwa sababu  wengine tunapeleka 
kuuza, unapiga na kusumbua mnyama.  In page 14, we came up with how you can sell your 
animals in livestock yard. You can sell by regular sale where the price of livestock shall be 
determined by the prevailing livestock sales yard price . Kama pale mumeandika kwa  yard 
ng’ombe size hii ni pesa hizi.  Also, you can sell by auction and that auction must be advertised. 
Where any livestock is put up for sale by an auction, wameweka hio eti lazima  you advertise. It is 
also stated that the sale wit hout reserve or to that effect, then it shall not be unlawful for the 
seller or any person employed by him so you cannot go and say that you were selling your 
animal. This Bill has come s uch a time when our county or some people have been siphoning 
money from our members. Therefore, as I second this Motion, this is a Bill that members ought 
to pass so that it will c ushion  our farmers from extortionists and those people who are exploiting 
our farmers. I beg to s econd . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. Member from Naivasha East 
and the vice chair.  
(Question proposed that the Nakuru County Livestock Sales Yard Bill No. 10 of 20 19 be now 
read a Second Time.) 
The Temporar y Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Motion is now open for discussion. Hon. 
Chebichii  
Hon. Irene Chebichii : Thank you very much Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. First of all I want to 
thank my colleagues at the Agriculture Committee. Being the sponsor of the Bill, first of all I 
want to thank the Hon orable  Members of the Agriculture Committee and the entire House, also 
the office of the Speaker for according us all the support that we actually needed to get to this 
point. Also, I want to thank the seconder of the Motion of today, Hon. Karanja, he has given us 
the true picture of the Bill, and I think the Hon orable  Members present here can now understand 
what we are talking about. Nakuru County Sale Yard Bill is simply a Bill that actually targets 
more the farmers. We  have several markets within our county, the market that have been selling 
livestock but they have been operating without any law to operationalize the markets. We 
FEBRUARY 16, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATE   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 decided to come up with this Bill so that we can assist our farmers and also those operating  the 
market to have a legal framework or a guideline on how they are going to do their work. We 
happen to have to consult several markets and being a member of the County Assembly 
representing Soin, I believe Soin is the ward that has the big livestock mar ket within our county. 
I knew the challenges that my people were going through while doing livestock auctions. We 
have been conducting auctions on a weekly basis where we have been selling several livestock 
but there has been a lot of gaps in terms of the issue of licensing, handling livestock, the issue of 
diseases that the Hon. Karanja has talked about. You understand that since the issue of livestock 
is a devolved function, there has no good structures on how we are going to handle it as a county 
but now  we have a good framework that starts from the ground such as the farmers, the 
committees in charge of markets, the director in charge, the sub county officer and we have the 
CECM in charge and also the Governor, it will be easy for us to work together as a County to 
make sure that we actually assist our farmers. Also some of this markets are always operated by 
people who do not have enough knowledge and others do not have licenses, that is the private 
ones and this law will assist them on how they are goin g to be registered before they operate the 
market in terms of private and public ones that are constructed by county government. We also 
have the duties of the committees’ outlines in each market. Now their duties are well elaborated 
by the Bill that they will be able to follow the guideline to ensure everything moves smoothly. I 
want to request the Hon orable  members that we team up so that we pass this Bill so that we are 
able to give a go -ahead to our markets to have the best sales yards and also in terms  of marketing 
of our livestock. Thank you so much Mr. Temporary Speaker sir.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. Chebichii Member for Soin. 
The Mover, Hon. Wilson  
Hon. Wilson Wachira : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker, I think Hon orable Members have 
really elaborated on the issue concerning this Bill and we are hopeful that we will be able to pass 
this Bill so that we can give our livestock farmers the leeway to do a good business in this great 
County of Nakuru. Thank you.  
The Temporar y Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you very much Hon. Wilson Wajeff 
and the members for your contributions  
(Question proposed)  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(The Nakuru County Livestock Sales Yard Bill No. 10 0f 20 19 was accordingly  read a  
Second Time. ) 
FEBRUARY 16, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATE   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 ADJOURNMENT  
Hon Members the assembly remains adjourned until 2.30 in the afternoon  
(The House rose at 10.40 am)  
 
 
 
 