COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 4TH April 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03:05 PM  
[Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
SEATS LABE LLING   
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Communication to ma ke. Hono urable Members  if you 
look at the seats that we occupy they are label led and from the next s itting which will be happening 
tomorrow at 9:30 am , you should not occupy any seat labe lled for another Member. For now, it is 
allowed that you can occupy any seat. Take note Hono urable Members . Next  order.  
MOTION  
VISIT TO MAI MAHIU CESS BARRIER  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Motion by the Hono urable Member for Viwandani ; 
he will be moving the Motion  on behalf of the Chairperson  for Committee  on Finance.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya: Thank you honorable Speaker, I rise to move a Motion on a Report from 
the Committee on Finance  on a Site Visit to Mai Mahiu Cess Barrier that I had laid here in the 
morning Plenary . The Motion that I am moving today was on a fact finding mission on how we 
can raise our revenue collection from various Cess Barriers . We visited the Mai Mahiu Cess Barrier 
and we came up with  observations and recommendations and I wish to move the Motio n and 
request Honorable Mercy Kilel to second but let me take the Members through the Motion.  
Honourable  Speaker , during our normal Committee s ittings as the  Committee on Finance we 
resolved to visit Mai Mahiu Cess Barrier and the objectives we had were to find out the total 
amount of cash being collected a t the Mai Mahiu Cess Barrier in the County  and to make 
recommendations on how Cess  collections  can be restructured to enhance more revenue for the 
County.  
While we were at the site, we made the followi ng findings and observations as well ; 
That Nakuru had digit ilised/ automated all essential services to improve income streams and 
enhance provision of service and in particularly at the Mai Mahiu Cess Barrier .  
The mode of payment is through Safaricom Pay Bill Number that all the County Officers attached 
to Cess Barrier  are working amicably towards revenue collection at the station.  
That the average Cess  collection per day at Mai Mahiu Cess Barrier is Kshs. 500,000.  
The main source of Cess  at the Mai Mahiu Cess Barrier is from harvesting of sand, bush stones , 
ballast , marram and pumice.  
The County charges for the cess collections per trip are as follows - 
i. Canter lorry - Kshs  500 
ii. Lorry (7 -10 tones) – Kshs 800 
iii. Lorry (above 10 tones) -Kshs 2200  
That the County imposes a penalty of Kshs. 10,000 for defaulters at the barrier.  
There is poor network connection to Safaricom service provider around the barrier and therefore 
hampers or delays payments through the Pay Bill System mode of payment . 
There a re no floodlights at the barrier and this paralyses the operations at the barrier during the 
night.  
There is no patrol vehicle  at the Cess Barrier to support effective  service delivery.  
Once a member of the public or a client is issued with Official Receipt for payment of Cess , the 
same does not reflect in the main cess collection which is the County Revenue Cent re and or at the 
ICT Department , therefore there  is disconnect between what is collected at the Cess Point and what 
is recorded at Revenue Headquarter s. 
That the County Government of Nakuru does not provide the essential equipment  or tools of trade 
for the Officer s working at the Cess Barrier such  as raincoats, flashl ights and Safaricom bundles  
among other necessities.  
That the County Government of Nakuru has not erected a Cess Barrier point on the road towards 
or at the border between Nakuru County and Narok County.  
That there are no proper records indicating daily, weekly or monthly cess collection per canter , 
lorry at the station. From the statistics and data on revenue collection , the County Government of 
Nakuru collected the following revenue on the given Financial Year. In Financial Year 2016/2017, 
the target was to collect Kshs. 113,401,200 and the actual money that was collected was Kshs 185 
104 654 million .  
Mr. Speaker  on the same 2017/2018 , the target was Kshs 168 200 m illion, and the collected was 
Kshs 201 570 346  million.  Mr. Speaker on 2018/2019 the target was Kshs 211 700 million, and 
the actual co llection was Kshs 217 040 996  million . Mr. Speaker during the year 2019/  2020 , the 
target was to co llect Kshs 225 million, and actually managed to co llect Kshs 188 946 000 . Mr. 
Speaker, the year 2020/2021 the target was low because of the COVID pandemic wh ich resulted 
to target  of Kshs 184 460  million an d the actual was  Kshs 223 995 891  million. In the year 2021 
and year the 2023 Mr. Speaker, the target was Kshs 230 million, which they co llected 226 165  
million . 
In the year 2022/2023 Mr. Speaker, the targe t was Kshs 280 million   but Mr. Speaker, we managed 
to get the First Quarter and the Second Quarter of which the First Quarter was Kshs 33 000 709 
million  and the Second Quarter has been Kshs 45 000 398. We are yet to get the Third Quarter  so 
that Mr. Speaker we can get the total or the actual collection. Mr. Speaker after all th is, we have 
some recommendations that will enhance or we will help the County to collect more revenue.  
 Rising from the observation s made Mr. Speaker . 
1. That the County  Government of Nakuru should see all the leakages so as to raise the average 
daily cess target at the Mai Mahiu Cess Barrier to Kshs 1 million from the actual from the 
actual target of Kshs 500 000. 
2.  That the County Government of Nakuru should li aise with Safaricom service provider to 
install Safaricom booster nearby the cess barrier for better network connection and effective 
operations.  
3. That the County Government of Nakuru should install floodlight s at the Mai Mahiu Cess 
Barrier for security purposes and  also …  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Order! There are some Members who are consulting loudly ! 
Proceed Honorable Member.  
Hon.  Joseph Muraya:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker.. . and also ease of operation at night.  
4. That the County Government of Nakuru should provide a patrol car stationed at my Mai 
Mahiu Cess Barrier for effective service delivery  
5. That the County Government of Nakuru should provide officers at the Cess Barrier with the 
necessary tools of trade equipment such as rain coats, flashlights and Safaricom data to enable 
them work effectively.  
6. That the  County Government of Nakuru should establish a Cess Barrier at the Narok/Nakuru 
County border and all the road s towards Narok County, in order to cab the loss of revenue.  
7. Mr. Speaker, the County Government of Nakuru sh ould introduce a levy for motor  vehicles 
that are traversing the County towards other Counties.  
8.  That the County Government of Nakuru Mr. Speaker should upgrade the ICT System Useable 
to avoid the continuous syst em failure resorting to variation.  
9. Mr. Speaker, that the County Government of Nakuru should have the officers stationed at the 
Mai Mahiu barrier and other major Cess Barrier s within the County to work on rotational basis 
at a maximum of six month s per sta tion. 
10.  That the County Government of Nakuru should conduct Lifestyle Audit to all Revenue 
Officers at the major Cess Barriers within the County.  
11. Mr. Speaker, we also recommended that the County Government of Nakuru should ensure 
that there are proper statistics of records of motor vehicle s paying cess on daily, weekly and 
monthly basis.  
12.  Mr. Speaker, the Committee also recommends that the County Government of Nakuru should 
install recording cameras at the Cess Barrier s to curb the revenue pilferage.   
13. Mr. Speaker, the County Government of Nakuru should ensure that the County Integrated 
Monitoring Evaluation System conduct regular spot checks to monitor the revenue collection 
at the County.  
14.  That the County Government of Nakuru should have royalties regu lations in place , to 
strengthen the operationali sation of Environmental Management and Coordination Act, which 
was of year 1999 (EMCA) and the mining Act of 2016.  
Therefore Mr. Speaker, the Committee wish es to take this opportunity to thank the Members fo r 
their input and valuable contributions during the site visit. We also wish to thank your Office Mr. 
Speaker and that of the C lerk to the Assembly for the logistical support accorded to the Members 
during the visit to Mai Mahiu Cess Barrier.  
Thank you Mr . Speaker. On behalf of the Committee , it is my pleasure and duty to present the 
Report. I now wish to request the Honourable Member Mercy Kilel to second the Motion.  
Hon. Mercy Kilel:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity. And thank you Mheshimiwa 
Muraya for this chance to second this Motion. I therefore wish to second and to add to this Motion. 
First of all before I go on, I want to thank my fellow Members of the Finance Committee for 
braving the sun and the bad weather to go and stand outside the Mai Mahiu Cess Barrier to fact 
find and to look for solutions that can help our County.  
Indeed we found that the situation at the barrier is really wanting and it is in a very bad condition . 
Considering  that cess collection is a critical Revenue Stream fo r the County , and we cannot be 
saying that we want to improve our own source of revenue  while we are not sealing the existing  
loopholes.  We realised that there was a lot of monkey business happening at the barrier, which I 
am sure is being translated in al l other barriers in the County. We therefore wish to say that as a 
Committee and as a County, we need to restructure our cess collection and we also need to find 
out why there is a big disconnect between what is being collected at the Cess Barrier and what  is 
translating in the books. That is what we found out that whatever is being collected at the cess 
collection point does not translate to the book of accounts in the Assembly. That means that we 
need to find out why there is no proper collection mechanis m and why there is a lot of pilferage in 
the revenue.  
Additionally, I wish to ask the Assembly to look for ways to come up with a regulation that will 
see an improvement in mining in the County. That means mining of ballast and sand. As you are 
aware, we are using an old age Act; that is the 2016 Mining Act and the EMCA Act. I wish to ask 
the relevant Committees to come up with regulations to see that we come up with new ways and 
policies to govern our County.  
Therefore, I wish to thank you and to congrat ulate my Committee for doing a good job and we are 
looking forward to being the champions of revenue collection because if you look at what is 
happening, the first and the second quarter; it means that in the Financial Year 2022/2023, our 
target is Kshs 28 0 million and if you see the first and the second quarter, it means we are not even 
half way there. We are at a quarter. That means we have collected around Kshs 78 million. If we 
are looking to collect more, I do not think we are going to meet our targets . That means there is 
something that needs to be done and we need to relook our ways of collecting our own revenue.  
With that, I wish to support the Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you.  
The Motion is that this House adopts the Report of  the C ommittee o n Finance on the site visit to 
Maai Mahiu Cess Barrier, laid on the table of the Hou se during the morning Plenary. The Motion 
is open for Debate.   
Hon. Member for Malewa.  
Hon. Francis Kuria: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion and commend the 
good job the Committee has done, but they have a lot of work ahead of them that they need to do. 
As I contribute towards this Report, I am one of the sand harvesters within Naivasha. I  am also 
one of the transporters of ballast and stones to Nairobi and I use that Barrier.  
On installation of the CCTVs, I second that, noting that we have two ways that most trucks from 
Nairobi use to escape immediately from the Barrier. I would like that  when identifying the location 
of the CCTV, the Committee should make sure that they are very vigilant so that those who will 
locate the lens of the CCTV will capture past the office. There is a road on your right that goes 
direct to the crushing machine o f ballast. Nairobi trucks used to escape using that route.  
Also, we need lights far ahead from the point of collection. We also need to enhance the security 
team because the target from Kshs 500,000 to Kshs 1 million; I am sure and I have done my 
assessmen t there, the collection on daily basis is almost Kshs. 1 million but they are indicating that 
their target is from Kshs 500,000 to Kshs 1 million. I do not think there is another Barrier that 
collects a lot of money than the Maai Mahiu barrier.  
I therefor e ask the Committee on Finance to make sure that some of the observations that they 
witnessed ant that Barrier has been implemented fully. I therefore rise to support the Motion and 
thank the Chair and the Committee for a good job.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Honourable Member from Lakeview Ward .  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support this Motion and commend the 
Committee on Finance for a job well done. We are talking about figures, numbers and money here. 
When y ou look at page 7 and 8, you realise that Mai Mahiu which is in Naivasha Sub -County, you 
will find that there was around Kshs 185 million. In the following year the money increased. It 
went on increasing then we went down because of Covid -19.  
In 2021/2022 , it increased and during the General Election, the trend goes back again and you 
realise a scene whereby we are not even able to produce enough money for this Financial Year. 
You realise that just within this half, we are just at Kshs 78 million whereas o ther years when there 
is no political interference, you find that the production goes very high.  
In fact in some years, we even go beyond the target. That shows you that Mai Mahiu sand, stones 
and everything else is affected majorly by politics and maybe this is the money that is used in 
containing and doing politics within the County Government and the Country at large.  
In realisation of this, the Committee has found it fit that we fit in security systems in each and 
every barrier that we have there. As the County Assembly, all that we can do is support this noble 
task and idea. It is very crucial and we can raise the revenue from Kshs 5000 to 1 million or even 
more than a million and that one will make Naivasha Sub -County a generator of almost a billion 
within the fiscal money of revenue.  
The last visit of His Excellency the President, he urged the County Assembly to come up with 
ways of how we can go up to around Kshs 4 to Kshs. 5 billion as own source revenue. This one 
can only happen if we safeguard wh at we have because if we have this one at Mai  Mahiu, we have 
another checkpoint at Kedong’, another one at  around Kinamba and other areas, you will find that  
within Naivasha alone the generation of revenue there if all things were taken care of, we shall b e 
producing up to Kshs 2 billion from one Sub -County. I rise to support this Motion. One of the 
Members here has stood and claimed that he is one of the sand harvesters. He has even given us 
ways of how they escape from paying this cess fee. He has given u s other panya  routes that they 
use and as a tycoon from Naivasha I know he is one person that will help us catch the other people 
and provide good service to this nation. I also want to encourage other Members of this House to 
create revenue within your ow n Constituencies and I encourage Wathiai to ensure that he creates 
money for this County. Thank you very much.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Wathiai  
Hon. David Wathiai : Mr. Spika nashukuru Kwa kunipa hii nafasi ya kuchangia huu mjadala. 
Kwanza kabisa ningependa kuwapa kongole Kamati ya Finance kwa kutupatia hii Ripoti iliyo 
sawa kabisa nikiwa mmoja wao. Ya pili, tulipokuwa pale Naivasha tulikuwa tumeenda kuangalia 
mambo ya ile barrier tuliweza kujionea mambo mengi sana na tukagundua kuwa kuna uf isadi wa 
hali ya juu. Hao wa fanyikazi wote kwa hiyo barrier hawapaswi kuwa pale. Tukisimama pale, 
unapata kuwa mtu ameshikilia pesa mkononi lakini wakituona wanaonyeshwa jinsi ya kulipa 
kutimia mpesa. Tunapoteza pesa kama Kaunti. Ningeomba Kaunti ya Nakuru  watengeneze a 
Special Unit that will comprise of the Audit Department and Enforcement Section that will be 
patrolling near the Barriers from a distance of about 300 meters.  They set up  a road block and 
they will be checking all the vehicles that go throu gh the barrier to confirm whether they have paid 
for the cess kwa sababu hapa naona tunapoteza pesa nyingi sana. Hii pesa ingefungiwa vizuri hii  
Kaunti ingekuwa na pesa nyingi sana . Tungekuwa tunapata millioni moja. Nikiongezea nitasema 
ya kwamba hao wafanyakazi ambao wako pale kwa Barrier , Kaunti iwapatie transfer  wote i watoe 
hapo na hata hiyo miezi sita ambayo imekuwa recommended kwa Ripoti wasipewe nafasi ya kurudi 
kwa hizo barrier kwa sababu inaonekana kuna wale wamekaa kwa hiyo barrier  kwa miaka m ingi 
na hao huwa hawagu swi. Sijui kama wako na wakubwa wanawaprotect. Watolewe na watu wapya 
waletwe. Na hao wapya pia wakija wapewe mda wa miezi mitatu na hao pia watolewe wapelekwe 
pahali pengine. Pia kuna uwezekano wa kuweka CCTV  kwa hiyo  Barrier. CCTV cameras 
zitasaidia sana . Nimeona iko kwa Ripoti hapa. Kujua vile kazi inaendelea kwa Barrier  ndio tuweze 
kukusanya pesa itakayo tusaidia na kufanya hii Kaunti yetu isonge mbele. Kwa hayo machache 
ninataka kuunga mkono hii Ripoti na niwape kongole tena wen zangu wa  Kamati ya Finance. 
Asanteni sana.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member from Barut.  
Hon. Bernard  Kirui : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Before I support the adoption of this Report allow 
me to congratulate my fellow colleague Hon Member from Viwandani for a proper presentation 
being his first time to table a Report in this Hon. House, I think to me I must congratulate you. To 
this Report I stand to support as long as the old recommendation is followed to the latter then I 
support this Report a nd I thank all the Finance Committee Members led by the Chairman and the 
Vice Chair. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Member for Barut. The Hon. Member 
Hassan.  
Hon. Hassan Abdi : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I also wish to take this o pportunity to concur with 
what the Finance Committee did. They did a good job. I am told they went there na walipigwa na 
jua the whole day so you are here to work for Wanjiku  that is very good of you. Going by the 
recommendations of the Committee I can see  that they have recommended something that needs 
to be taken seriously about the issue of ICT Systems Technology. As you understand the world of 
today is all about technology.  
I am wondering why they are still using the Safaricom Pay Bill. They are suppos ed to use more 
technology systems that can help curb these people who are running away from paying this 
revenue. For all of us who have been Nakuru residents, we all know that Maai Mahiu has been a 
cash cow that has made some few people rich and it is some thing that is known out there. Even 
the staff say that they are looking for an opportunity to go to Maai Mahiu. If you go there you are 
not going to work but going to make yourself rich.  
I do not want to take much of time but I just want to talk about the  penalty. I am shocked that when 
one runs away from paying the Kshs 2 200 they get a penalty of Kshs 10 000. Someone should be 
penalised Kshs 100 000 or more or even that lorry can be tracked down and clamped. There is a 
way these KRA people are doing alon g the highways and I am sure my friend Hon Francis Kuria 
is aware because he has told us he is in the transport industry. Once you run away from paying the 
Way Bridge due, the penalty there is around Kshs 400 000. I am shocked that running away from 
paying  Kshs 2 200 one gets a penalty of Kshs 10 000. That is too little. The lorry itself is worth 
Kshs 8 million. My suggestion is that the Committee should recommend that the penalty be 
increased. It should be Kshs 100 000 and the lorry should also be impounde d for one week or even 
a month because this is an economic crime.  
One cannot run away from paying revenues. In fact the other day the KRA told us that paying tax 
is compulsory. These men and women who are running away from paying Kshs 2 2000 are just 
paying Kshs 10 000 and I am sure they collide with the staff from the Revenue Department. I also 
wish to support this Report and to tell the Committee that this is wonderful work and the penalty 
should be increased. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): T hank you. The Hon. Member from Dundori, then the Hon. 
Member from Soin, then the Hon. Member from Hells Gate. In that order.  
 Hon.  James Gathuita : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I would like to support the Motion and 
congratulate the Committee on Finance for the j ob they did . First, I would like to acknowledge 
and urge that we put more effort on digitali sing on E -payment on the number of lorries and the 
service providers at that place. I want also to emphasi se still on the issue of CCTV which is very 
good so that we may have a record on who escaped the payment at that cess point.  
Going forward, as a digital nation, we need to have a good record because there was an issue about  
there being  no proper record s on daily , weekly and monthly cess collection per lorry. I think it is 
high time we c ame and include d daily collection da ta. Le t us have data on quarterly so that lorry 
of for example K5 , can pay on a quarterly basis to avoid daily charges.  
My other input is  about smart card s. To avoid those  panya  routes where they escape, I suggest that 
Mr. Speaker, we need to issue smart card s to those clients so that in case they escape through other 
routes, the people on patrols would just use that smart card to identify the people  who passed 
through cess point s or other routes , bearing in mind that we are in public participation and where 
as a County we are being subjected to dividing very little money at Ward level. It is up to  us to 
know how we can increase the revenue for the County that will trickle down to our Ward level. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Hon. Degaulle Elibas : Mr. Speaker sir, I stand to support this Motion and first of all I want to 
thank the Committee for the good work they did by visit ing the Cess Barrier at Maai- Mahiu. I 
have supported their observation s and their recommendation s. For sure Mr. Speaker sir, we should 
do this to all other Cess Barriers in the entire County because I am a witness there is a Barrier 
between Baringo and Nakuru Count y and there are so many panya  routes there .  
Therefore if we are to enhance the cess collection we should try to improve on securing all the 
panya  routes and try to minimi se them by ensuring the revenue collection is digitali sed so that we 
have all the mone y paid through Safaricom or through the Till and other means of getting money. 
This is because this money for sure it is being divided about 40 per cent comes to the County, 30 
percent is lost through panya  routes because they try to evade the barriers and  the other 30 per cent 
goes to the County workers who are manning the Toll Stations. If they are able to evade the Maai 
Mahiu because there is one route, they might decide to take a longer route and for them to evade 
that Cess Barrier, it is not possible f or them but what I know is maybe the workers manning at the 
Cess Barriers may  be collud ing with the transporters to avoid paying tax.  
Otherwise I am asking this honorable House if they can try to give laws to enhance the collection 
of tax, I think we shou ld be somewhere. So, I therefore stand to support the Motion for the 
Committee and their recommendation s. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Member from Soin; Hon. Jane . 
Hon. Jane Gituku : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir . I rise to support the Motion b ut with some 
amendments. If you look at the Committee findings and observations no.2 , the Committee says 
that all the County Officers attached to the Cess Barrier , that is the Enforcement Officers and the 
Revenue Officers are working amicably to one Revenue Collection at the Station. Come to the 
recommendation no.10 , the same Officers that the County Government of Nakuru should conduct 
Lifestyle Audit to all Revenue Officers manning Cess Barriers within the County. The Committee 
did a very good job , including noting that there are panya  routes especially on your way to Suswa 
there those lorries which use that route they do not pass through the Maai- Mahiu Barrier . Another  
panya  route where the revenue gets lost but w e cannot commend them on the other side we accuse 
the same. If there is corruption, it starts from the top; if the money collected at the site is not the 
same money which we find at the account, then where in between do we lose the money? That 
means if the re is corruption, it starts from up because the people there might account for the money 
but when it is going to the bank or when it gets to whoever takes the money to the bank, it gets lost 
along the way.  
Therefore, Mr. Speaker I arise to support all the  other recommendations but not no.10. If there is 
audit to be done, let it start from the officers at the County Headquarters that include the Senior 
Officers and Officers collecting revenue at the ground. But we cannot sacrifice the ones at the 
barrier ye t whoever is very corrupt is up here in the County Offices. All the other recommendations 
are very good but no.10 should be done away with. Lifestyle Audit should start from the Officers 
at the top; but all the other things that they have said I agree with  because I have been to Maai -
Mahiu so I know there are a lot of disparities and we need to look at these people because you see 
there is some observation suggesting that these people manning the barriers they do not have 
umbrellas, they do not have raincoa ts; but they have to be rained on so that they can at least get 
our County the revenue from these sand harvesters among other transporters.  
Mr. Speaker I beg to support but the Committee should look at recommendation no.10 from 
another angle. Thank you Mr . Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. I now want to propose a question.  
(That this House adopts the Report of the Committee on Finance on the site visit to Maai Mahiu 
Cess Barrier laid on the table of this House during the morning plenary ). 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable  Members , this House is adjourned to tomorrow 9.30 in the morning  
The House rose at 3.55pm 
 
 