OCTOBER 12, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday , 12TH October  2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 2: 40 pm 
[The  Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ) in the Chair]  
PRAYER  
Third Assembly -First Session  
(Third Assembly  established by Proclamation  – Gazette Notice No. 12100  of 2022)  
ARRIVAL OF HER EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR  
[Her Excellency  the Governor  (Hon. Susan Kihika) escorted  by the  Speaker of the Assembly  (Hon. 
Joel Karuri ) and accompanied by the Mace entered the Chambe r at forty  minutes past two O’ 
clock ] 
(The Mace was placed on the Table)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): We are going  to invite the Spiritual  Leaders  to lead us with words 
of prayer , starting with the Muslim Imam  and then the Pastor  from the Christian faith.  
(The Spiritual Leaders then said Prayers ) 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
HOUSE LEADERSHIP MEMBERS  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Your Excellency the Governor, Madam Susan Kihika, Honorable 
Members the Office of the Speake r has received Communication s from our Political Parties  in the 
Hous e and I start from the Kenya Kwanza Coalition . The following have been elected to serve in 
the House Leadership . 
1. Hon. Dr. Alex Langat - Majority Leader  
2. Hon. Rose Njoroge  - Deputy Majority Leader  
3. Hon. Hamisi Fadhili Msuri – Majority Chief Whip  
4. Hon. Leah Serem – Deputy Chief Whip.  
OCTOBER 12, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Your Excellency the Governor  and honorable Members  I have also received Communications  
from the Azimio Coalition . The following have been elected to serve in the Minority Party  
1. Hon. Philip Wanjohi - Minority Leader  
2. Hon. Kezia Akinyi Okumu - Deputy Minority Leader  
3. Hon. Virginia Wamaith Gichanga - Minority Chief Whip  
4. Hon. Bethsheba Kerubo - Deputy Minority Whip  
Honorable Members, as you are aware, our Standing Orders provide for timeline in the formation 
of key Committees in the Hous e namely ; the House Business Committee, Committee on Selection,  
and Committee  on Appointmen t. Following the nomination of the Majority and Minority Par ty 
Leadership as Communicated , I wish to direct that the formation of the three Committees  be 
finali sed forthwith . 
Once concluded we expect the  Committee on Selection  to expedite the process of nominating 
Members  to the  respective Select and Sectorial Committees of the House  as required by the 
Standing Orders . Honorable Members , today we are going to have the Governor ’s address from 
her Excellency  the Governor  and this is in pursuant to Standing Order  No. 26 of the County 
Assembly of Nakuru, which  requires that the Governor  shall address  the opening of newly elected 
Assembly.  
Accordingly  pursuant to the provisions of the Standing Order Number 13 and 25 vide Gazette 
Notice No. 12100 published in the Kenya Gazette on 7th October, 2022 I gave notice that this 
sitting is properly convened. Hon orable  Members, distinguished guests , ladies and gentlemen, it 
is now my singular honour and privilege  to invite her Excellency  the Governor of Nakuru  County 
to address the Assembly. Welcome your Excellency . 
    SPEECH BY HER EXCELLENCE THE GOVERNOR OF NAKURU COUNTY   
                             HON. SUSAN KIHIKA  
The Excellency Governor  (Hon . Susan Kihika): Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon. Members. It 
gives me great pleasure to address this County Assembly gathering following the national general 
elections that delivered the 3rd County administration. May I begin by congratulating you 
honourable Members on your election on the 9th of August 2022. Observi ng the grueling nature 
of the long campaign trail, I know your victory was not easy. I further wish to recognize all 
nominated Members of the County Assembly who got the honour to occupy the few slots available. 
The August elections and its outcome was the  most fair and peaceful. Independent observations 
demonstrated that Nakuru County and Kenya in general we are slowly achieving maturity in our 
democratic processes and institutions.  Let me also take this chance to congratulate you Hon. 
Speaker on your rece nt election as the 3rd Speaker of the Nakuru County Assembly. As a former 
member of this House, am sure you will quickly adapt into your new mandate.  May I also take this 
early opportunity to thank the President of the Republic of Kenya and our Kenya Kwanz a Coalition 
OCTOBER 12, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Leader H.E Dr. William Samoei Ruto for rewarding Nakuru with a full Cabinet Secretary 
appointment (of Mr. Zack Mwangi Njeru – CS nominee for Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban 
Development) . I wish to thank you Hon. Speaker and the entire Count y Assembly Leadership for 
affording me this opportunity, to once again share my vision for Nakuru County under the auspices 
of the State of the County Address in pursuant of the provisions of the County Government Act 
2012.  Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon. Members I wish to once again acknowledge the overwhelming 
mandate that we received from people of Nakuru to steer this County forward. The voice of the 
people reigned supreme on what direction the County should take in governance and political 
affairs. Having previo usly served as the first County Speaker and the second Senator of Nakuru I 
have interacted with leaders and constituents from all over Nakuru. I have observed and understood 
the challenges our people face, but I have also noted their immense potential in b uilding a shared 
and prosperous County. I offered myself to lead Nakuru into the next level because I believed in 
the abundant prospects of Nakuru and its people.  
Therefore, in the run -up to the general elections, we shared our political manifesto outlining our 
agenda for Nakuru. I have further ensured alignment of our manifesto with priorities under the 
Kenya Kwanza Administration and the United Democratic Alliance (UDA) on putting our people 
and their interest first.  Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon . Members Nakuru County is the 3rd most populous 
County in Kenya after Nairobi and Kiambu – with a projected population of 2.3 million (KNBS 
2022). The Gross County Product (GCP) by KNBS for the period 2013 -2020 has ranked Nakuru 
among the top five contrib utors to the national economy.  Further the GCP 2021 report has found 
out that the County economy is among the most diversified and therefore more resilient. Our 
population is expected to continue growing fast and increasingly urbanize. Within a five -year 
period, we now have a City and three major Municipalities.   
Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon. Members I wish to remind you that –while we have received positive 
assessment from external reports –we are emerging from ravages of Covid -19 pandemic and its 
severe effects to lives and livelihoods. The County economic recovery has been constrained by the 
negative effects during a prolonged post pandemic period, disruptions in global supply chain, weak 
performing public sector, inflation and high cost of fuel. Our farmers have a lso recorded poor 
harvest over  last two seasons. As a County G overnment, we have also inherited huge amounts of 
pending bills. As a result of both internal and external shocks, business has suffered, the cost of 
living has gone up and many livelihoods have  been lost. Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon. Members 
Therefore, our singular aim in the short -term to medium -term period must without a doubt focus 
on building back and “building back better”. Irrespective of our political affiliations, we 
collectively have the uniqu e opportunity of ensuring that the benefits of devolution reach to all the 
County residents. Allow me therefore to outline my strategic priorities for Nakuru in appreciation 
of the foregoing situation and the functional responsibility of County Government.  In the 
integrated medium -term period 2023 -2027, I look forward to an Inclusive leadership and socio -
economic empowerment for all.  
OCTOBER 12, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 To begin with Health Sector – I envisage Quality healthcare for all.  
Health is one of the fully devolved services and further  consume the highest proportion of the 
County budget. The County is burdened with challenge of preventable diseases, chronic ailments 
and access to affordable healthcare services. The Covid -19 disease and post pandemic effects 
exposed the soft underbelly i n the sector.  
In order to achieve access to quality and affordable healthcare for all County residents, my 
administration will focus on priorities based on the main pillars in the Health Sector. These 
priorities will address the following gaps;  
a) Reformi ng Health sector policies to address existing gaps in staff recruitment, placement, 
training, promotion and terms of employment;  
b) Promote improving access to healthcare services by organizing patients with chronic 
illnesses into support groups to stream line access to drugs and services; Establishing dedicated 
youth -friendly centres and palliative care units in all our sub -county hospitals; Establishing 
ambulance management system; and reforming County community health services;  
c) In order to promote su stainable financing for Healthcare, I shall prioritize  governance, 
transparency and accountability concerns in the management of hospital Facility Improvement 
Fund (FIF). In addition, I shall lead collaborations with the National Government to ensure acces s 
to NHIF cover.  
d) In order to ensure adequate health products and technology I shall ensure deliberate budget 
allocation for the procurement of drugs and essential medical supplies. I shall further ensure 
deployment of a robust ICT system to manage drugs , essential medical supplies and patients in 
health facilities.  
e) To increase further access to healthcare services my administration shall prioritize  
completion, equipping and operationalization of ongoing and stalled health infrastructure projects, 
upgrading all sub -county hospitals into functional level IV status; expansion of the existing 
dispensaries and health centers to offer a comprehensive and standardized package of care and 
expand services offered at Nakuru Level V hospital to minimize cases of referrals.  
f) To address Health sector leadership and governance constraints, I shall ensure that all 
hospital Boards of Management and Health Facilities Management Committees are constituted 
from within local community served to promote participation and ownership in decision making.  
g) Observing the huge burden for healthcare financing, I intend to promote and strengthen 
partnerships and collaboration with relevant stakeholders in the sector to leverage on opportunities 
for external resource to bridge cu rrent budgetary gaps while also ensuring accountable and 
transparent utilization of such resources.   
OCTOBER 12, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon. Members the contribution of the agriculture sector to the County economy 
cannot be overstated. However, the sector has continued to s uffer from high cost of farm inputs, 
declining yields, climate change and its effects and fluctuations in market prices. My 
administration has among other, prioritized achieving Food Security and Agro -Processing through 
the following interventions;  
a) Enhancing access to affordable farm inputs and subsidized services, effective and efficient 
agricultural extension services to promote productivity;  
b) Implementing quality control through standardi sed packaging of local agricultural products 
and ensuring acc ess to certified seeds and improved livestock breeds;  
c) Promote agribusiness through policy guidance in contract farming to guarantee minimum 
returns;  
d) Promote diversification crop and livestock including pyrethrum and avocadoes to reduce 
vulnerabilitie s associated with traditional crop;  
e) Establishing partnerships to operationalize the Egerton Agri -city park to enhance agro -
processing;  
Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon. Members, Kenya Vision 2030 has identified physical infrastructure as a 
foundation for national transformation. An effective and efficient physical infrastructure is the 
hallmark of a competitive economy. In order to facilitate the com petitiveness of the County 
economy and transform Nakuru my administration intend to focus on the following;  
a) Develop and operationalize a robust Integrated County Transport Infrastructure Master 
plan covering road and transport connectivity  
c) Construct  modern Matatu termini in the city and all urban areas with supportive 
infrastructure for SMEs/MSEs. Formulate and implement policy to promote utili sation of local 
content in County Infrastructure Development and Maintenance;  
d) Undertake routine maintenance of at least 2,000KM of access roads across the County;  
e) Identify at least 200KM of road network for upgrading to bitumen standards in 
collaboration with National Government and development partners;  
 f) Expand County street lighting program a nd transition to solar powered street lighting.   
Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon. Members given the devolved function of Early Childhood Development 
and Education (ECDE), the County Government has a unique opportunity of guaranteeing a good 
start and foundation for b asic education. My Administration is committed to achieving access to 
quality and affordable ECDE and vocational training for all. I look forward to achieving this noble 
goal through executing the following;  
OCTOBER 12, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 a) Implementing a school feeding program in ECD E to improve nutrition and increase 
enrolment and retention;  
b) Employing adequate and well -trained ECDE teachers to reduce the teacher pupil ratio;  
c) Undertaking continuous in -service capacity development for ECD teachers and programme 
officers;  
d) Expanding and equipping ECDE classrooms with enhanced digital capabilities, and 
providing adequate instructional materials.  
 e) Collaboration with national education stakeholders to improve transition rates at all levels. 
On the other hand, my administration will prioritize youth training by focusing on skills 
development in our Vocational Training Centres. On this agenda I intend to do the following;   
a) Acquire  modern equipment and tools for Vocational Training Centres through partnerships with 
industry pla yers and other external partners;  
c) Establish digital innovation hubs and community libraries at the Sub County level; -
Progressively establish Vocational Centres of Excellence in each Sub - County;  
d) Promote partnerships with universities and industry for  incubation and commercialization 
of youth innovations. To increase retention of our learner in high school and tertiary education I 
wish to consolidate County Bursary allocations so as to ensure equitable distribution and introduce 
scholarship program for  needy students. On this Hon. Members I wish to mention that next 
disbursement may be delayed due to current reconstitution of bursary committees.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon. Members a good government is recognized based on how well it protects 
its weakest memb ers of the society. My administration will prioritize provision of social safety 
nets to reduce vulnerabilities of our special interest groups including the Elderly, and Persons With 
Disability (PWD), Women and Youth. To attain the objective of social prot ection, I look forward 
to implementing the following;  
a) Formulate, approve and implement a County gender policy;  
b) Establish and operationalize Gender -Based Violence (GBV) rescue and rehabilitation 
centres in collaboration with relevant stakeholders;  
c) Facilitate faster registration of PWDs and increase efficiency in implementation of County 
PWD Fund;  
d) Streamline Access to Government Procurement Opportunities (AGPO) to ensure 
meaningful benefits to the intended target group(s);  
e) Partner with sectora l stakeholders in community social mobilization, sensitization and 
access to affordable credit for organized groups. Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon. Members As 
OCTOBER 12, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 aforementioned in my statement above, the County economy contributes to a significant proportion 
of the na tional economy. To promote our competitiveness and in building a more diversified 
economy, the County Government will require to take deliberate steps to reduce the cost of doing 
business and position Nakuru as an important destination for local and foreig n investment. In order 
to achieve this goal, I look forward to promoting the following;  
a) Reform the County government tax regime through harmonization of fees and charges and 
elimination of other non -tariff barriers to trade;  
b) Partner with interested and eligible financial institutions to operationalize the County 
Enterprise Fund and the Cooperative Fund to facilitate access to affordable capital by 
MSME/SMEs;  
c) Leverage on abundant County energy potential to establish proposed industrial park in 
collaboration with responsible National government departments;  
d) Modernize and expand County market infrastructure;  
e) Offer policy guidance towards value addition in livestock, fisheries and agriculture 
products by the private sector;  
f) Mobilize group savi ngs for capital investment through the cooperative movement;  
g) Market and promote Brand Nakuru;  
Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon. Members As you are aware, Nakuru is ranked as a water scarce County. 
Our County also lies in ecologically sensitive regions with important wetlands. My administration 
will focus on achieving clean and safe water supply systems and sus tainable environmental 
conservation. To achieve this initiative, I look forward to undertaking the following;  
a) Expeditiously follow -up with responsible State department to ensure completion of the 
flagship Itare Water Dam;  
b) Collaborate with neighbouri ng Baringo County to expand water reticulation from 
Chem asusu dam in Rongai and Nakuru West Sub Counties;  
c) Mobilize necessary capital to construct Malewa dam to increase supply of clean and safe water 
in Naivasha and Gilgil Sub Counties;  
d) Complete and sustain solari sation of County boreholes projects.  
e) Collaborate with National government and responsible state departments to allow for 
sustainable exploitation of forest resource to alleviate current vulnerabilities in our timber industry 
and related sectors;  
OCTOBER 12, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 g) Coordinate sustainable solid and liquid waste management systems in all urban areas; 
Promote adaptation/mitigation to climate change, access to clean energy sources and transition to 
green economy options. Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon. Membe rs Observing the finite nature of land 
resource, we are called upon to effectively and efficiently utilize this scarce resource. Land -based 
revenues contribute close to half of our County Own Source Revenues. Am aware that this House 
has previously adopted  the County Spatial Plan (CSP  2014 -2024) and the Integrated Strategic 
Urban Development Plans (ISUDPs) for Nakuru and Naivasha Municipality. In the next integrated 
plan period, my administration will prioritize the following;  
  
a) Digitalize County land re cords, submission and approval of building plans through 
proposed Land Information Management System (LIMS);  
b) Implement the County Spatial Plan to further ensure proper coordination and sustainable 
land use planning;  
c) Promote Alternative Dispute Resolu tion (ADR) mechanisms in resolution of land disputes;  
d) Develop a County policy and master plan on affordable housing leveraging on County 
owned land;  
e) Develop and implement City, Municipalities regeneration plans;  
f) Prioritize proper physical planning  for selected towns and urban centres;  
g) Engage National government on finalization of County titling program and to resolution of 
‘land caveat’ imposed in sections of Njoro, Molo and Kuresoi South Sub counties.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon. Members The youth po pulation constitute the most active and highest 
proportion of the County labour force. Unfortunately, most of them have remained 
underemployed. To mainstream youth agenda for Nakuru and create opportunities for our young 
men and women, I intend to focus on  the following;  
a) Enhance skills development in our vocational training centres and other training 
institutions to promote youth employability;  
c) Enhance the County youth internship programme to provide necessary linkage between 
academia and needs of ind ustrial environment; Formulate and implement a youth policy on short -
term youth volunteer -ship programme;  
d) Document available County skills set and provide linkage with the job market locally and 
abroad;  
e) Create a Sports and Arts fund for managing and nurturing County sport, sports talents, art, 
culture and recreation;  
OCTOBER 12, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 f) Fast-track the completion of Afraha Stadium, Keringet Sports Academy, and other 
existing, sports stadia;  
g) Invest in ICT infrastructure to leverage on the available opportunities in A jira Digital and 
other online jobs opportunities.  
  
Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon. Members In order to attain the above commitments the County Government 
will require to address current governance, transparency and accountability constraints within the 
County publi c sector. We must therefore ensure that we have a motivated and productive County 
public service. Among other public sector reform initiatives, I now wish to briefly enumerate a 
number of crosscutting issues that will assure expected results in delivery of  public good;  
  
a) Develop and implement human resource management policy focusing on planning, 
recruitment, placement, deployment and career progression;  
b) Performance Management through a reward/sanction -based Performance Contracting (PC) 
and Performanc e Appraisal Systems (PAS);  
c) Devolve County government services to Sub County, Ward and village level where 
possible in line with the objects of devolution;  
d) Continuous in -service employee training based on needs assessment;  
e) Establishing and implementing service charters at all service delivery points;  
f) Completing the process of automation in revenue administration across all streams;  
g) Automating eligible County Government services and provision of public Wi-Fi 
connectivity in selected pub lic amenities to promote access to e -Government services; Mr. Speaker 
Sir, Hon. Members as I conclude I wish to acknowledge your distinguished role in the achievement 
of the County Government mandate as well as your commitments to the electorate through 
legislation, oversight and representation. To accomplish the above tasks, we must promote 
prudency in utilization of County Public Finances. I have taken note of the limited scarce resources 
in the National transfers and Own Source Revenues (OSR) in meeting County Development Goals. 
I therefore expect to operationalize external resource mobilization department and work with our 
development partners to help finance off -balance sheet initiatives. To achieve the above, I shall be 
initiating several policy and le gislative proposals for your consideration and approval. Among 
other, the County Treasury shall be forwarding the first supplementary budget proposal FY 
2022/2023 to this House in order to align my administration priorities with the County budget 
appropria tion. In due course the County Executive will forward the Finance Bill to address current 
constraints in mobilization of local revenues. I also look forward to the finalization of the 3rd 
OCTOBER 12, 2022                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 County Integrated Development Plan (CIDP 2023 -2027) to further align  our agenda for Nakuru 
with the County Government development planning process. The CIDP will also be submitted to 
the house for your consideration and adoption. In my short stint since my inauguration, I have had 
meetings with all County Government entiti es and received important briefs on current status of 
the County Government. I have made necessary decisions to allow for seamless transition and to 
facilitate continuity of government services. In  order to further assure a smooth transition, I 
reiterate m y pledge to the completion of ongoing County projects. In addition, I wish to confirm 
the County government commitment in meeting its current financial obligations that may include 
but not limited to clearance of eligible pending Bills and honouring of for mally entered contracts 
with suppliers and contractors –that is LPOs and LSOs.  In the coming days I will be announcing 
nominees of the County Executive Committee (CEC) to facilitate supervision, administration and 
delivery of County Government services. I urge you Hon. Members to expeditiously discharge 
your function in reviewing and approving the nominees.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir and Hon. Members May I end by appealing to all of us to join hands to do that 
which is good and right for Nakuru  County . Thank you for listening.  May God bless you all and 
God bless Nakuru.  
                                                         (Applause ) 
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Hon. Members the House stands adjourned until tomorrow, 
Thursday, at 9.30am.  
(The House ro se at 3.20pm ) 
  