COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Thursday 6 th  July 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03:20 PM  
[The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Next Order ;  there  is a M otion by honorable Alex Mbugua ,  the 
Chairperson  Committee on Budget and Appropriation s .  
Hon . Alex Mbugua: Thank y ou Honorable Speaker  and the Honorable House ;  I have a  Motion 
that Pursuant to the provisions of S ection 8(e), ( xi )  of the County Government Ac t, 2012, Section 
125( 1) (a) of  the Public Finance Management Act 2012, this House adopts the R eport of the 
Committe e on Budget and Appropriation s  on the County Integrated Development Plan 2023 - 2027.  
I wish to present to this Hono u rable House to table and move a  Motion on the R eport of the 
Committe e on  Budget and Appropriatio n s  on the County Integrated Development Plan 2023 - 2027.  
On  Acknowledgement ,  the Committee  on  Budget and Appropriation s  wishes to thank the Office  
of the  Speaker  and the Clerk  of th e County Assembly for the support extended to it in the execution 
of its mandate as well as the Member s of the County Assembly  who participated in the process.  
Hono u rable Speaker , the Committee  also wishes to acknowledge the team from the County 
Treasury who appeared during the review process of the CIDP 2023 - 2027 as well as the Budget 
Secretariat for the support received as it discharged its mandate of examining the D ocument.  
Hono u rable Speake r , allow me to extend my gratitude to your O ffice for you have organi s ed a 
forum whereby the Members of this House  including the entire  House , the  Committee  on Liaison 
and the Committee  on Budge t and Appropriation s  have sat in a C onsultative M eeting and 
un derstood this great D ocument that will inform the B lue - P rint of Nakuru County in the next five 
years beginning with this  Budget all the way to 2027.  
OVERVIEW  
1.  Hono u rable Speaker , Nakuru County Integrated D evelopment P lan 2023 - 27 is third to be 
prepared under the D evolved S ystem of G overnment. This CIDP 2023 - 2027 aims to guide 
County P lanning over the 2023 - 2027 M edium - T erm P eriod and leverage on an I nclusive 
L eadership to ensure S ocial E conomic E mpowerment for all.  
2.  Hono u rable  Speaker , in designing the structure and context of this I ntegrated D evelopment 
P lan, careful consideration was made to ensure effective linkages between CIDP and other 
existing National/ County P lans and P olicies.  Kenya Vision 2030 & MTP III provided 
direction of the National D evelopment A genda and the S ector P olicy P riorities in the 2023 - 
2027 P lan P eriod.  
3.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  The Constitution of Kenya 2010 has set the F ramework for D evolved 
S ystem of Gove rnment with the aim of bringing G overnment S ervices closer to the citizens. 
Nakuru County is one of the 47 Counties of the Republic of Kenya established in the 
Constitution of Kenya 2010. It covers 7,504.9 Km² .  
4.   Hono u rable Speaker ,  Nakuru is a cosmopolitan County that is centrally located and one of 
the most important T rading, I ndustrial, T ransport and A gricultural H ubs in Kenya .  
According  to the 2019 Kenya Population and Housing Census (KPHC), the County had a 
total population of 2, 162,202 (third highest nationally ) comprising of 1,077,272 males, 
1,084,835 females and 95 intersex. The population was projected to reach 2.3 million in 
2022 and 2.5 million people by 2027.  
5.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  t he major economic activities in the County include; Agriculture, 
F orestry and F ishing; T ransport and S torage; W holesale and R etail T rade; and E lectricity 
G eneration & S upply. Other economic activities include: M anufacturing; C onstruction; 
R eal E state; F inancial and I nsurance; A ccommodation & F ood S ervices etc. The County’s 
contribution to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) stood at 4.9 percent and ranked as the fourth 
largest contributor (GCP, 2021)  
6.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  The Nakuru County Spatial Plan (C SP 2019 - 2029) provides a 
structured framework for coordinating and integrating S ectoral P lans and A ctivities and 
support the S ystematic I mplementation of County D evelopment P rogrammes  
PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF THE PREVIOUS CIDP 2018 - 2022  
7.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  this will review   the implementation of the I ntegrated P lanning P eriod 
2018 - 2022, focusing on R evenue and E xpenditure P erformance as well as S ector 
P erformance based on expected outcomes of the second CIDP.  
8.  Hono u rable Speaker  the lessons learnt, the emerging issues, development issues and natural 
resource s  will inform the formulation of strategic interventions for the T hird I ntegrated P lan 
P eriod.  
Analysis of the County Revenue Sources  
9.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  d uring  the 2018 - 2022 P lan P eriod,  the County Government forecasted 
revenue from National Equitable S hare, Conditional G rants and Own Source Revenue 
(OSR). Total R evenue R eceipts amounted to Kshs . 74.3 billion against a target of Kshs . 
77.3 billion reflecting an achievement rate of 96 percent. Equitable share of revenue 
accounted for 71 percent ( Kshs . 52.7 billion), while the OSR contributed to 18 percent ( Kshs  
13.6 billion) of the total County receipts during the P lan P eriod.  
Equitable Share of Rev enue  
10.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  E quitable S hare of revenue accounted for 71 percent of the T otal 
R eceipts. The County received the full allocation hence achievement rate during the P lan 
P eriod was 100 percent. The actual revenue increased from 9.27 billion to 13.02 billion 
reflecting a 40.4 percent growth across the period.  
11.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  the rise in revenue collection in the FY 2021/2022 is due to the 
enactment of the 3 rd  Generation  R evenue S haring F ormula approved by the Senate. Further, 
four C onditional G rants, i.e., road maintenance fuel levy fund, grant for level V hospital, 
grant for rehabilitation of village polytechnics and compensation for user fees foregone (for 
D ispensaries  and H ealth C entres) were converted to U nconditional G rants.  
Own Source Revenue  
12.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  the total OSR –  comprising of local sources and Facility Improvement 
Fund (FIF) –  amounted to Kshs . 13.6 billion against a target of Kshs . 15.4 billion 
representing an average of 88.0 percent achievement. This result was achieved through a 
performance rate  of 79.3 percent and 105.7 percent from local sources and FIF respectively. 
Local revenue accounted for Kshs . 8.2 billion (60.4 percent), while the Facility 
Improvement Fund (FIF) contributed to Kshs . 5.38 billion (39.6 percent) of the total OSR 
during the  P lan P eriod.  
FIF performance  
13.  Hono u rable  Speaker ,  d uring the CIDP 2018 - 2022 I mplementation P eriod ,  revenue from 
H ealth F acilities grew steadily from Kshs. 405 million in FY 2016/17 to 1.5 billion in FY 
2021/22. The growth can be attributed to the upgrading of eight facilities in FY 2018/19 
alongside improved collections in the facilities.  
Conditional Grants  
14.  Hono u rable Spe aker ,  during  the period under review ,  the County Government received 
Kshs . 4.05 billion as per the projections. The growth in disbursement of C onditional G rants 
from GoK declined from an average of 42 percent in FY 2017/18 to negative 83 percent in 
FY 2021/2022. This is attributed to the reclassification of some C onditional G rants to 
U nconditional A llocations in the E quitable S hare.  
15.  Further Hono urable Speak er ,  the County Government benefitted from loans and grants 
negotiated between the National Government and Development Partners. The T otal 
R eceipts from C onditional G rants (from Development P artners) amounted to Kshs . 3.9 
billion against a target of Kshs . 5 .0 billion representing 78 percent achievement. The under 
achievement may be attributed to non - disbursement of funds by D evelopment P artners to 
the Government. Table 2.1.6 gives an analysis of D onor R eceipts versus the target.  
County Budget Expenditure Analysis  
16.  During the period under review  Hono u rable Speaker ,  the County Government incurred an 
E xpenditure of Kshs . 69.7 billion against a target of Kshs . 101.0 billion representing a 69.0 
percent absorption rate. This underperformance may be a ttributed to the slow down 
occasioned by the COVID - 19 P andemic and A dministrative I nefficiencies during budget 
implementation.  
 
Expenditure by Economic Classification    
17.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  Government E xpenditure can either be R ecurrent or D evelopment in 
nature. During the period under review the County Government incurred a total expenditure 
of Kshs . 69.7 billion i.e., total R ecurrent E xpenditure accounted for 73.6 percent ( Kshs  51.3 
billion) and a D evelopment E xpenditure accounting for 26.4 percent ( Kshs . 17.4 billion).  
 
18.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  Recurrent E xpenditure amounted to 44 percent ( Kshs  30.6 billion) 
was compensation to employees, 24.6 percent ( Kshs . 17.1 billion) for O perations and 
M aintenance and 5.0 percent ( Kshs  4. 4 billion) as transfers to County Assembly of Nakuru. 
The total D evelopment E xpenditure accounted for. However, this falls short of the 
recommended 30 percent threshold envisaged in the PFM Act 2012.  
Sector Programmes Performance Review  
19.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  during  the 2018 - 2022 I ntegrated P lanning P eriod, the County 
Government prioriti s ed P rogrammes in eight S ectors. An overall performance of 68.5 
percent was achieved in programme implementation based on planned targets which is 
consistent with expen diture performance rate of 69.0 percent.  
20.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  t he Health S ector reported the highest achievement rate (90 percent) 
while E ducation S ector reported the lowest achievement rate (39 percent). The variability 
in performance across S ectors was attributed to realignment of priorities to address the 
response to COVID - 19 P andemic and investments in N on - C apital E xpenditure.  
Table 2.3: Sector i mplementation Status  
S/no  Sector  Reported Status of 
completion (%)  
 Agriculture, Rural and Urban Development  65  
1.1  Agriculture Livestock and Fisheries  67  
1.2  Lands, Housing and Physical Planning  62.9  
 Energy, Infrastructure and ICT  56  
2.1  Infrastructure  49  
2.2  ICT  63.7  
 Health  90  
3.1  Health Services  90  
 Education  39  
4.1  Education, ICT and e - Government  39  
 General Economic, Commercial Affairs Sector  72  
S/no  Sector  Reported Status of 
completion (%)  
5.1  Trade, Cooperatives, Tourism and Industrialisation  72  
 Environmental Protection, Natural Resources and Water  75.06  
6.1  Water, Environment, Energy, Natural Resources and Climate 
Change  75.06  
 Public Administration and International Relations (PAIR)  76.26  
7.1  Office of the Governor and the Deputy Governor  108.24  
7.2  County Treasury  70.8  
7.3  Public Service Training and Devolution  71  
7.4  County Public Service Board  79  
7.5  Nakuru City Board  43  
7.6  Naivasha Municipality  85.5  
 Social Protection  51.92  
8.1  Youth, Culture,  51.92  
 Overall Achievement  68.5  
 
PUBLIC HEARINGS AND CONSULTATIONS  
21.  Therefore Hono u rable Speaker ,  in compliance with legal provisions for P ublic P olicy 
F ormulation, the County Government of Nakuru invited members of the public, P rivate 
S ector representatives, local Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) and other I nterested 
P ersons for public consultation forums.  
22.  Honourable  Speaker ,  the scheduled forums deliberated on proposed M ediu m - T erm 
I nterventions aimed at addressing current S ocial E conomic D evelopment constraints 
affecting citizens’ well - being in Nakuru County. The D evelopment A genda of the 3rd CIDP 
2023 - 2027 focused on the following;  
i.  Carrying forward ongoing projects/programme s into the 3rd CIDP 2023 - 
2027;  
ii.  Post C OVID - 19 S ocial E conomic R ecovery S trategy & P rovision of S ocial 
S afety N ets;  
iii.  Leveraging on growth in productive S ectors of the County economy;  
iv.  Mainstreaming/integration of crosscutting issues in development planning;  
v.  Promotion of access to Q uality and A ffordable H ealthcare S ervices;  
vi.  Enhancing G overnance, T ransparency & A ccountability in the County 
P ublic S ervice;  
vii.  Creating enabling en vironment for faster growth of P rivate S ector, SMEs & 
MSMEs;  
viii.  Expansion and O p erationalisation of County P hysical and S ocial 
I nfrastructure.  
23.  Hono urable Speaker ,  the C onsultative F orums were held across all 55 Wards in Nakuru 
County  between 5th December and 9th December 2022 and the written memoranda’s 
forwarded to the County Department of Finance and Economic Planning, any of the Sub 
County/Ward Administrator’s O ffices in Nakuru on or before Friday 9th December 2022.  
Sector performa nce 2018 - 2022  
Agriculture, Rural and Urban Development  
This S ector is composed of two S ub - S ectors: Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries; and Lands, 
Housing and Physical Planning.  
Agriculture, Livestock and fisheries  
24.  The Sub - S ector’s priorities  Hono u rable Speaker ,  included; improving crop production, 
promoting extension services, promoting agribusiness, research and promotion of fish 
production.  
25.  At the end of the R eview P eriod  Hono urable Speaker ,  the annual meat yield stood at 13.4 
million Kgs against a target of 6.5million kg .  This  was due to construction of seven 
slaughter houses and high demand for meat & meat products. Annual Poultry yield -  eggs 
increased from Kshs . 884 million to Kshs . 1.2 bi llion due to high demand in eggs, enhanced 
extension services. The disease prevalence reduces significantly to one percent from 3.7 
percent due to increased extension services and capacity building. The value of livestock 
products traded increased from Ksh s . 11.2 billion to Kshs . 17.7 billion.  
26.  Under F isheries D evelopment  Hono u rable Speaker ,  the annual fish yield increased from 
1.85MT to 12.40MT this was due to; 57 S takeholder Fora held across the S ub C ounties, 
training of 1390 farmers, 15 extension services offered to farmers, 22 show & exhibitions 
and purchase & distributed of 297,886 fingerlings. In 2018 the annual turnover from fish 
stood at Kshs . 236 million at the end of the R eview P eriod from turn over of Kshs . 1.53 
billion. This was mainly attributed to exploration of new fishing areas and a decrease in 
illegal fishing at Lake Naivasha due to increased surveillance by the Kenya Coast Guard.  
27.  During the review period  Hono u rable Speaker ,  the S ub - S ecto r increased the area under 
sorghum from 250ha to 6000ha, area under sweet potato from 200ha to 458 ha, area under 
cassava from 40ha to 170ha and the acreage under pyrethrum production from 1,000 acres 
to 4,000 acres in a bid to increase crop productivity.  
 
 
28.  Additionally  Hono u rable Speaker ,  the yield of maize achieved was 2.77 tonnes/ha, beans 
yield was 692kg/ha, potatoes 10.48 tonnes/ha, garden peas 6 tonnes/ha, kales 28 tonnes/ha, 
carrot 18 tonnes/ha, cabbage yield was 32 tonnes/ha.  This was attributed to support to 
farmers with seedlings,  fertilizers, training and increased number of E xtension S ervices, 
F ield D ays, T rade F airs, F arm T ours, E xhibitions and D emonstration. There was increased 
uptake in C limate S mart A griculture and R eduction (by 9 percent) in incidences of crop 
disease throug h implementation of programmes such as SHEP P rogramme, NARIG - P, and 
Climate  Smart A griculture P rogramme.  
Lands, Housing and Physical Planning  
29.  The S ub - S ector’s priorities  Hono u rable Speaker ,  were to implement L and P olicy, undertake 
P hysical P lanning, U rban D evelopment, and Land  S urveys & M apping and provide 
affordable housing.  
30.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  during the period under review the County Spatial Plan (2019 - 2029) 
was adopted by the Nakuru County A ssembly and 29 T rading C entres D evelopment P lans 
were prepared and approved. Additionally, the S ub - S ector collected an amount of Kshs . 1.8 
billion from L and R ate and D evelopment C ontrols.  
31.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  i n order to achieve decent and affordable housing, the S ub - S ector 
rehabilitated 951 housing units and 144 toilet blocks across the County estates, established 
five ABMT C entres and trained 15 groups in ABMT, delivered 605 affordable housing units 
through PP P. Additionally, 7.6km of sewer line was laid and connected 1,454 new 
households to the main trunk sewer. Feasibility study on affordable housing in Naivasha 
was completed in the period under review.  
32.  Further  Hono u rable Speaker ,  the S ub - S ector also issued 2 40,000 title deeds to Nakuru 
County residents under the County Land Titling Programme in collaboration with the 
National Government. Four new M unicipalities were created during the R eview P eriod, 
namely Nakuru, Naivasha, Molo and Gilgil Municipalities. Nak uru and Naivasha 
Municipalities were operationalised in the p eriod u nder r eview. Nakuru Municipality was 
later elevated to City status pursuant to the provisions of the Urban Areas and Cities Act 
2011(Amended, 2019).  
Energy Infrastructure and ICT Sector  
The sector comprises of two subsectors: Infrastructure and the ICT & E - government subsector.  
Infrastructure  
33.  Honourable  Speaker ,  during the period under review, the S ub - S ector prioritised 
I nfrastructural D evelopment and M aintenance of R oads, S treet L ighting, B us T ermini & 
B ridges and F irefighting & D isaster M anagement. In order to improve efficiency in 
T ransport S ervices, the Infrastructure Development  increased gravelling and tarmacking of 
County roads by 1,020Km and 42 K m respectively. Further, in order to control S torm W ater 
D rainage and reduce risks of flash floods, the Sub - S ector constructed an additional 34 Km 
new drainage system.   
 
34.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  in a  bid to improve C ommunity S ecurity and promote 24 - hour 
E conomy, the S ub - S ector increased street lighting by 1,532 and further 1,000 LED Street  
L ights aimed at reducing the cost of power.  To increase the response rate and reduce the 
time taken to respond to fire emergencies and other  related disasters in the County, the S ub - 
S ector constructed and operationali s ed the Nakuru F ire S tation with two engines of a 
combined capacity of 15,000 litres and recruited & trained 25 firefighters.  
ICT and e - Government subsector  
35.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  during the period under review, the S ub - S ector prioritised ICT 
I nfrastructure, e - Government S ervices and Information & Communication S ervices.  
36.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  the S ub - S ector established five D igital C entres in Rongai, Njoro, 
Kagoto, Shabaab and Menen gai to promote digital literacy, access to e - Government 
services and Business Process Outsourcing (BPOs). The D epartment increased the number 
of sites connected with WAN/LAN from three to 25 to increase access to ICT services and 
improve efficiency in serv ice delivery.  
Health Sector  
37.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  during the period under review, the S ub - S ector prioritised P romotive, 
P reventive Health S ervices, C urative and R ehabilitative S ervices.  
38.  In the R eview P eriod  Hono u rable Speaker ,  the H ealth S ector reduced M aternal M ortality 
from 375 per 100,000 L ive B irths to 362 per 100,000 L ive B irths. This achievement is 
attributed to increased proportion of deliveries by skilled birth attendants from 65 percent 
to 93.4 percent and increase in the proportio n of pregnant women attending at least four 
ANC visits by nine percent to 73.4 percent.  
39.   Further  Hono u rable Speaker ,  access to PMTCT services for HIV/AIDs pregnant mothers 
increased to 98.6 percent from the initial 95 percent, proportion of fully immunized  children 
increased from 85 percent to 90 percent and infant mortality rate stagnated at 34 deaths per 
1000 live births.  
40.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  In order to improve access to health services, the sector recruited 659 
staff in all cadres’ County - wide, equipped and operationalized Electronic Medical Records 
(EMR) in five health facilities, completed Cancer Centre at Nakuru Level V Hospital, 
upgraded  seven Health Centre (Level III) to Sub - County Hospitals(Level - IV) status, 
constructed the Nakuru Level V Hospital Out - Patient Departm ent (OPD) Complex, 
operationalis ed the 250 - bed capacity Margaret Kenyatta Mother Baby wing and improved 
access to the Coun ty Ambulance services through purchase of 10 new ambulances.  
41.  Overall  Hono u rable Speaker ,  to improve public health outcomes, the number of Open 
Defecation - Free (ODF) certified villages increased by 468 and 113 new Community Units 
(CUs) were established in c ollaboration with partners.  
 
42.  Honourable Speaker ,  during the period under review the sector collected Kshs  5.386 billion 
against a target of Kshs  5.096 billion from FIF depicting an achievement of 106 percent.  
Education Sector  
43.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  during the period under review the sector prioriti s ed access to quality 
Early Childhood Development and Education (ECDE) and Vocational Training.  
44.  Hono u r able Speaker ,  the total enrolment for the public ECDE as at 2022 was 60,571 with 
30,946 as girls and 29,625 as boys. The gross enrolment rate in ECDE stood at 96 percent 
against a target of 70 percent. This may be attributed to construction of 305 new ECDE  
classrooms, recruitment of 688 ECDE teachers and implementation of school feeding 
programs in 22 ECDE centres. However, the teacher to pupil ratio target of 1:40 was not 
achieved as the current ratio is 1:88 due to inadequate staffing. The single sex toil et - pupil 
ratio improves from 1:60 to 1:40 during the review period attributable to the construction 
of 173 toilet blocks. This however falls short of the policy requirement of 1:25 for girls and 
1:30 for boys.  
45.  Hono u rable Speaker ,  the VTC enrolment improved from 1733 students in the year 2018 to 
2500 students in the year 2022 against a target of 2200 due to recruitment of 55 trainers and 
revitalization of 4 VTCs. VTC capitation programme disbursed Kshs  166 million to 
respective VTC s. A total of 7,849 students graduated from various County VTCs against a 
target of 13,725 with 10 percent linked to job market. Further, approximately Kshs . 681.7 
million was disbursed to 154,560 students in secondary and T ertiary I nstitutions.  
 General E conomic Commercial Affairs  
46.  Hono u rable Speaker , during the period under review the S ector’s priorities included; 
P romotion and M arketing of County T ourism; P romotion of C ooperative D evelopment & 
M anagement; M arket R ehabilitation & D evelopment; Consumer P rotection & P romotion 
of F air B usiness P ractice and C ommerce & E nterprise .  
Honourable Speaker , during the R eview P eriod ,  an increase was noted in local tourism numbers 
(from 10,000 recorded to 859,000) on account of World Rally Championship in Na ivasha and 
Gilgil .  Continuous marketing and growth in Meetings Incentives Conferences and Exhibitions 
have been reali s ed with full hotel bookings.  
Hono u rable Speaker , during the p eriod under review ,  the County Government had committed to 
provide consumer protection through Weights and Measures Unit. However, by the end of June 
2022, only 43 percent compliance on calibration of weighing machines was achieved due to late 
arrival of stamps and shortage of certificate s  of verification.  
Environmental P rotection, Natural Resources and Water  
47.  Honourable Speaker , during the period under review, the Sector’s priorities included 
provision of water and sewerage services; protection of the environment and conservation 
of natural resources; pollution control; so lid waste management; greening and 
beautification; regulation and protection of riparian land; energy reticulation, and climate 
change mitigation & adaptation.  
Hono u rable Speaker , t o further promote the use G reen E nergy O ptions, the number of new 
household s using renewable energy sources i.e., biogas, wind and one - tier clean energy 
alternatives, was 40,479 households against a target of 5000 households. Overall, the C limate 
C hange A ction P lan was fully implemented through enactment of the Nakuru Climate Cha nge Act 
2021 and the C onstitution of the Climate Change Committee.  
 
 Public Administration National/International Relations  
48.  . Honourable Speaker , this Sector comprises of seven Sub - Sectors namely, the Office of the 
Governor and Deputy Governor, County Asse mbly, the County Treasury, County Public 
Service Board, Public Service Training and Devolution, Nakuru City and Naivasha 
Municipality.  
 
Office of the Governor and the Deputy Governor  
49.  Honorable Speaker , during the period under review, the subsector prioritised effective 
management of County affairs and Coordination & Supervisory Services to County entities. 
This was achieved through appointment of 10 County Executive Committee Members, 
delivery of five State of the County Addresses, issuance of 55 press releases, holding of 120 
Cabinet Meetings, assenting 30 Bills to law, and reviewing of 33 Policies.  Further, the 
construction of the Milimani Annex Office Block was done to 70 percent completion rate.  
 
  
 
County Treasury  
50.  Honourable Speaker , Members can follow that: -   
Public Service, Devolution, Citizen Engagement, Disaster Management, and Humanitarian 
Assistance.  
Hono u rable Speaker , during the period under review, the D epartment prioriti s ed staff training and 
development, performance management, County  enforcement and compliance, civic education 
and public participation, and legal advisory services.  
Hono u rable Speaker , to enhance s ervice delivery at the S ub - County and W ard levels, 14 offices 
were constructed across various Sub - C ounties and W ards. To improve staff welfare the 
D epartment provided a comprehensive M edical I nsurance (as a requirement of the Salaries and 
Remuneration  Comm ission), established a G uidance and C ounselling U nit, and conducted 31 
engagement forums on S ensiti s ation of E mployees on HIV/AIDs  
 
 
 Nakuru City  
51.  Honourable Speaker , Nakuru Municipality was established in May 2019 and later elevated 
to City Status on 1st December 2021 after having complied with the requirements stipulated 
under the Urban Areas and Cities Act 2011(Amended, 2019). During the 2018 - 2022 
Integrated Plan P eriod the Sub - Sector prioritised Infrastructural Development and Social 
Services within the City.  
 
 Naivasha Municipality  
Hono u rable Speaker , Naivasha Municipality was inaugurated on 19th April 2019 after being 
granted the C harter in line with the UACA, 2 011. During the 2018 - 2022 I ntegrated P lan P eriod 
the S ub - S ector prioriti s ed I nfrastructural D evelopment and S ocial S ervices within the 
Municipality. To ensure improved infrastructure, the subsector tarmacked 5.7 Kms and maintained 
15 Kms of M unicipal roads , installed 40 streetlights, constructed a parking lot and constructed the 
Naivasha W holesale M arket mainly through KUSP. This market was opened last month by the 
P resident .  
 
 County Assembly  
Hono u rable Speaker , during the 2018 - 2022 I ntegrated P lan P eriod the County Assembly 
prioriti s ed L egislation, R epresentation and O versight. This was achieved through passing of 25 
B ills, construction and equipping of a M odern C hamber, County A ssembly O ffices, the Speaker ’s 
O fficial R esidence and R ehabilitation of existing O ffice B lock. The County Assembly also 
resolved to confer M unicipality status to Nakuru, Naivasha, Molo and Gilgil towns.  
 
Social Protection Recreation and Culture Sector  
Hono u rable Speaker , during the period under review, the sector prioritized  development of socio - 
cultural diversity, socio -  economic empowerment, promotion of gender equality, responsible 
gaming, youth training & empowerment, and sports development.  
 
 Challenges  
Honorable Speaker , some of the constraints that prevented optimal implementation of planned 
programmes during the 2018 - 2022 I ntegrated P lan P eriod included.  
i.  Budget constraints:  
ii.  Human R esource constraints:  
iii.  Weak procurement planning and implementation:  
iv.  Cas h flow constraints:  
v.  Lack of feasibility and prefeasibility studies:  
vi.  Weaknesses in execution of large/multi - year projects:  
vii.  Covid - 19 P andemic and its effects:  
viii.  Over - reliance on donor financing.  
ix.  Inadequate Political goodwill:  
 
Emerging Issues  
3.  Hono u rable Speaker , in implementing the planned programmes during the 2018 - 2022 
I ntegrated P lan P eriod, the following is the emerging issues that occurred.  
i.  Covid 19 - Pandemic:  
ii.  Climate C hange:  
iii.  Rapid Urbani s ation: Nakuru M unicipality being turned to C ity S tatus in December 2021.  
iv.  Macroeconomic fluctuations.  
v.  Increased Transfers to the County  Government:  
vi.  National G overnment I nvestments in Nakuru County:  
  
 
 
 Lessons Learnt  
Hono u rable Speaker , the following are the lessons learnt from the challenges that hampered the 
achievement of the planned programmes;  
i. Intergovernmental collaboration is one of them and we have them enlisted in page 28 and 29 of 
this R eport.  
 SPATIAL DEVELO PMENT FRAMEWORK  
Hono u rable Speaker , this S ection provides the linkages between the County/National Spatial 
Planning  D evelopment F ramework and the proposed S trategic I nterventions for the third 
I ntegrated D evelopment P lan. The Nakuru County  Spatial Plan (CS P 2019 - 2029) provides a 
structured framework for C oordinating and I ntegrating S ectoral P lans and activities and support 
the systematic implementation of County  D evelopment P rogrammes.  
 
Spatial Development Framework  
Hono u rable Speaker , to operationali s e int egration of the S patial D evelopment F ramework into the 
CIDP 2023 - 2027, the CSP 2019 - 2029 provides a structural F rame W ork for coordinati ng and 
integrating S ectoral P lans and A ctivities.  
There is a table that will give us the mapping of CSP 2019 2029 T hematic S trategies and M embers 
can have a quick look at it.  
 DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES, STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMMES  
Hono u rable Speaker , this section highlights the S ector D evelopment P riorities,  S trategies, 
P rogrammes and F lagship P rojects for the 2023 - 2027.  
 
Flagship projects  
Hono u rable Speaker , d uring the 2023 - 2027 I ntegrated P lan P eriod, the County  G overnment has 
prioriti s ed F lagship P rojects aimed at attaining high economic and social impacts. The projects are 
geared towards transforming service delivery and achieving the D evelopment A genda of both the 
National and County  Governments. The following are the F lagships P rojects proposed f or 
implementation.  
i.  Construction of a modern M ulti - P urpose A gro - P rocessing C entre  
ii.  Development of affordable housing  
iii.  County  T itling P rogramme  
iv.  Refurbishment of Afraha S tadium P hase II  
All the way to school feeding program. We shall still proce ed to  
v.  Completion of Keringet High Altitude Sports Academy/ Training Centre  
vi.  Njoro Bulk Water Supply project (Egerton Dam)  
vii.  Naivasha Town Water Supply Project  
 
Hono u rable Speaker , d espite their obvious value to the communities, the following two p rojects 
were not included. (…)  
CIDP Linkages with National Development Agenda, Regional and International   Development 
Frameworks .  
Hono u rable Speaker , t his S ection demonstrates the County  Government interventions and 
contributions towards achievement of t he following commitments/plans; they include, Kenya 
Vision 2030, Sustainable Development Goals; Africa Agenda 2063; East Africa Community 
(EAC) Vision 2050, ICPD25 Kenya Commitments, Paris Agreement on Climate Change, 2015; 
Sendai Framework for Disaster Ri sk Reduction 2015 –  2030 .  
 
IMPLEMENTATION FRAMEWORK  
Hono u rable Speaker , this chapter provides the County  institutional arrangement and specific roles 
in implementation of the CIDP 2023 - 2027. In addition, the chapter presents the projected resources 
required to finance strategic interventions proposed in Chapter Four of this document.  
 Hono u rable Speaker , in order to realise the aspiration of the 3rd CIDP 2023 - 2027, the County  
Government I nstitutional F ramework will be organi s ed strategicall y in line with mandate of each 
unit and interface with external stakeholders.  There is a table for that .  
 
 Resource Mobilization and Management Framework  
 
Hono u rable Speaker , this outlines projected resources required to implement County  S trategic 
I nitia tives based on estimated yearly costing for proposals in Chapter F our of this D ocument. The 
S ection further outlines estimated revenue forecast for the 2023 - 2027 P lan P eriod.  
During the period 2023 -  2027 the County  Government will require Kshs. 121.38 bil lion in order 
to fund the prioritised S trategic I nitiatives excluding the F lagships of the County  Government. As 
illustrated in table 5.3.1 the H ealth S ector shall account for the highest percentage –  that is 39.5 
percent –  while the GECLA S ector account s  for the least percentage (2.3 percent) of the P lanned 
E xpenditure. Member s  can have a quick review of this in page 36 and 37 where we have the table 
of content on the same.  
 
 
 Estimated Resource Gap   
Hono u rable Speaker , observing the P rojected E xpenditur e R equirement of Kshs. 119.0 billion 
against a F orecasted County  R eceipt of Kshs. 99.9 billion ,  o ver other Medium - T erm P eriod, the 
County  Government is therefore faced with an estimated R esource G ap of Kshs. 19.1 billion. 
However, this resource requirement  is exclusive of the F lagship C osts because most of them are 
expected to be financed by MDAs and D evelopment P artners. The estimated A nnual R esource 
G ap is illustrated in the table below.  
Hono u rable Speaker  there is a table there that has given a proper t abulation  
Hono u rable Speaker , the County  will formulate strategies for resource mobili s ation and 
management aimed at financing prioriti s ed S trategic I nterventions and F lagship P rojects.  
 
Capital Financing Strategies:  
 
i)  Direct Project Funding by N ational MDAs   
ii)  Private S ector financing:  
iii)  Debt financing:  
iv)  Grants and D onations:  
v)  Policy and legal requirements:  
vi)  Natural R esource S haring B enefits  
vii)  Leveraging on R egional E conomic B loc  
(a)  Operational Fin ancing Strategies:  
 
i)  PFM reforms: The County Government will continuously pursue reforms in Public 
Finance that include R e venue and Expenditure Rationalisa tion to further achieve 
prudence in utili s ation of public resources.  
That will go on all the way to num ber seven  
(b)  Asset Management   
 
Hono u rable Speaker , The County Government E ntities have the responsibility to manage its assets 
effectively and efficiently to ensure that they are utilised for the intended purposes, provide value 
for money, prolong the lif e of the assets, minimi s e maintenance costs, prevent possible loss, 
damage and misuse in line with P ublic S ector A sset and L iability M anagement P olicy and 
G uidelines. During the 2023 - 2027 P lan P eriod, the County Government has put in place measures 
to manage assets along the A sset M anagement C ycle. These measures go up to number xvii 
detailed. List…  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: … Risk Management. The following are the anticipated risks that may hinder 
the implementation of t he CIDP 2023 - 2027.  
52.  The following are the anticipated risks that may hinder the implementation of the CIDP 2023 - 
2027, potential risk implications and proposed mitigation measures to enhance sustainable 
development. The information has been summarised in the  table below  
Risk, Implication, Level and Mitigation Measures  
Risk 
Category  Risk  Risk Implication  Risk 
Level 
(Low, 
Medium 
, High)  Mitigation measures  
Financial  •  OSR 
underperformance  
•  Wage bill constraints  
•  Weak PFM 
governance  
•  Weak asset 
management practices  
•  Pending bills  
•  Erratic national fiscal 
transfers  •  Inadequate budget 
for O&M  
•  Delayed service 
delivery  
•  Misuse of public 
assets  
•  Low budget 
absorption  
•  Unsustainable fiscal 
framework  
•  High budget roll 
overs  High  •  OSR enhancement 
measures  
•  PFM reforms  
•  Streamlining of 
procurement processes  
•  Strengthen internal 
controls  
•  Formulate and implement 
County Asset management 
Policy   
Economic  •  Macro -  economic 
fluctuations  
•  Rapid urbanization  
•  Poverty  
•  Scarcity of resources  
 •  High cost of service 
delivery  
•  Pressure on existing 
public amenities 
and available social 
safety nets  
•  Incidences of urban 
poverty  
•  Inadequate 
execution of 
prioritised 
interventions  Medium  •  Fiscal policy adjustments  
•  Proactive urban planning 
and development  
•  Pro - poor development 
interventions  
•  Internal and external 
resource mobilisation  
Legal  •  Non - compliance with 
legal and regulatory 
frameworks  
•  Inadequate enabling 
laws/policies to 
strengthen devolution  •  Increasing 
litigations  
•  High legal pending 
bills  
•  Poor service 
delivery  Mediu 
m  •  Compliance with existing 
legal and regulatory 
frameworks  
•  Adoption of ADR/AJS 
mechanisms  
•  Formulation, approval and 
implementation of pro 
devolution laws  
Risk 
Category  Risk  Risk Implication  Risk 
Level 
(Low, 
Medium 
, High)  Mitigation measures  
Organisati 
onal/opera 
tional  •  Weak succession 
planning and 
management  
•  Staff 
underperformance  
•  Pending bills  
•  Unfavourable/poor 
working conditions  •  Inadequate HR 
capacity  
•  Poor service 
delivery  
•  Reputational 
damage  
•  High cost of service 
delivery  
•  Industrial action  High  •  Effective and efficient 
human resource planning  
•  Implementation of PC and 
PAS  
•  Prompt settlement of 
financial commitments  
•  Undertake HR reforms  
•  Compliance with labour 
laws and regulations  
Environm 
ental  •  Climate change 
impacts  
•  Natural disasters  
•  Environmental 
pollution  
•  Human wildlife 
conflicts  
•  Weak DRR strategies  •  Declining 
agricultural 
productivity  
•  Loss of life, 
property and 
livelihoods  
•  Loss of biodiversity  Mediu 
m  •  Adoption of green 
economy options including 
design and construction of 
resilient infrastructure and 
climate smart agriculture  
•   Protection, restoration and 
conservation of the natural 
environment  
•  Develop County DRR plans  
Technolog 
ical  •  Rapid technological 
advancements  
•  Cyber crime  
•  Slow uptake of 
emerging 
technologies  
•  Inadequate ICT 
infrastructure   
•  Weak data 
governance structures  •  High cost of 
replacing obsolete 
technology  
•  Data/information 
insecurity  
•  Data loss   
•  Operational 
inefficiencies  
 High  •  Investing in ICT 
infrastructure and 
innovative solutions  
•  Adoption of data 
protection policy  
•  Installation of data security 
systems  
•  Cyber security awareness 
and training  
•  Establishment of 
County data centres  
Political  •  Inadequate political 
good will  
•  Transitional shocks  
•  Corruption  
•  Political instability  •  Non - 
implementation of 
the prioritized 
programmes and 
projects  High  •  Foster collaboration and 
good will among political 
players  
•  Promote citizen - centred 
governance through 
Risk 
Category  Risk  Risk Implication  Risk 
Level 
(Low, 
Medium 
, High)  Mitigation measures  
•  Reputational 
damage and loss of 
public trust  
•  Poor service 
delivery  
•  Poor business 
environment  participatory decision 
making   
•  Promote national values 
and principles.  
•  Compliance with 
leadership and integrity for 
state officers    
 
  
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND LEARNING  
 
53.  Honourable Speaker ,  this outlines how the CIDP 2023 - 2027 will be M onitored and E valuated 
during and after its implementation. The M&E processes, methods and tools are guided by 
Section 232 of the Constitution of Kenya and all the legal provisions that provide for M&E, 
N ational and County P olicies including National M&E Policy 2022, Dra ft County M&E 
Policy 2019, CIMES Guidelines 2019, Kenya Norms and Standards for M&E 2020 and 
Kenya Evaluation Guidelines 2020.  
 
54.  Honourable Speaker ,  highlights the proposed M&E s tructure; D ata C ollection, A nalysis, 
R eporting and L earning; M&E O utcome I ndicators Tracking; and D issemination and 
F eedback M echanism.  
 
County Monitoring and Evaluation Structure  
 
55.  Honourable Speaker ,  The County Government has established the necessary structures to 
support the M&E processes for implementing the plan based on the CIMES guidelines. The 
established County M&E structure consists of the County Executive Committee, the 
County M&E Unit, County M&E Committee  (CoMEC), Departmental M&E Committees, 
Sub - County M&E Committees (SCoMEC)  and the Project Implementation and Management 
Committees (PIMCs).  
 
56.  The M&E structures provide linkages with the S tate D epartment for Economic Planning 
(SDEP), Council of Governors (C OG) and the citizen engagement forums. Additionally, the 
County Assembly provides oversight through the Implementation Committee and the 
respective Sectoral Committee(s).  
  
 
 
State Department for 
Economic Planning – 
SDEP –  (via NIMES)  
Departmental Project 
Implementation  
Committees (P I C)  
County Information and 
Documentation Centre 
(CIDC)  
Project Management 
Committees (PMC)  
Sub - County Monitoring and 
Evaluation Committees 
(SCoMEC )  
Departmental M&E 
Committee s  
(DMEC)  
County Monitoring  and 
Evaluation Committee 
(COMEC)  
County Executive 
Committee  
County Assembly 
Committee(s)  
Citizen Engagement 
Forums including:  
• CBEF  
• Direct public 
participation  
• Urban forums  
• Nakuru Civil Society 
Forum  
Department of 
Economic Planning 
(M&E Unit)  
Council of Governors  
(COG)  
Nakuru Monitoring and E valuation  Structure  
57.  Honourable Speaker ,  The County Assembly Committee  for Implementation shall be 
responsible for receiving County progress reports, reviewing, and presenting them to the 
County Assembly for consideration. Further, the County Assembly Sectoral Committees 
shall be responsible for monitoring the programmes/projects implementation of the relevant 
sectors/subsectors.  
 
58.  Honourable Speaker ,  The  County Executive Committee  ( CEC)  shall review the County M&E 
R eports received from County Monitoring and Evaluation Committee (COMEC) and make 
policy recommendations to County departments and agencies.  
 
59.  Honourable Speaker ,  The  CoMEC  shall be responsible for: approving M&E Unit work plan; 
M&E quality control; guiding the preparation of the indica tor reports; identifying, 
commissioning, and managing evaluations; reviewing and adopting the departmental M&E 
reports; presenting M&E reports to the CEC; oversee implementation of the CIDP and ADP; 
and capacity building for M&E.  
 
60.  Honourable Speaker ,  the  M&E Unit  is domiciled at the County Department of Economic 
Planning. The Unit shall be responsible for: providing technical guidance, coordination and 
management of County M&E function; ensuring active collaboration with M&E 
stakeholders; and providing secretariat services to CoMEC.  
 
61.  Honourable Speaker , t he Departmental M&E Committees  shall be responsible for producing 
D epartments’ M&E R eports, formulation of S ub - S ector indicators, undertaking S ub - S ector 
field M onitoring V isits and E valuations, and presenting S ub - S ector M&E R eports to the 
CoMEC.  
 
62.  Honorable Speaker ,  The Project Implementation Committees (PICs)  shall be responsible 
for initiating and managing departmental projects within specified time, scope and budget.  
63.  Honorable Spea ker ,  The Project Management Committees (PMCs)  shall provide 
interface with the community in project execution; preside over site handover/meetings; 
oversee implementation and delivery of individual projects within the timelines and project 
scope/specifications; and provide a platform for identifying complementary projects.  
 
Monitoring and  Evalaution Capacity  
 
64.  Honorable Speaker ,  The County government has deployed skills, technology and resources 
based on the existing M&E structure. The County has a designated head of M&E unit and a 
dedicated budget for M&E activities. Competent M&E personnel have been deployed in the 
County M&E unit, departmen tal M&E committees and the CoMEC. Additionally, the 
County has operationalized CIMES in accordance with the CIMES guidelines, 2019.  
However, the County has inadequate budget for M&E, weak technological deployment to 
support M&E function, and the SCoMECs, PI Cs and PMCs have remained constrained and 
inactive.  
 
65.  Honorable Speaker ,  During the 2023 - 2027 integrated plan period, the County government 
will prioritize continuous capacity - building of M&E committees and units, mobilization of 
critical financial resource s for M&E, finalization and approval of the County M&E policy, 
operationalization of SCoMECs, PICs and PMCs and rollout of e - CIMES. Further, the 
County government will leverage technical assistance from the SDEP and development 
partners to strengthen the M&E  capacity in the County. The County government will also 
leverage on well - coordinated civil society groups under the leadership of the Nakuru Civil 
Society forum in conducting community social audits, training, sensitization, and advocacy 
during implementat ion of projects. Other existing online platforms such as the County website 
and the online portal shall be used to collect data and disseminate M&E findings. To further 
strengthen the effectiveness of the County M&E function, the M&E Unit will regularly asse ss 
the M&E capacity and devise strategies for addressing emerging gaps through partnerships 
and collaborations.  
Data Collection, Analysis, and Reporting  
 
66.  Honourable Speaker ,  The County Government will rely on primary and secondary data –  
both qualitative and quantitative –  for M&E purposes. Primary data will be collected through 
interviews and observations from field visits/surveys, citizen/stakeholder engagement 
forums, and PMCs/PICs. S econdary data will be collected from County departments’ progress 
reports, County indicator handbook, survey publications, CIDP, ADP, and any other written 
reports. To enhance efficiency of data collection, the County will deploy Computer Assisted 
Personal In terviewing (CAPI)tools. The M&E unit will coordinate formulation of prescribed 
data collection tools in line with the National M&E norms and standards.  
 
67.  Honourable Speaker ,  Data collected will be cleaned, collated and validated before being 
analysed through ICT based tool such as MS office suite, and the Statistical Packages for 
Social Sciences (SPSS). The findings of M&E will be documented, reported and shared in 
line with guidelines and procedures for quarterly/ annual progress reporting. The 
County Government will prepare and publish Annual Progress Reports (APRs), Quarterly 
Progress Reports (QPRs), Public Expenditure Tracking (PET) reports, 
Feasibility/prefeasibility study  reports, Voluntary Local Reports (VLRs) and other ad - hoc 
reports as may be required. The CIDC will be instrumental in archiving of published M&E 
reports and further knowledge management. E - CIMES rollout during the plan period will 
enhance efficiency in da ta collection, analysis and reporting.  
 
Dissemination, Feedback Mechanism, Citizen Engagement, and Learning  
 
68.  Honourable Speaker ,  the findings of M&E activities will be disseminated through 
stakeholder meetings, press releases, social media platforms, online web portals, 
County website, publication of abridged documents & other IEC materials, devolution 
conferences, and peer - to - peer events.  
 
69.  Further  Honourable Speaker ,  the County will develop a Feedback - and - Response System 
(FRSs) that will enable County departments and agencies receive and timely respond to 
stakeholder/citizen feedback. Selected feedback mechanisms will include social media, web 
portals, stakeholder/citizen forums, suggestion boxes, and citizen complaint registers. 
Citizens will be engage d directly through open public participation meetings and local urban 
forums and indirectly through agencies such CBEF, CSOs/CBOs and elected representatives. 
The outcome and lessons learned from M&E activities shall be utilized to support evidence - 
based d ecision making and policy adjustments. The findings of M&E shall further inform the 
preparation of the State of the County Address.  
 
RECOMMEDATIONS  
1.  In order to eliminate duplication, red tape and bureaucracy that may results in delay and 
further hinder effe ctive implementation and monitoring of projects and programm es, it is 
recommended that the Sub - County Monitoring and Evaluation Committees (SCoMEC) be 
abolished.  
2.  The County to consider exploring blue economy to stimulate development  
3.  The County to ensure lin k between policy and budgeting  
4.  The County is advised to develop policies at the departmental levels to guide on future 
infrastructural development.  
5.  The County to consider investing in a modern conference facility to take advantage of the 
high demand in the County in order to boost the County own source revenue,  
6.  Nakuru City accounts for 54.4 percent of the County urban dwellers while Naivasha 
municipality accounts for 18.9 percent with a population of 656,395 and 228,240 respectively 
in 2023, in this regard the County is urged to establish public amenities across the county.  
7.  The County to ensure  that the left - out flagship projects are included and implemented during 
the plan period  
 
This document has been gone through by these Members. We are grateful that you provided a 4 - 
day program that the Members of this County Assembly have interacted with this document fully. 
I beg to move and ask Mheshimiwa Palang’a to second this Motion. Thank  you.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a: Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. I hereby stand to second this report for adoption 
of the CIDP.  
Without laboring too much, the CIDP program is a plan for five years and therefore, for the time 
that we are going to be here for the 202 3 - 2 - 27 thereabout, this is a roadmap of the undertakings 
that we need to undertake as a County. I have realized very keenly that most of the areas that have 
been earmarked to be undertaken in terms of projects are in line to both the national spatial 
plann ing and the County spatial planning. Therefore, in regard to the project to be undertaken, they 
are also in tandem to the manifesto of the Governor of this County.  
Therefore, I hereby second and urge Members to contribute and look at it very keenly. I am su re 
that thereafter, after adopting this report, we would also be getting to annual development 
programs that we will be getting annually to split it into kind of annual plans to make sure that we 
really geared towards the major goal or the larger goal of t his particular CIDP.  
I hereby support and wish Members to give their input that this is the safest way that has been 
given the roadmap of us to undertake the projects and developments within our County. I beg to 
support.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Th ank you. The Motion has been seconded and the Motion is 
that pursuant to the provisions of section 80 (11) of the County Government Act, 2012 section 125 
part 1 a of the Public Finance Management Act of 2012, this House adopts the report of the 
Committee on  Budget and Appropriations on the County Integrated Development Plan 2023 - 2027. 
The Motion is open for Debate.  
Hon. Member for Maai Mahiu.  
Hon. Eliud Chege: Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. I would like first to recommend the Committee 
on Budget for this report. I can say that these are the blueprint of Nakuru for the year 2023 to year 
2027. I can also see that this is a marking scheme of the development in our County.  
If clearly we look at this document, it has really showed us a map of where we are heading to. I t 
is very clear that because now we know where we are going, we cannot ask for direction. We are 
now being directed by this document that we are moving from this stage to another.  
The biggest issue is that during our ADPs and this is what I would also like  to urge my fellow 
colleagues, that clearly we focus on our CIDP because if we have been shown this is the way, this 
is the Manifesto of our Governor and this is what she aims to do for Nakuru, even in our 
development, we should clearly focus on making sur e that we are still on the line of implementing 
our CIDP.  
During the ADPs, I also believe that because we draw those annual development from these, I 
think when we clearly focus on this document, we will be going in the right track. Also, I would 
like to u rge the Members that having such a good map. We require resources because this map 
without finances, we will be having blue prints on papers but implementing will be a problem. The 
Committee on Finance should focus to see that our own source revenue will d o it to the maximum 
best.  
I rise in support and urge Members that we now have a map; a direction and now we know where 
we are heading to. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Dundori and then Hon. Member from 
Turi.  
Hon. James Gathuita: Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. I rise to support this CIDP on the basis that it 
is a plan for our County in the coming 5 years. This is where we derive our agendas so that we can 
have our people in the ground benefit from this project. Bear ing in mind that this CIDP originated 
from our public participation that we did across the 55 wards, it is good to adapt it; having it capture 
everything that we have in our various Wards and it will drive and give our people better services.  
In my Ward, I have an issue with titling and I have seen in the main project, we have the 
County titling program that is being booked in place and I am looking forward for the same so that 
I can have my Ward and others even across the County benefit from that.  
There is also the issue of healthcare. There is equipping and operationalization of level 4 and level 
5 hospitals. Healthcare is one of the key issues. The greatest wealth is about health. When a 
community is healthy, that means it is a healthy nation.  
On the othe r issue that brings across is water. Water is life and in our County, our Governor had a 
manifesto of about giving water to every community and that is inline and it is captured in this 
CIDP and this budget. I rise to support. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Member for Turi  
Hon. John Mwangi: Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. the CIDP is one of the vital document for the 
County Government in that it is a document whereby the County is able to plan for 5 years and in 
that particular document, we are abl e to draw the Annual Development Plan.  
Last year, I remember very well that each and every Ward in the 55 Ward was being accorded the 
opportunity whereby the Honorable Member plus the Executive and the Members of the public 
were able to meet during the pub lic participation and we were able to come up with the CIDP that 
we are talking of today.  
Therefore, if we can be able to adopt or to pass the report and the report ends up being 
implemented, then we can be able to give the people of Nakuru County what they  deserve because 
in this particular vital document, this is where we are able to see the sector by sector; meaning that 
all the departments that are within the County Government. It is going to help us so that we can be 
able to achieve what the second and t he fist County Governments was not able to achieve because 
the Government operates in perpetuity. I support the document and urge the Honorable Members 
to support the document so that it can be implemented and become of greater benefit to the people 
of Naku ru County. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member for Bahati and Hon. Member for Shabaab.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi: Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. There is a saying that goes, if you fail to plan, 
you plan to fail. This is our time for us to stand and  plan for our County, plan for our Wards and 
for the people that brought us in this House.  
I can remember very well that this CIDP belongs both to us and the people that we lead in our 
Wards because …  
SHARON  
Hon .  Grace Mwathi : … this is what they said and the very important thing in this document is 
that it has all the Departments catered for in one page. When it comes to agriculture we have 
macadamia, pyrethrum, coolers and everything that our people deserve. We also have 
Inf rastructure that is roads and buildings.  
Health and ICT is also catered for. Education is equally catered for and this time we know that the 
governor went to all our wards telling parents that there will be a feeding program for our children. 
We very well  know that there are some families who are very poor, they have nothing to eat in the 
morning and when those children go to school; they do not concentrate but when those children 
get something to eat then they will concentrate with their studies and they will love school because 
they have something to take.  
We also have a problem with climate change which has been catered for in this CIDP and as my 
colleagues are saying this is a map that will show us where we shall be five years to come. It is a 
blue pri nt and a score card that the people who brought us here will judge us with both the MCAs 
and the Governor. I urge my colleagues to adopt this CIDP so that it may give us the way forward 
and know what we shall be doing. This is where we will get our project s and our Annual 
Development Plan for every year for the next five years. With that I support the Report.  
Hon. David Wathiai : Thank you Mr. Speaker  for giving me this opportunity. Kwanza kabisa 
ningependa ku m patia kongole Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Bajeti Kwa  kazi nzuri a liyo fanya.  This 
Report is a Blueprint for all the projects that we are intending to do to our great people of Nakuru 
City and for the next five years in tandem with the Governors manifesto.  
I am looking forward to the launch of the ECDE Feedi ng Program which actually is going to assist 
most of our arears like in my place where we have an informal settlement and most of the kids do 
not go to school because they lack food and some basic needs. Probably they will get the food 
from school so I am looking forward to that day because it is going to be a big day for my people 
in Githima and Gilani Estate where our children school in the neighboring schools.  
Lastly, I beg that this Report be adopted since it has the best interests of our people in Nak uru 
County. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the information Hon. Palang’a?  
Hon. Peter Pala nga: I just felt Mr. Speaker  that I should inform  the House that our Standing 
Order 68 provides that when you start communicating or giving your co ntribution in a particular 
language you stick to it to the end. You cannot mix the two languages so once you start contributing 
in Kiswahili you have to stick to it to the end or while…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Palanga, you are grossly out of o rder! The Standing Orders 
were amended. The two languages are allowed that is English and Kiswahili. There was that 
amendment so the Member for Shabaab is right when he mixes both languages.  That is the 
language that maybe his people would understand. Wha t is it Hon. Wathiai?  
Hon. David Wathiai : Mr. Speaker , I would like to say that I understand my senior, you know he 
has been in this House for four terms and being here for four terms means that is twenty years plus 
the years that he has lived. Mr. Speaker  it is old age that is making Hon. Palanga not realise that 
our Standing Orders were amended.  
( Laughter )  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! Order! Hon. Wathiai. There is a point that you are trying 
to explain that the Hon. Palanga is very old now that he is not able to know when the Standing 
Orders are amended; is  that  what you mean ? The Hon. Palang’a, you have b een mentioned, do 
you have something to say about your old age?  
Hon. Peter Palanga : Mr. Speaker , at times it is very unresting when we meet in such occasions 
and it is a mixture of old and young and therefore I want to confirm that I am not old the way the  
Hon. Member might put it and if anything old is gold; so it is a treasure that is not for many.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Malewa West.  
Hon. Francis Kuria:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . First of all I would like to commend the good job 
from the Chair, Budget and the entire Committee. This marks the genesis of development within 
Nakuru County and I therefore find it very well to support this document 2023 -  2027.  
Remember when God created heaven and earth and had a plan for it because he f inally created 
man from his own image and up to date that plan is there. This CIDP marks the beginning of or 
continuation of projects within Nakuru County. Without much comments, I rise to support this 
Motion and commend the good job and thank you for what  has been delivered through this 
document. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Maiella and then I am going 
to go to my left.  
Hon. Jane Git uku:  Hon. Speaker  and Members, I rise to support this Motion and say that it is a 
good plan. It shall make us stay within focus of making sure that we are able to achieve that which 
we can account for. But in the implementation as much as I support, I would like to caution and 
maybe inquire, I do not know how the Chair Budget will tak e it but on lesson learnt, it is on page 
28; we have mentioned Kenya Coast Guards,  and people from Naivasha especially those around 
the lake know how difficult this situation has been. So I believe that we will have a better way of 
handling it so that we c an also have an account of what we usually get from the fish from the lake 
because it has not been a smooth sailing.  
We also require that as we explore the Blue Economy, we also consider please Chair Budget, the 
issue that has continued to be a thorn in o ur flesh on making sure that the riparian land has been 
left for the community, and not encroached by private developers, which has really been a problem. 
This is the area I needed to mention so that we can maybe have a sit down and look for ways and 
means  as an Assembly through raising Motions whichever way we can, to make sure that Lake 
Naivasha is beneficial to the community as much as possible.  
Otherwise, thank you so much Mr. Speaker  Sir, and I do support this particular Motion.  
 The Speaker  ( Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you Hon. Jane. The Hon. Member for Nakuru East, Hon. 
Anthony Kanyere.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Thank you so much Mr. Speaker  for giving me this chance. I stand to 
support this Motion and also to commend the Committee on Budget for the goo d work that they 
have done by giving us a Blue Print for the next five years which we are going to derive our Annual 
Development Plans (ADPs) from.  
However Mr. Speaker , I would like to mention some issues that I may want captured in this year’s 
ADP. On th e recommendation that the Chairman has highlighted on the issue of low economy in 
Nakuru City. I would like the County Government of Nakuru to give a study to the lake Nakuru 
because something is being done in Lake Nakuru. People are fishing in Lake Nakuru but it is being 
said that the fish that come from Lake Nakuru is not suitable for human consumption, yet fishing 
is still going on.  
So, I want the Department of Fisheries to relook on that issue and even consider Lake Nakuru as 
one of the water bodies tha t can produce fish because the fish that come from Lake Nakuru is 
edible. I personally eat fish from Lake Nakuru so we should be considered in the Blue Economy.  
I would also like to commend the issue of Conference Tourism, which has been well articulated 
by the Chairman and we should take advantage of it. Nakuru is a young City and we should take 
advantage of the Conference Tourism and that is an area where we can enhance our own revenue 
which according to the Report that was given the other day we are not  doing well in that line; we 
said that we are doing 30%. We need to have a lot of Streams where we can get our own sources 
of revenue.  
Mr. Speaker  Sir as I finish, I would like to say that Nakuru city that is Nakuru Town West and 
Nakuru Town East, a lot o f revenue is gotten from this city but when it comes to the flagship 
projects I can see that most of the flagship projects are not coming to the city so I want to record 
my sentiments that when it comes to flagship projects can we also be considered. I com e from 
Nakuru East ward and some of the people in my ward do not know if they are in the city or peri -  
urban areas. Something to do with tarmacking of roads, I want them to be considered so that we 
can be in the flagship projects and if we are not on the t able as we speak now then Mr. Speaker , 
we might be on the menu. So I want to register my reservations on that.  Thank you Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): After this the Hon. Chair will be responding. He needs to say 
whether Nakuru East is on t he menu or on the table because that is a concern from the Member of 
that area. The Hon. Member for London Ward, Hon Gatuso.  
Hon. Benard Gatuso : Mheshimiwa Spika nachukua nafasi hii kukushukuru kwa kunipatia fursa 
hii ili pia mimi niweze kupeana contribution  yangu kwa Mswada huu .  P ia nachukua nafasi hii 
kushukuru Committee  ya Budget  ambayo imefanya kazi nzuri ya kuleta CIDP.  Najua tumekaribia 
kuanza kufanya miradi kulingana na ile  budget  ambayo tuliweza kupitisha hivi majuzi na yale yote 
ambao tunastahili kufanya  l azima yakuwe kwa mwelekeo ama kwa mpangilio ambao unastahili .  
N a tunaona hii  CIDP itatuwezesha sisi kama jamii ya  Nakuru County kuweza kufuatilia na 
kuhakikisha miradi yote ambayo inafanyika ni ile ambayo iliweza kupitishwa pale katika Wadi 
siku ambazo tulikuwa na  public participation na pia zile  validation tulikuwa nazo .Nikiangalia 
vizuri katika hii R ipoti ambayo im eletwa na  Budget Committee ni kwamba wame weza kukadiria 
kila kitu amba cho  k inatakikana Kama  vile mambo ya maji ambayo ya likuwa one of the agenda  
ambayo mama  aliweza kueneza siku ambazo alikuwa anafanya campaign . Mambo ya elimu pia 
nimeona pia  vilevile  amew eza ku yaa ng a lia kwa njia ambayo inastahili…  
Hon. John Gachiri : Point of order Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the Order?  
Hon. John Gachiri : Is the Member of London in order calling the name mama; who is mama?  
( Laughter )  
Hon. Benard Gatuso : Haya sawa nitachukua fursa hii kutoa hiyo; kwamba Gavana wetu wa  
Nakuru County aliweza kutuahidi mambo ya  ICT ambayo yanasaidia vijana wetu kwa sababu kuna 
zile kazi vijana wetu wataweza kufanya kupitia teknolojia. Kuna vile pia ameweza kukad iria 
mambo ya ukulima ambayo ya mebaki na nafasi kubwa ambayo tutaweza kuwezesha vijana wetu 
kuingia shambani na kuweza kufanya ukulima ndio wapate kipato kama njia moja ya kujiajiri. 
Kwa mambo ya Barabara  ameweza kuya weka vizuri kwa sababu yale mavuno amba yo tutaweza 
kupata kutoka shambani yataweza kutoka kwa kupitia zile b arabara kutoka pale  hadi sokoni.  
Nimeona pia mambo mengine ameweza kuangalia ni vile atatuwezesha pia sisi upande huu wa 
Assembly  tuweze kufanya mambo yetu na tuweze kuwa na nafasi nzuri  ya kuweza kuangalia yale 
ambayo yanatimizwa upande ule mwingine yanaenda kulingana na CIDP  na kulingana na sheria 
ambazo zina ambatana. So  mimi n achukua nafasi hii to support the Motion  na asante sana B wana 
S pika kwa kunipa tia  nafasi.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Rhonda.  
Hon. John Gachiri : Thank you so much Right Hon. Speaker  for this opportunity. First of all… I 
am wondering why the Chair Budget is laughing, I do not know whether I have made any mistake. 
He is Ri ght Honourable Speaker . I want to thank the Committee for Budget and your Office for 
this CIDP. I just have one issue that I want to echo on concerning the ECDEs.  
Mr. Speaker  we have a big problem in our County; for the last I think two regimes that have been 
there concerning the ECDEs. I think in each and every Ward we have built ECDEs but the 
implementation and the working of those ECDEs is the problem and we know majority of our 
children down there at mashinani ;  some of our people do not have the money for kindergartens 
and other ECDEs.  
So it is my prayer and my plea to the Committee Chair for Implementation to ensure that the 
ECDEs we have built, the promises that we have made that we shall have the feeding program, the 
teachers that we are going to em ploy, it is my hope that it will work this time because in the last 
two regimes, we have seen these ECDEs remaining just buildings.  
But I believe as Chair Budget has planned for these things, my prayer is that we shall have good 
ECDEs that would be able t o nurture the children so that we are able to walk together and ensure 
that we have credible schools in our County. Thank you so much, I support.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Flamingo. Hon. Muraya.  
Hon. David Muraya : Thank  you Mr. Speaker  for giving me this opportunity to support this 
Motion. First I want to appreciate our Chairman for Budget and the Committee for this good job 
that they have done.  
Mr. Speaker , you remember we subjected our people to public participation a nd the public 
participation that we did for CIDP…  
SIELE  
 
Hon. David Muraya : We want to thank the Committee because already they have come with what 
we proposed and we have seen today we have started our journey towords the achievement of our 
projects within the period of five years.  
Mr. Speaker  mine is to support that, the enti re document which we went through yesterday is good 
and I urge all Members of this Assembly to support. But also Mr. Speaker  I would like to echo 
what Hon. Ngeru has said that we are all Members of this County Assembly and we come from 
different Wards but w e want to see in future all Wards are included especially when we are going 
to do flagship projects because we have seen most of the flagship projects we as a Nakuru Town 
East and West, we have seen nothing maybe what we are getting when we look at ECDE ma ybe 
lunch programme that is where we are captured but in future we want to be considered in those 
flagship projects.  
In terms of development in the entire County, we have seen the Committee and the Executive, the 
Chairman, they have captured all Departmen ts and we appreciate for that. I arise to support the 
agenda Mr. Speaker . Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Hon. Member for Barut, Hon. Kirui  
Hon Bernard Kirui:  Asante sana Mhe sh imiwa Spika kwa hii nafasui nimepata pia nimesima ma  
ku ungana na wenzangu kuhusu hii CIDP  ambayo tulifanya  jana pale Naivasha .  T ulikuwa 
tumeelimi sh wa kidogo lakini ukiangalia kwa ile bajeti ambayo tumepatiwa, sisi watu wa Nakuru 
Town West  na Nakuru Town East especially area of Barut  haina chochote na tuko town.  
Hatujapewa nafasi kwenye hii budget  na ukikumbuka katika Supplementary Budget,  niliuliza kwa 
n ini hatupati chochote kwa hii b udget.  S iku hiyo Chairman  a lijitetea akasema kwamba hiyo budget  
ilikuwa ya serikali ingine na kwamba makosa ha ya kuwa yake na ni kakubaliana na yeye.  
Hii sasa ambayo imetengenezewa yeye akiwa Chairman  hatuna chochote sasa Mhe sh imiwa Spika 
hatutakuwa kwa hii N yumba kusindikiza watu ati unapata mamilioni imeelekezwa Naiva sh a ,  sisi 
watu ambao tumegu sa town  hatupati chochote. Niko na sh ida ya barabara, Barut,  kukonwect town  
inakuwa sh ida .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it the Hon. Member for Maai Mahiu? Put on your mic.  
Hon. Eliud Chege : Mr. Speaker  I do not think the Hon. Member on the floor is rig ht when he says 
all the monies are taken to Naivasha and when I look at the budget, if you talk about the Nakuru 
as a City, I think more resources are in Nakuru City more than Naivasha. Therefore I do not 
understand why the Hon. Member is saying that all r esources are in Naivasha; I do not think that 
is in order Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Kirui  
Hon. Bernard Kirui:  Asante Mhe sh imiwa Spika ;  hata kama hawakuchukua yote, walichukua 
asilimia kubwa .   S isi tunaomba kama kazi yetu itakuwa kusindikizana hapa, tutakuwa tunakuja 
kusign tukienda kwa sababu sisi tunaumia. Mnakumbuka tulipoenda Barut hata kufika huko  
ilikuwa  ni sh ida,. Kukinyesha w atoto  kwenda shuleni  ni ngumu. Sisi tulikuwa tunaomba hii pesa 
pia tuwekewe barabara moja kuconnect huko. Siku ile nikaomba barabara na sijaona chochote 
tumepewa. Sisi tunaomba tupatiwe na kama hatusikizw i  hata sisi tutatoa nguo na tutembee kwa 
barabara hii yot e ndio tusikizwe. Na h aya  mambo si ya kucheka kwa sababu tumeona kila kona 
tunafinywa na tutakuwa w anyama asanteni.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it the Hon. Member from Turi, Hon. Mwangi?  
Hon .  John Mwangi:  Mr. Speaker  I think the Hon. Member has used unparliamentary language; 
when he talks about removing clothes so that their grievances can be listened to, I think that one 
is not in order. Number two, today we are talking about CIDP and not the budget. During the 
budge t passing day, the Hon. Member was in this House and he never said anything on that 
material day. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Now Hon. Palang’a and then the Hon. Member for Barut to 
respond.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I thin k for avoidance of any doubt, this CIDP is a 
roadmap for the projects to be undertaken for the next five years. Hon. Kirui is right in his own 
lamentation but again, thus and your views and any other reservations may be factored specifically 
during the bud getary making process and now that you hail within the Municipality or the City of 
Nakuru, I think Hon. Kirui is justified but only if he takes the information where it is supposed to 
be. For the purpose of this meeting and these deliberations, I may want to support him; he was 
insinuating the situation where he feels left out, so talking about removing his clothes does not 
necessarily mean that he is going to remove his clothes but he was expressing his frustrations in a 
way that he also needs to be factor ed. Thank you, Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Kirui and then… Oh! Sawasawa.  
(Honourable Kirui had left the floor of the House )  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honourable Chair, you have your time to respond.  
Ho n . Alex Mbugua : Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir, I will first start by saying thank you to the 
Members of this House and yourself Mr. Speaker  sir and more so to these Members for the good 
words they have used on this document. This is a Blueprint and I will say that in this document, 
during electioneering period, many people aired their views. I would have wished that 
Mheshimiwa, because he asked a question, he should not have walked out because he needed to 
go out with an answer.  
Mr. Speaker  Sir, one of the Members sai d that his Ward is not on the table but he might be on the 
menu. The CIDP is a continuation of the projects that were there. Mr. Speaker  Sir, at the moment 
when you go to Nakuru East, you will get that there is road tarmacking going on at the moment 
and th ere are electric posts being relocated as we are speaking in this Assembly. I do not know 
how many other Wards are being tarmacked at the moment; he is in the menu and has been eating 
from the County and all he could get.  
Mr. Speaker , on the issue of the f lagship projects, these are projects that are not just affecting one 
Ward. If you go to a project like that of Afraha Stadium, the Stadia is serving the entire Nakuru. It 
is not serving one Ward. I would ask Members not to dwell in one Ward. When you talk about the 
Nakuru Biodiversity Conservation project, it is a flagship project; it is affecting the entire Nakuru. 
When you talk about Lake Naivasha it is affecting the entire County. If you talk about Level 4, 
Level 5 Hospitals, they are affecting the entir e County. When you talk about the Keringet High 
Altitude Sports Academy, of which is not in Naivasha, in the current budget, we gave it Kshs 40 
million. We gave another Kshs 50 million to a hospital in Rongai which is also not in Naivasha. 
Njoro Bulk Water  Supply project in Egerton will be serving Nakuru County. The 
County Aggregation and Industrial Park at Egerton took a whopping Kshs 150 million, in the 
supplementary we gave it Kshs 100 million and that one is not located in another region. Let us 
possess Nakuru and let us not divide Nakuru into the tribal pockets. This is a CIDP, a roadmap for 
this County and not a personal thing.  
Mr. Speaker  Sir, let us learn to appreciate our diversity that we have within Nakuru County. With 
that, I want to appreciate al l these Members for the interest of time, the comments they have made 
we take these comment positively. The Members of the Budget Committee who critiqued this 
document to produce a master key that will give this County a document that will be read again in 
2028. We appreciate and thank you Mr. Speaker  sir, na ubarikiwe  Mr. Speaker ; thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the Chairman. I now want to put it to question.  
( Question proposed that pursuant to the provision of Section 8 (e)part X1 of t he 
County Government Act 2012, S ection 125 ( 1 ) ( a )  of the Public Finance Management A ct of  
2012, this House adopts the report for the Committee  on Budget and Appropriations on the 
County Integrated Development Fund 2023 - 2027 ) .  
( Question put and agreed to ).  
BILL (s)  
The Nakuru County Housing Estates , Tenancy and  Management Bill  of  2023 (First Reading )  
The Nakuru County Housing Estate Tenancy and Management Bill  of 2023 was subsequently 
R ead a F irst T ime  
This Bill is committed to the Committee on Lands, Housing and Physical Planning, The Hon. 
Chair, Hon. Palang’a take note of that.  
The Nakuru County Revenue A llocation Amendment Bill  No .  2 of 2023 (F irst R eading )  
The Nakuru County Revenue Allocation Bill  No .  2 2023 was subsequently R ead for a F irst T ime .  
Now  the Bill is committed to the Committee on Budget and Appropriations; the Hon. Chair Hon. 
Alex Mbugua take note.  
The Nakuru County Valuation and Rating Bill  No.4 of 2023 ( First Reading )  
The Nakuru County Valuation and Rating Bill  No. 4 of 2023 was subsequently R ead for a F irst 
T ime  
The Nakuru County Valuation and Rating Bill No.4 of 2023 the Bill is committed to the Committee 
on Lands and Physical Planning. The Chairperson Hon. Palang’a take note.  
The Nakuru County Sports Management  Bill  No . 3 of 2023 ( First Reading )  
The Nakuru County Sports Management Bill  No . 3 of 2023 was subsequently R ead for a F irst 
T ime  
This Bill is committed to the Committee on Culture, Sports and Community Services. The Hon. 
Chairperson, take note. The Chair is not in the House, the Vice Chair take note.  
The Nakuru County Finance Bill  No. 3 of 2023 ( First Reading )  
The Nakuru County Finance Bill  No. 3 of 2023  was subsequently R ead a First Ti me  
The Nakuru County Finance Bill No. 3 of 2023 is committed to the Committee on Finance. So, the 
Hon. John Maritim the Chair of Finance Committee take note.  
(A Member of the Committee takes note).  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members this House is adjourned until further notice.  
The Hou se rose at 4.50pm  
 
 
 