APRIL 13, 2022  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday, 13th   April 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3. 20pm 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi)  in the Chair]  
PRAYER  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi ):  Honorable Members welcome to the 
afternoon session. Clerk next order.  
PAPE R 
COUNTY EXECUTIVE ADHOC COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE INTENTION TO CONFER MUNICIPAL 
STATUS TO MOLO AND GILGIL         
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi ):  Honorable Members we have two Papers. The 
first one is a Report of the Committe e of the County Executive on the in tention to confer Molo 
Town Municipality status.  This Paper will be laid by the Leader of Majority pursuant to Section 
8(4) of the Urban Area (UAC)  Act of 201 2. Honorable Virginia Wamaitha on behalf of the 
Majority Leader  
Hon. Virginia Wamaitha : Thank you, on behalf of the Leader of Majority  I would like to lay the 
following Papers , the Report of the Adhoc Committee of the County Executive on the intention to 
confer Molo Town  to a Municipality Status . The other one is the Report of the Adhoc Committee 
of the County Executive on the intention to confer Gilgil Town to a Municipality Status . I beg to 
lay. 
                                    (The Reports were laid on the table)  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi ):  Thank you very much Honorable Virginia I 
forgot that you were to lay two Papers but you have done that. The second one was the Report of 
the County Executive Committe e on the  intentions  to confer Gilgil Town to a Municipal Status . 
Thank you very much for laying the Papers. The two Paper s remain  committed to the  Committee 
on Land s and Physical Planning.  
MOTION  
HOUSE TO ADJOURN IN ACCORDANCE TO ASSEMBLY CALENDA R 
APRIL 13, 2022  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi ):  Honorable Members there is a Motion; that 
pursuant to the provisions of Standing Order 31 (3), this House adjourns from today 13th April to 
resume on 10th May, 2022 in accordance with the Assembly calendar. The Honorable Majority to 
be represented by Honorable Gathariki from Maela Ward.  
Hon. Joseph Kamanu : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker Sir. I would like to move the Motion ; 
THAT  pursuant to the provisions  of Standing Order No.31 (3), this House adjourns today, 13th of 
April and resumes on 10th May, 2022 in accordance with the Assembly calendar. Am sure right 
now we are very engaged with the party primaries and some of the areas the seats are hotly 
conteste d. So, we are currently facing a hard task to ensure that we defend our seats. So, we are 
very much engaged on the ground and due to that fact, we want to commend the House Business 
Committee and also the House Leadership for thinking it wise to adjourn as  per our calendar 
because currently every Member of this Honorable House is very much engaged and busy.  
The schedule is quite tight and God willing we are all defending these seats. It will be good for us 
to have ample time because some of us are facing t heir primaries, others next week as per the Party 
constitution and am sure Parties should be through with their primaries by 26th of April.  
So, it will be good for us to have ample time to recover from the fights that have been very costly 
and time consum ing and am sure we also need time to rest and recap and also to reshape again. 
So, on that matter we also need time to re -strategise because once Party primaries results are out 
and if one does not manage to get the ticket there is always a plan B. As I wi sh my colleagues all 
the best in the Party p rimaries, we need a lot of time  to regain and also to restructure and also 
strategise on the way forward. We also have our role, that is, the oversight role. We have a number 
of projects being implemented in vari ous Wards by the Executive. As per our mandate, the 
oversight belongs to us. It is one of the core functions of this Assembly. We also need time to 
monitor the ongoing projects as part of the oversight to ensure that Wanjiku  has value for money. 
I am sure we also have a number of pending private issues. Some of us are also farmers and we 
are also in business. We are heading to the rainy season so we also need ample time to put 
something in the soil to ensure that by the end of the year, we reap something fr om our shambas. 
I am sure we will be very busy down there but of importance are the ongoing Party primaries 
because that is our core business and I am wish ing my colleagues all the best and I am sure God 
willing, we shall meet here after the general electi ons which will be held in August. I wish all the 
best to my colleagues and I would like Hon. Kabutu to second.  
Hon. Timothy Kabutu: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I am here to second this Motion 
that we adjourn from today to 10th May, 2022 so that we  can go to our primaries. To our colleagues 
whose Party primaries will be tomorrow, I wish them all the best. I wish to see them back in the 
Third Assembly. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. Kabutu.  
APRIL 13, 2022  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 (Question proposed that the House adjourn from 13th April, 2022 and resumes on 10th May, 2022 
in accordance with the Assembly calendar ) 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): The Motion is now open for discussion. Hon. 
Leah Sang.  
Hon. Leah Sang:  Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker sir, I stand to support the Motion that we 
should take a break. Since we have a lot of work to do at this time and more so in going to work 
towards our coming in. I want to wish the Members who will be participating for tomorrow’s Party 
primaries all the best. This is timely and we thank the Leadership and this House Business 
Committee for the same.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Mheshimiwa. Hon. Gladys Kairu  
Hon. Gladys Kairu:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I am a nom inated MCA from 
Naivasha, I stand to support; we need to go on leave to enable us fight on the ground so that we 
can come back to this Assembly. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Mheshimiwa. Hon. John Ndonyo 
from Bahati.  
Hon John Ndonyo : Asante sana mheshimiwa, kwa nafasi hii na kwa kweli mimi hata nimesimama 
kuunga mkono hoja ya likizo yetu kwa sababu kwa kweli tuko na kazi nyingi mashinani. Pia kila 
kazi, watu wanapofanya, ni lazinma wapumzike kidogo ili kazi wakati mwingin e irudi iendelee. 
Nimeamka na nimesupport kwamba kutoka leo tarehe…  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Tarehe  13 
Hon. John Ndonyo:  Tarehe 13 mpaka tarehe 10 mwezi wa Mei, tukirudi tutakuwa tumeona ya 
kwamba kazi imefanyika huko kwa ground . Asant e nimesupport.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Asante sana Mheshimiwa. Now Hon. Members, 
I propose the question which is that: - 
(Question proposed that this House adjourns from today 13th April and resumes on 10th May 
2022 in accordance with the Assembly Calendar)  
(Question put and agreed to)  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members like most of us have said, I want to wish all the Hon orable  Members peaceful and 
orderly nominations and pray that all of us will come back. Remember you still remain Members 
of this honorable House until the 9th of August. So you could be called for an assignment and thus 
we still remain honorable Members even if you lose Party prim aries. Thank you very much 
Honorable Members. So the House remains adjo urned until 10th May 2022 at 9.30am.  
APRIL 13, 2022  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 (The House rose at 3.30pm ) 
 