COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 11 th April 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03:45 PM 
[Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
VISITORS FROM THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF BUSIA.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Communication  to make. This afternoon we are happy 
that we have visitor s from the County Assembly of Busia. In the House  we have Honorable Dalmas 
Manjole, Honorable Agnes Nangane , Hono urable Rose Amoit and Honorable Shadrack Masinde . 
We are also delighted to have members of s taff from the Busia County Assembly here with us ; 
they are Ms. Juliana Imoset , Ms. Brenda Kanani, Mr. Kadudu who is the Sergeant at Arms for 
Busia County Assembly, Karibuni sana. Next or der.   
NOTICE OF MOTION  
IMPROVEMENT OF CESS COLLECTION.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Notice  of Motion  from Honorable Njuguna  Mwaura , 
the Membe r of County Assembly for Elburgon Ward.   
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank You Hono urable Speaker, I rise to give a Notice of  Motion on 
Improvement of Cess Collection. That, Wherea s the County Government charges prescribed tax 
on goods at specific border areas in form of Cess ; Furthe r aware that Cess Collection is critical 
Revenue Stream for the County Government; Appreciating that in the past, the Governmen t has 
endeavored to improve accountability and transparency at the Cess Collection Points through rafts 
of reforms but such has borne no results; Concerned that there is lack of clear s trategy to seal 
loopholes  with a view of minimi sing revenue loss; Noting  that the County Government is yet to 
implement Cashless Payment System  at Cess Collection Points hence creating for revenue loss;  
Now Therefore, in order to ensure accountability and  improve Revenue Collection , this  House 
resolves as follows - 
1. Department of  Finance and Economic Planning to gazette all Cess Collections Points 
within the County  and deploy appropriate number of Enforcement Officers . 
2. Department of Finance and Economic Planning in consultation with the Department  of 
ICT to come up with long -term strategies including installation of  CCTV Cameras  at all 
Cess Points . 
3. Department of Finance  and Economic Planning to come up with convenient Cashless 
Payments System at all Cess Points . 
4. Improving working conditions for Enforcement Officers, preferably introducing a 
container to provide shelter.  
I beg to give the Notice of Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): The Notice of Motion  is properly given. Next order.  
MOTION  
LANGALANGA SUB COUNTY HOSPITAL  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Motion  from the Chairperson  for the Committee  on 
Health Services , Honorable Njuguna Mwaura.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Honorable Speaker I rise to move a Motion  that this  House adopts the 
Report of the Committee Health Services on a visit to Langalanga Sub County Hospital on 28th 
February , 2023. The Health Committee proceeded  to Langalanga Hospital to see what has been 
happening at the  Hospital which is a Level Three Facility but according to the County Executive 
it is a Level Four Facility and of which we are waiting for the accreditation so it  can assume the 
full flagship of Level Four Facility.  The said Facility was commissioned by the First  President  of 
the Republi c of Keny a on 18 th September, 1973. It has a catchment of 34  000, majority being 
women and children . 
 It currently offers services to the public under the County Department of Health Services. The 
Facility lies on a land measuring  2.3 Acres , and the  said land has no Title Deed. There are different 
Department s within the fac ility that I am going to mention, but  just before I do that, allow me to 
mention the kind of clientele that usually go es to seek services at the facility. It is worth noting  the 
results of morbidity and the mortality in the facility which include s the Respiratory Issues, 
Diarrhea, Ulcers, HIV and Aids, Hypertension, Diabetes, Traumatic Injuries resulting from Boda 
Boda Accidents, Malnutrition  and Neonatal Sepsis . The facility  has a Consultation Room which 
is very small . It has a Nutrition Room which also serves as a  CVT Room and it is a very small 
room. It has a Tuberculosis (T B) Room which if you look at it critically, the kind of a TB room in 
this facility is very small and lacks the Isolation Room. TB is a very contagious disease and if the 
room is very small then it can lead  to other people getting infected, something that  needs to be 
checked. They have Laboratory, which I can say th ey are trying but still it is very small .  
We also have very few and outdated  Screening Machines which need a lot of improvement. They 
have a Physiotherapy Department which they have tried ; they have certain Machines and 
equipment  which can be used for that purpose. They have a Laundry Room which is a small room . 
They  have a Kitchen  that is very small and a  Maternity which is a small room that usually deliver s 
30-40 Babies per month and with the current generation and population th at we have in Nakuru it 
is very small. If you can see the kind of Hospital Beds that they are hav e, for instance we have one 
in our pictorial as annexes ; they are metallic delivery beds which are outdated . In fact they are 
improvised beds and they should not be in that facility considering its  current status of our Country  
and with the current number that they are serving. We also interacted with the Community Health 
Volunteers and the facility ha s Fifty Community Health Volunteers serving  the areas of Pangani, 
Racecourse , Flamingo, Langalanga and Lake View . While interacting with them, they raised some 
concerns and they had the following to say - 
1. They said they need to be given some allowance s for te lephone calls and communication,  
Risk All owance and also Job Identification Cards so that when they are traversing during 
the night they can be identified by Security Personnel without harassment.  
2. They requested to be considered when recruiting the Hospital Management Board because 
they have some information or they are informed on the issues of the facilities and 
concern s. 
Allow me to highlight some of the achievements of the  Facility over the years. The Langalanga 
Facility is accredited fully by the NHIF therefore the patie nts that usually go to that Facility  can 
enjoy NHIF  services. They also have a new Maternity that was started last year and it is picking  
up very well. They are improving and that can be confirmed by the kind of revenue they are 
collecting quarterly. They are doing well and we are very impressed by the revenue they are 
collecting. The  facility  started an Ultra Sound Services and Biochemistry  last year and it is doing 
well. The Facility  has a facelift and there is an ongoing automation of services which is a lmost 
complete. From its look, even the gate, you can see that is a serious Facility . We are commending 
the Management in that Facility ; they have really tried given the kind of population they are serving 
and the kind of the status they are in.  
Allow me to go to the Findings  of the  Committee and the Observations  that they made. The 
Committee highlighted the following Observations - 
1. The Facility  has no Title Deed . Owing that this facility is at the Central Business District 
(CBD), i t is within the City and there a re situation s whereby anybody can arise and claim 
the ownership  of the said Facility and the County Government of Nakuru will be open to 
a Pandora’s  box of  Court Cases  which will draw a lot of resources from the Public Coffers 
and therefore we request that the Department to fastrack that the Facility  gets a Title Deed.  
2. There is an acute shortage of Staff in the  Facility . The Facility was commissioned after 
independence but the number  of the staff that we have there is very low and this a Satelli te 
Facility of the Nakuru Level Five Hospital (PGH). Something ought to be done there so 
that they can operate comfortably.  
3. The Infrastructure that was established in 1973 by the founding  President is the same ; the 
structures that are serving the people  of Langalanga  and the surrounding area. We need 
an overhaul way of looking at the facility and coming up with modern structures .  
4. The facility lacks a 24 Hours Outpatient Services and services such as X-Rays and Dental 
Clinics .  
5. No Inpatients Service apart from the Maternity . If today you fel l sick and you be taken 
there, automatically you will be referred to the Nakuru Level Five Hospital (PGH) and 
that is why the workload of the PGH  is continuously going to grow in terms of Patients  
who are referred there yet this facility has the capacity to accommodate the Inpatients 
Services and that is why I said it is not a Level Four; it is a Level Three.  
6. The Facility has no Laundry Machine in the Maternity. Honorable Speaker , I know you 
have a background of Med ical Department and I tell you the Casuals  who are working 
there are dealing with automatic stings, washing those Linens  that are littered with 
afterbirth  is traumati sing and therefore that Facility  ought to have a Laundry Machine.  
7. There is  inadequate medical equipment ; for instance the Laboratory  equipment that we 
saw do not commensurate the status of the facility and the age of the facility.  
8. There is no backup generator and you know power keeps on fluctuating and that is a 
Maternity  facility and we need a generato r so we can give the  Newborns the heat that they 
need  
9. There is unreliable KEMSA supplies. This animal called KEMSA continu es to torture our 
Medical Services and the facility is complaining.  
10. They require a new  Incinerator  and the Staff Quarters should also be  considered.  
11. The Ambulance  is very old and serves a number of Health Facilities in the Sub-County . 
The Ambulatory Services ought not to be customi sed to focus o n the facility and therefore 
they require an Ambulance . 
The recommendations from the Committee  are as follows - 
1. The Committee  recommends that the County Government of Nakuru to allocate 
more resources in the Financial Year 2023/2024 for recruitment of Staff such as 
Nurses, Lab Technicians, Sonographers, Pharmace utical Technicians and the rest.  
2. They need two Auto Clay Machine s and the Patients Lockers, X -Rays Machines , 
Dental Units , Delivery Beds, Resuscitating Machine, and Physiotherapy Equipment 
and other machines that are needed there.    
Mr. Speaker a facility that does not have an Autoclave Machine is a facility that can easily transmit 
diseases to other patients when they visit, and therefore, that is urgently needed. But as we said 
Mr. Speaker, that this is a Maternity Mr. Speaker and we need a resuscitator f or the newborns so 
that they can survive after being cared for by their mothers. When they come to the public, you 
know Mr. Speaker when a child is born, although it is the responsibility of the parents, they now 
become co -owned by the State and also by th e parents and therefore, we need those machines so 
that we can take care of those children or the newborns Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker, the systems and the facility need to be fully automated so that even the Referral 
Systems can be very easy to fastrack and also the collections that we make from those facilities 
Mr. Speaker; we went to fastrack and know the kind of revenue that has been generated by that 
facility.  
Mr. Speaker we also need to build a new structure so that the facility can be updated. Mr. Spea ker 
we usually say a building has therapeutic effects and when a patient goes to a facility that is in 
good shape Mr. Speaker, they are halfway cured Mr. Speaker and they usually say even when you 
administer water Mr. Speaker and you tell them it is medici ne, they will be cured Mr. Speaker. 
Therefore we need that facility to be facelifted and not the way it is currently Mr. Speaker.  
The facility needs to procure a backup generator due to the Maternity Wing Mr. Speaker. The 
incinerator is very old and they need a Bio Digester so that all the medical waste Mr. Speaker is 
well managed and disposed of Mr. Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker, the County needs to purchase an additional ambulance because the distance between 
Langalanga and Bondeni is very close, and if at least  a new one can be allocated Mr. Speaker, they 
can serve those two facilities. And these facilities mark you Mr. Speaker will also be having a safe 
way of operation.  
That the County Government of Nakuru to liaise with the Department of Lands and Physical 
Planning to fastrack the titling of the said facility. And so Mr. Speaker, that one also, if the facility 
will have its own title even the Partners will find their way to that facility and we can have partners 
who will be willing to construct that facility for us.  
Therefore, we request that this matter be taken urgently and I request the Department of Lands 
through the Chairperson of Lands and the Lands Committee Mr. Speaker to own this matter and 
make sure that all the County Lands have title deeds Mr. Spe aker so that we can attract Donors 
and other Partners who will be willing to come and assist this Committee Mr. Speaker, as far as 
the Health Department is concerned.  
That the County of Nakuru should demand from the KEMSA to supply reliable and timely, the  
actual requisitions that the Department makes or the facility makes. Mr. Speaker, today if you 
requisite the funds or the drugs from the KEMSA, they take ages Mr. Speaker to be delivered. 
They can deliver after the third quarter Mr. Speaker when requisiti on was done during the first 
quarter, and therefore Mr. Speaker you end up losing the value for money. And therefore, we want 
the County Government through the Department to have a proper engagement with KEMSA so 
that they can deliver the drugs that they h ave requested and do so on time.  
That the County Government of Nakuru should fully operationalise Outpatient Department, which 
should serve for 24 hours and also fully operationalise the Inpatient Department. Mr. Speaker, this 
facility operates on Level T hree but if it can be accredited to a Level Four, they will be operating 
24 hours and therefore even the revenue is going to increase. Currently majority of the members 
of the public are ending up in private facilities Mr. Speaker, while we have facilities  like this one, 
which is Langalanga which can offer those services to the residents of that area.  
Mr. Speaker, that the County Government of Nakuru should engage security services to ensure 
that the Hospital's resources and equipment are well taken care o f at any given time Mr. Speaker, 
though we missed that in our findings. There is a lot of insecurity there Mr. Speaker. You know 
that is a home of ‘confirm’ gang members and the honorable Member is here. Mr. Speaker, those 
young gang members are terrorisin g even the patients who end up in that facility. And Mr. Speaker, 
if we open a 24 -hour system even the doctors and the nurses will not be feeling comfortable to 
operate in that facility, leave alone securing the premise Mr. Speaker.  
Therefore Mr. Speaker,  we need the County to engage; that is the Department of Health to engage 
the security personnel. That is Mr. Speaker, the County Commanders and other Security Agencies 
within the County to make sure that this facility and its properties are not going to b e vandalised; 
our staff are going to operate comfortably, and also the patients can access the facility comfortably 
without fear of such gangs.  
 Mr. Speaker as I had earlier mentioned there that the County Government of Nakuru should 
consider setting up st aff quarters for their officers. Mr. Speaker, when the doctors operate at the 
facilities, they usually require at least resting room Mr. Speaker where they can wait for the cases 
Mr. Speaker, because sometimes they require a place that they can settle and relax. And therefore 
Mr. Speaker, if we can have a staff quarters Mr. Speaker, the facility is going to operate for 24 
hours. The Medical staff are going to have some time to rest even before they get into some of the 
cases that we have; the ambulance driv ers can have a place to wait for the cases to emerge so that 
they can serve the Members of the public.  
Mr. Speaker, therefore Mr. Speaker, if these issues that have been mentioned by the Committee 
are going to be taken care of Mr. Speaker, I believe the f acility will not only be a revenue generator, 
but it will also be a haven of hope for our people and it is going to save even more lives and more 
lives are going to come to being in this County Mr. Speaker, through that facility.  
Mr. Speaker, I beg to move  that this House supports this Motion so that we can save our people. 
Mr. Speaker, I beg to move and request honorable Mur age to second the Motion. I beg to move.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you. Honorable Mur age. 
 Hon. Elijah Mur age: Thank you Mr. Speaker, I do second.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you.  
The Motion is that this House adopts the Report of the Committee on Health Services on the visit 
to Langalanga Sub -County Hospital on the 28th February 2023. The Motion is open for debate . 
Honourable Evelyne, then Honourable Muna.  
Hon. Evelyne Chepkirui:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for this chance to support this Motion. My 
name is Chepkirui Evelyne, nominated MCA representing People With Disabilities.  
Mheshimiwa Speaker, I am really happy to s ee this Report. I really want to congratulate the 
Committee Members for working this hard to make sure that they have given us each and every 
part, you see from the Maternity we have been given each and every detail we would like to hear 
Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker, I would like or I would request all the other Committees to borrow a leaf from this 
Committee and work according to what they are given. Mr. Speaker, there are some issues which 
I really think need a lot of attention Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker, when  we search for a place to stay, there are always three things that we look for; 
security, electricity and infrastructure. The Chair of this Committee has highlighted some of the 
issues to do with security Mr. Speaker and I would really request that this ma tter be looked into 
Mr. Speaker.  
We have also seen one of the recommendations being procurement of the backup generator Mr. 
Speaker. I would really wish that those matters are taken seriously and faster Mr. Speaker to ensure 
the patients and people living in that area or around that hospital are happy and embrace that 
hospital Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to request the Chair that as you visit all these hospitals, can you 
also allow us know those hospitals which have been are easily accessib le to People With 
Disabilities? Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you. The Honorable Muna; the honorable from the area.  
Hon. David Muraya : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for giving me this opportunity. First, I would 
like to appreciate the Chairman of Health Committee and the entire Committee for visiting my 
Ward and these facilities which are located in my Ward, which is Flamingo Ward. Mr. Speak er, I 
stand here to support one recommendation that this Committee has seen. It is very important and 
as a matter of fact, this hospital was commenced in 1973 when I was born. You see since then up 
to today Mr. Speaker sir, it is very unfair to see that th e hospital does not have a title deed of which 
Mr. Speaker according to the Chairman, he has said that developers cannot put any investment in 
that area since anybody can reclaim that land to be theirs. So I recommend we move very fast Hon. 
Member for Elbu rgon, to make sure that we have that title deed.  
Also Mr. Speaker, I was there when the Committee was visiting and the recommendation that they 
have put down here is very true that in that hospital Mr. Speaker sir, and if we start with the 
Maternity you c an see the beds which our wives and our children are using when delivering their 
children. You can see we have only two; one is metallic purely mabati  Mr. Speaker and you can 
see it is not comfortable at all. Mr. Speaker, it can also cause other diseases during childbirth. So 
we need to have modern delivery beds. There are one or two Mr. Speaker and then we do not have 
a resuscitator which is very sad b ecause if you can visit that area Mr. Speaker, you will see the 
resuscitator which is made out of wood.  
So Mr. Speaker, I recommend we purchase one so that we can rescue our children because the one 
available is not comfortable at all and also it can cause  diseases to the newborns.  
Mr. Speaker sir, I can also recommend that we purchase a modern laundry machine because the 
one being used is not a commercial one. The person who is using that machine uses his own hands 
and you see some of those clothes have b lood which is not good Mr. Speaker. So if we can get one 
we can appreciate.  
Mr. Speaker the other one I would like to suggest that or support my Chairman as far as the backup 
the backup generator. You see it is very unfair when a child is born and the doc tors are using 
candles when the light is off. So the backup generator is most needed there Mr. Speaker and I still 
recommended that and I have been there during the night hours that when the electricity goes off, 
you can see Mr. Speaker the situation which  is there.  
I also recommended that the incinerators that we are using there, is not good Mr. Speaker, sir.  
Most of the people who live nearby always complain about that incinerator because the smoke 
which comes from that incinerator affects them. Mr. Spe aker there was a recommendation that we 
are going to have a new one; maybe we build or we renovate the one which at the moment is not 
operating. And I will like if it can be treated as a matter of urgency and Mr. Speaker we can save 
the lives of the people  that live around that place.  
Also Mr. Speaker that hospital is one structure that was well constructed but it does not operate 
during the night  because we do not have doctors so if we can be added two or three other members 
of staff, maybe that facility can help so many people because you can see as at now, the catchment 
is around 34,000. It serves Flamingo Ward and the bordering Wards like Kivumbini, Rhonda, 
Biashara Ward and other people who come from far. We would like to have that facility operating 
for 24 hours.  
On the issue to do with medicine, you can see we have a shortage of medicine and what we get 
from the other quarter is inadequate. I support that they should add medicine to that hospital so 
that the patients can be getting medicine from ther e. If a patient can go to that hospital and get 
treated, they are asked to buy medicine from outside because the medicine is inadequate. I would 
request we be facilitated with medicine as quickly as possible so that our people who depend on 
that facility c an be happy and be satisfied that the facility is theirs and that they get good services 
from that facility.  
The security agencies that our able Chairman has recommended is very important because you can 
see he has mentioned that we have so many confirm pe ople across the area.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Confirm people? Who are they?  
Hon. David Muraya: Vijana wale ambao huwa wanaibia watu through the phones,  
wananyanganya watu vibeti zao wakipita kwa barabara.  We need security so that we can secure 
that facility because last time when I was there, I was told that they steal even those small gadgets. 
If there is a construction that is going on around the facilities and sometimes during the night, they 
enter through the fence and when the engineers come in  the morning, they start complaining that 
it is the staff of those facilities who are snatching them.  
I would like to support this Motion fully so that our people can feel that they are Kenyans like any 
other Kenyans. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kar uri): Thank you. Hon. Gatuso, Member for London Ward then Hon. 
Mwangi Muraya from Viwandani, Hon. Mukami and Hon. Dida from Mau Narok, in that order.  
Hon. Benard Gatuso: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I believe the number one thing that we are 
supposed to inc ept with is to ensure that that land is formally a County property. If we will be able 
to have title for them so that they can be able to continue with development and grow, being 
assured that the land is theirs.  
The other thing I believe is that it is hig h time as a County we start as much as possible to ensure 
that we try and practice primary kind of health instead of curative kind of health that we are used 
to. I believe the other thing that I will be able to commend the Committee through the Chair is th at 
they have been able to capture it well because staffs are supposed to be recruited because we have 
attitude issues in so many hospitals. As you go there, patients usually go to hospitals but are not 
taken seriously.  
The other thing I believe is that if there is a practicality of us as a County to be able to secure 
modern equipment that will help our people in terms of servicing ways on how they will be able 
to be treated there with the equipment that will help them in terms of health. I also believe that  it 
will be so encouraging, especially as leaders if we can be able to be attending hospitals when we 
get sick. I believe it will be encouraging to the community because we are the people who are 
showing directions and also even the insurance covers that a re secured by the County on our behalf 
if they can be directed towards that so that we can pool resources to the facilities or Health 
Facilities that happen to be around us. It will help much in terms of decongesting the level 6 or the 
PGH that we have her e if we can be able to incept the operation of other Health Facilities.  
I take this opportunity to commend the Health Committee. It is one of the most active Committee 
within this Parliament and I fully support the Report.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Hon. Muraya.  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to welcome our fellow Hon. Members 
from Busia County. Feel much welcome here.  
I want to commend the Committee and also to criticise because the facilities we are seeing here 
and the way th ey are being told, you cannot differentiate whether they are in the real condition 
because if we wanted them to be colored, we can be able to tell whether the condition the Chairman 
is talking about is the real condition. As we can see, we can also say the y were not in good 
condition because they are black and white here. There is no difference between the Members and 
the facilities.   
As much as we are supporting this Motion, we need to fasten service delivery to our Health 
Facilities and also the manageme nt in our hospitals and these health facilities should know where 
to prioritize. I have heard the Chairman explaining that the Hospital have started face lifting the 
gates and the rest. The Honorable Member from Flamingo Ward is crying here that the worker s 
are washing the linens with their hands, without the laundry machines. Face lifting is not a priority. 
The management is failing us to some extent.  
We also need management of our facilities to know what to prioritise ….  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Wh at is it Hon. Kamau?  
Hon. Simon Kamau: Mr. Speaker sir, is the Honourable Member from Viwandani in order to say 
that the staff were crying?  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Mr. Speaker sir, as I said last time, you see the kind of expression. Crying 
sio tu kulia kwa m acho.  That is why I said we must listen to understand, not to reply and my Chair 
should also learn that.  
Some of our facilities that are said to be owned by the Government usually do not have tittle deeds. 
It is because the allotments that were there maybe  were signed by some individuals and the fear is 
that people do not want to process the tittle deed because the said owner who was allocated that 
use of land will not accept to transfer the tittle deed to the next person.  
There is a recommendation  here I  can also add in this Committee; that in this floor of the House, 
we pass a Bill that all the allotments that were issued to the first owners who have sold or 
transferred these properties to other Institutions be cancelled and be issued with a new allotmen t 
to the one who is paying rates. That is the only way we can save our facilities and this is the only 
way we can have our facilities owning the tittle deeds.  
The “confirm” gang that has been mentioned; I want to urge the Honorable Members from these 
areas with “confirm” gang to talk to these young men and also to try and look for a way to facilitate 
them; either by giving them the opportunity to work because it  is the only way we can eradicate 
them. Unless otherwise, our facilities will always be vandalised by them and it is because they 
were formed with a purpose and now the purpose has gone to even terrorising patients. They ought 
to have been told to which ex tent they will be performing their duties. It is their mandate to give 
them guidelines on where to reach and where not to reach.  
Hon. Member from Flamingo Ward, you have a task there to educate our young men so that they 
can stay away from criminal activi ties. I beg to support and I am cannot remember whether the 
Hon. Chair has brought the same Report from the visit we went in Naivasha.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member, refer to the Chair.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Mr. Speaker sir, the Hon. Member i s out of order because he is moving 
out of the Motion. He is not confining himself to the details of the Motion. He is out of order and 
therefore, he ought to withdraw.  
Another issue I have noted is that the Honorable Member is a chronic absentee of this H ouse.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Dida from Mau Narok and Mheshimiwa Wathiai 
from Shabaab.  
Hon. Wathiai, is it a point of order?  
Hon. David Wathiai:  Yes Mr. Speaker sir. To our guests, welcome. This is how we do our things 
here.  
I stand to  be guided. Last week, you gave a very clear Communication on our sitting arrangement 
in the House. The Chair Health is seated at the Majority Whip’s seat. I do not know if he was 
elevated to be our Whip and yet he is in the other Party and not the Whip’s Party. Please guide us.  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Mr. Speaker sir, I am also concerned because our Deputy Majority Leader 
is seated in our Speaker’s Panel. You need to make a Communication to the floor of the House 
and also Hon. Hazy on whether he has joined the  Speaker’s Panel. Mr. Speaker give a 
Communication to these Members so that we can know whether things changed overnight.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Noted. The Hono urable…  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Mr. Speaker perhaps…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): On the same issue or a different issue?  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Yes on the same issue Mr. Speaker. I wish to actually explain so that it 
can go down well. Since I was moving two Motions at ago, I do not find it worth to move across 
the floor to the far end. Ther efore I want to excuse myself so that…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! That issue is closed. I will make a communication on 
that. The Hon. Dida from Mau Narok and then the Hon. Wamaitha.  
Hon.  Cyrus Dida : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the Motion and also congratulate the 
Chair Health for the good work that he is doing. Mine is just to comment on a few things. I have 
just noted that the problems, last time we were talking about Naivasha, now we are talking about 
Langalanga and all the Sub -County Hospitals that we have in Nakuru County are almost similar. 
I would request the Chair to continue with his good work but he has a long way to go.  
Continue visiting even our dispensaries at Mau Narok and other places around Nakuru County. I 
also want t o inform the House that Madam Governor launched the medicine and drugs few months 
ago but I regret that up to now Mau Narok Health Centres and Dispensaries and I believe also your 
Wards up until now have not gotten those drugs. We have tried to follow up b ut all in vain. The 
Chair kindly help us do a follow up. As you do the follow on the drugs and medicines in our 
hospitals also take note that our dispensaries and Health Centres do not have condoms and it is 
very important, especially to the people of Mau Narok. Thank you.  
(Laughter ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Wamaitha. What is it Hon. Wathiai. You already had 
your time on the floor.  
Hon. David Wathiai : I stood on a point of order. I now want to contribute.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): May be what you need to be prioritising is whether it is the time 
for contribution or the time for point of order. You now want to contribute and not give a point of 
order?  
Hon. David Wathiai : Yes.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Proceed and then you allow the  Member next to you Hon. 
Wamaitha. Then Hon. Kirui from Barut.  
Hon. David Wathiai : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I would like to commend the good work 
that the Committee on Health has done. They have given a comprehensive Report on the state of 
Langalan ga Health Centre. It is the only point that I noticed and to me I do not support that point 
though I am going to support the report but on amendments. There is a point that the Chair has 
said that Langalanga Health Centre needs to be given another ambulanc e. I used to work with the 
County Government so when I stand here I can say that I know that there is an ambulance at the 
health Centre and there is another ambulance at Bondeni Maternity yet in my ward I have a 
dispensary that does not even have a vehicle  that can be used around the ward. I would request to 
support the report but on amendments that that ambulance if at all is going to be bought then it 
should be brought to the Dispensary at my ward Shabaab. Thank you very much.  
Hon. David Muraya : Mr. Speak er, I rise to object what Hon. Wathiai has said…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Muna. Hon. Wathiai are you introducing another 
substantive Motion that the next round of buying ambulances your dispensary will benefit? That 
is more progressive than  saying that LangaLanga hospital which is at Level Four Hospital should 
not benefit from a new ambulance.  
Hon. David Wathiai : I stand to be guided.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you.  
Hon.  Ann Wamaitha : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to give 
my views. I want to welcome our visitors from Busia County. I would like to congratulate the 
Health Committee Members for their thorough investigations on Langa Langa hospital. One th ing 
that I have noticed and which it has saddened me is that the maternity ward does not have a laundry 
service. A few years back, there was a study in Nakuru that from one hundred thousand birth, four 
hundred and thirty six women died during child labor. A number of children die in Nakuru because 
they are not being handled well in the hospital. There are certain diseases that come with lack of 
proper sanitation in the hospitals that can affect both the mothers and the children .As we are on a 
worldwide mis sion to eradicate maternal and child death, our maternity should be at per with what 
our goals are and this will benefit both the women and children of Flamingo ward as well as the 
all of Nakuru County. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Kirui then the Hon. Francis from Malewa West.  
Hon. Bernard Kirui : Asante sana  Mr. Spika kwa hii nafasi nimepata. Kwanza ningependa 
kukaribisha wageni wetu kutoka  Busia. Karibuni sana  Nakuru City. Nimesimama kuiunga mkono 
hii Ripoti ya Kamati ya Health  kwa sababu nimeona kuwa kuna mambo mengi ambayo 
yamefanywa kwa hii hospitali ya Langa Langa.  Vile tumes ikia Mheshimiwa  Muna, MCA kutoka 
hiyo Wadi akipongeza Ripoti hii, mimi pia kama  MCA wa Barut ambae pia huwa tunatumia hiyo 
hospitali tunashukuru. Tumeona kuw a kuna mambo ya  NHIF hapo.  Sisi kama waheshimiwa wa 
jijini tumeshinda tukifanya harambees kila jumapili kuchangia bills za hospitali. Tunashukuru kwa 
sababu kuna kadi ambayo imeletwa kwa hii hospitali ya  Langa Langa. Imekuwa tu ni hospitali ya  
PGH ambayo imekuwa ikitumia hii kadi kwa hivyo tutakuwa tukishauri watu wetu pia waweze 
kwenda kwenye hiyo hospitali kwa sababu kuna hii kadi ya  NHIF. Ombi ambalo ninaomba kama 
Mbunge wa Barut ni kwamba tumeona kuwa hakuna  outpatient services na pia mambo ya hayo 
kadi pia yanasaidia kulipa matibabu ya kuingia na kutoka kwa hivyo Tunaomba Kamati ya  Health 
iweze kuangalia hayo ndio iweze kusaidia watu wetu. Mambo ya maternity, tumekuwa tukitumia 
ile ya  Bondeni na ya  PGH. Laini ambayo Unapata pale inakuwa ngumu kwa wengi ne kufika kule. 
Unapata kina mama wakijifungua nyumbani lakini kwa sababu tumeona kuwa kuna  Maternity 
Wing imeletwa pale  Langa Langa pia tunashukuru Kamati hiyo kwa ile kazi nzuri wamefanya.  
Sina mengi ila tu kupongeza hii Kamati na kuwaomba pia waweze kuf ika upande wa  Barut. Tuko 
na dispensary mbili ya  Burgei na ya  Parkview. Tuna  facility ambayo imeletwa lakini kufunguliwa 
ndio shida kwa hivyo tunaomba  Chair aweze kuangalia hapo ili iweze kufunguliwa na iweze 
kusaidia watu wengine.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel K aruri): Thank you Hon. Kirui. The Hon. Francis then Hon. Leah from 
Keringet.  
Hon. Francis Kuria : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I do not have much to say, I just want to support 
the Motion and congratulate the Committee for a job well done. We really tried put ting more effort 
on how to support this team and visit the various facilities. I have heard one of our Hon. Member 
say that the facility was supposed to prioritise on buying the laundry machines. Remember we 
found the Management of the facility doing repai rs to that facility so we have no powers to say 
that they are not supposed to this but start with this. What we were supposed to do is support that 
and guide them where we can. Allow me to just support and commend the Committee for the good 
job that they h ave done. I want to urge my fellow Hon. Members to be visiting their facilities so 
that whenever they find that there is a problem or something that needs to be investigated or carried 
out on such facilities then as a Committee we will be able to know how to tackle such issues. 
Thank you and I do welcome our colleagues from Busia.  
Hon. Leah. Serem : Asante sana Bwana Kinara Spika wetu kwa hii nafasi ambayo nimeweza 
kupata. Nimesimama kuunga mkono kazi ambayo Kamati ya Afya iliweza kufanya.  Tunaelewa ya 
kwamba bila afya hatuwezi fanya chochote katika maisha yetu, nyumbani, kazini na hata katika 
hii Bunge . Kwa hivyo afya lazima i pewe kipao mbele.  Tunawapongeza sana kwa kazi ambao 
wameweza kufanya. Jambo ambalo ningependa kuongezea ni kwamba katika chumba c ha 
kujifungulia cha kina mama ningeomba ya kwamba Kamati iweze kuingilia kati.  Waweze kutembea 
katika hizo hospitali kubwa na hizo ndogo ambazo ziko kule mashinani kuhakikisha ya kwamba 
ziko safi na pia kuhakikisha kwamba mahali ambapo kina mama wanajifung ulia pako sawa . Mwezi 
uliopita sisi kama kina mama tuliweza kutembelea msichana mwengine mdogo ambaye alijifungua 
watoto watano hapa  Nakuru na lilikuwa ni jambo la historia sana katika  Kenya yetu. Kwa sababu 
ya challenges nyingi na  facilities ambazo hazito shi, na hao watoto waliaga.  Tungependa pia 
Kamati ya  Health wafuatilie na watuletee  Ripoti ili tuweze kujua ni jambo gani lilifanya hawa 
watoto wakaaga katika  Hospitali yetu ya  General. Pia tunapozingatia kujifungua kwa kina mama, 
tusije tukaona tu kwamba kila mama ambaye anaenda kujifungua huwa anajifungua mtoto mmoja. 
Wengi hujifungua watoto wawili, wanne hadi watano kwa hivyo wanapopitia changamoto kama 
hizo lazima pia tuwe na  Counselling Room. Tukiwa na hiyo  Counselling Room itawasaidia. 
Tukizingatia upande wa wanaume huwa wanawaachili a sana wanawake wao wanapo jifungua 
sana sana wanapo pata watoto wengi. Unapata kwamba wanaume wanaanza kutoroka na kuachia 
mama mzigo mkubwa. Tusipokuwa na  Counselling Room hao kina mama watatoka pale na wana 
weza patwa n a kicha a ambayo hawakutafuta. Kwa hivyo  Chairman kazi kwako.  
Hon. Bernard Kirui : Point of order Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the order?  
Hon. Leah Serem : I do not need any point of order Mr. Speaker.  
(Laughter ) 
   
 Hon. Bernard Kirui : Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the order?  
Hon. Bernard Kirui : Mr. Speaker, kuna mahali Mheshimiwa amesema ati sisi wanaume huwa 
hatuwajali kina mama wakati wanajifungua. Swali langu ni kuwa wanataka tufanye nini? Tukuwe 
hapo kuwasai dia kujifungua ama vipi?  
(Laughter ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! Order! Hon. Kirui . You had proceeded very well until 
when you answered yourself. You specifically wanted to know what is expected of the man in as 
far as delivery of a kid is concerned. Maybe Mheshimiwa ajibu hiyo.  
Hon. Bernard Kirui : Acha atajibu zikiwa mbili. Natumai sis i kama wazee tunamalizia kazi pale. 
Halafu wao waende wafanye hiyo nyingine. Sio sisi…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! Order! Hon. Kirui.  The Hon. Serem  
Hon. Leah Serem : I think Mr. Kirui is out order Mr. Speaker. Hakuna vile utasema unamaliza 
kazi yako. Kazi gani hiyo? Ningeomba wanaume wote  kwa hii…   
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Address the Chair.  
Hon. Leah Serem : I am sorry Mr. Chair. Naomba kwamba hii Bunge iweze kua kielelezo kizuri 
kuonyesha upendo na pia kuonyesha kwamba wewe ndiye m zazi, wewe ndiye baba mtoto. Awe 
mmoja amezaliwa , awe mlemavu, wawe wawili, watatu ama wanne wamekuja kwa ghafla 
uwapokee wote na sio kuwatoroka tafadhali.  
Hon. Francis Kuria : Point of order Madam Serem. Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What i s it? What is the order?  
Hon. Francis Kuria:  Mr. Speaker can Hon. Serem elaborate further. Ni waheshimiwa wangapi 
hapa ambao hawaonyeshi mapenzi kwa wake zao?   Afafanue… ametoroka . Endelea Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! I can see where  now this discussion is headed to.  
Hon. Leah Serem : Through experience Mr. Speaker sir, mimi kama mjuavyo munaniita mama 
Triplets lakini hamuwezi mkaelewa ni yapi nilipitia. Kuamanisha unachanganyikiwa kimawazo 
pia hata tuseme umejifungua hao watoto bila m tu mwenye ako karibu na wewe, hata kunyonyesha 
hao watoto inakuwa ni shida kwa sababu mama yeyote anatakiwa kuwa na maziwa lita mbili kila 
siku; lakini akiwa na stress  atapata less than a litre  na hao watoto wanaweza kuaga. Kwa hivyo 
sio kuamanisha twende na wewe kama mume maternity ukajifungue pia. Ni kuamanisha ya 
kwamba uwe na chakula, unitulize kimawazo na kila kitu ambacho kinahitajika uwe karibu. Sio 
ati kutoroka; wengine hutoroka kama kule kwetu, hakuna nyumba nyingi na hivyo wengi hutoroka 
na kwenda  kulala stoo kwa sababu hawataki kusikia kelele za watoto. Kwa hivyo tusiwe kama hao 
watu. Asante sana Bwana Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Kanyere the Member from Nakuru East, then the Hon. 
Member from Kivumbini, and then the Chairperson for Health you will be responding.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity. First and 
foremost is to welcome our visitors from Busia County. Feel welcome to this Honorable House. 
Secondly is to commend the good work done by t he Committee on Health; and now marrying the 
two Reports that have been tabled in this Honourable House, there are two things which are 
recurring Mr. Speaker sir. There is this issue of drugs which was mentioned when the other Report 
about Naivasha was bei ng tabled and now in the Langalanga Report.  
I think it is a serious issue which we should discuss because lack of drugs in our facilities has 
become a menace and the only drugs that are provided there are painkillers and sometimes they 
are not available. It is now time for this House to think widely and get to know if it is an issue of 
procurement or it is about single sourcing, considering the issue of KEMSA also came up. So I 
think that issue should be looked into.  
The other issue that is recurring in t he two Reports is about the land title; the ownership of the land 
that the facilities are. It is a matter of great concern and this House needs to come up with a 
resolution to deal with that menace which keeps on recurring. As it has been reported by other  
Members, it seems that this thing is everywhere in each and every facility. The other worrying 
issue is concerning security in our facilities. It saddens me to hear that Langalanga facility which 
has a Maternity Wing has no Security Personnel and it comes  to my attention when just the other 
day in Pumwani Hospital, we had some cases where some people stole newborn babies. So if we 
do not have security personnel to man our facilities, it is worrying that such crimes can happen 
there.  
Mine is just to commen d the good work done and the recommendations that have been put across 
to be adhered to. To conclude on my submission, I urge the Intergovernmental Relations 
Committee to have Health functions fully devolved. Currently a lot of money is being withheld by 
the National Government and that is why you can see our facilities have some issues to do with 
facilitation and even upgrading of the hospitals and therefore I will urge the National Government 
to come up and fully give money to the County Governments so th at we can improve on matters 
to do with health. Thank you Mr. Speaker for that chance.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon Member from Kivumbini.  
Hon. Neto Sakwa:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I also welcome Hon. Members from, Busia County 
to this great c ity and into this Honorable House. Mr. Speaker sir, I also commend the Chair for 
Health and the entire Committee for the Report that they have come up with on the Langa Langa 
Hospital. That facility Mr. Speaker serves almost three Wards, namely Biashara, F lamingo and 
Kivumbini. Kivumbini Ward does not have any Health Facility and so we depend Langa Langa 
Hospital to serve our people. So, I will be brief and point out a slight observation to ask the Whole 
House through you Mr. Speaker that this Report should  be adopted to the latter but even as we 
adopt this Report, I take also consideration on the area of interaction with the Community Health 
Volunteers. These are the people who have volunteered working within our area and serving our 
people and have made th eir request that when writing the Report and adopted, the Country 
Government has a way of employing some people within the hospital and they have made a request 
that they be considered through being given casual opportunities within the same facility. So I  
commend the Report and urge the House through you the Chair and Mr. Speaker sir, the Report 
should be adopted. Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Chair and before you respond, for clarity, there is a 
point that you said t hat the facility was raised to Level Four then at some point the services are not 
matching a Level Four facility. so, which is which? Is it a Level Three or Level Four facility?  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Thank you Mr. Speaker; allow me to respond to various iss ues that have 
been raised starting with the one that you have raised Mr. Speaker. The current status of 
Langalanga facility is a Level Three Facility.  
However, they said the name precedes everything; because before I became an MCA or even 
dreamt about it Mr. Speaker the Honourable. Wananchi  started calling me Mheshimiwa  Mr. 
Speaker. I think that is the same analogy that the Department is using but as far as we are concerned 
as an oversight body, we are referring that facility as a Level Three; that is a He alth Centre. It has 
not yet been elevated because it is the services that elevate a facility and we are requesting the 
Department to confine themselves to calling that facility a Level Three.  
On the issue of the drugs, it is an issue cutting across all th e Wards and I wish to say and state that 
these facilities and the kind of drugs that we have received, they are in low volumes and we are 
requesting the County to do something as far as the drugs is concerned so that all the facilities can 
have enough drug s. We are also pushing for this facility that once they have improved the services, 
this facility will be at capacity to buy its own drugs through the FIF. Therefore, it is an issue of 
making sure that we have done the necessary the recommendations if they  can be implemented, 
the facility will be able to shoulder the burden of drugs and will be able to give members of  the 
public the services that they ought to get.  
On the issue of the laundry machines it is true that the one which is at the facility canno t serve the 
population that the facility has and we are requesting all the maternity facilities that we have that 
they should have laundry machines. On the issue of psycho -support including paternal support, it 
is paramount and each facility ought to give priority to this service because our mothers have been 
suffering. It is painful and how I wish men could have a share of what the women go through. I 
salute the women because they go through a lot of painful and strenuous conditions that is not 
optional an d psycho social support should be offered.  
The County Government of Nakuru should provide such services in each facility. If you visit 
Margret Kenyatta Maternity at the PGH, there is no room for such service yet even the father 
should be there where the w omen are delivering so that they can comfort them. It is true our African 
tradition is awkward; you participated when making the baby but when the baby is coming to life, 
the man usually runs away. He does not want to be associated with such affairs. And y ou have 
heard from a member that the women usually go through a lot. I do not want to extend that debate 
but perhaps you can organise for one evening we have a couples’ night on this matter so that the 
male Members can get the gist and the information as f ar as maternity issues are concerned.  
On the issue of ambulance services, I did not say that ambulance should go to Langalanga and 
even the Report stipulates clearly that an additional ambulance should go to the Sub -County. That 
means Nakuru East Sub -Coun ty ought to have an ambulance that should be moving round the Sub -
County. Perhaps when we will be visiting Nakuru West we are also going to come with the same 
recommendation. On the issues raised by Hon. Dida, I sympathise in that I understand his age and 
therefore he is concerned about his age mates. However, we have made sure that they are in the 
stores but the only issue is on their distribution.  
The issue of title deeds is a thorny issue because none of our facilities have the title deed unless 
those o nes that the County procured land just recently but the rest of the facilities do not have title 
deeds. I am requesting the relevant Committee to tackle this matter and make it a business of that 
Committee so that our facilities can have title deeds so tha t we can move forward.  
On the issues of disabilities, it is true that all upcoming facilities must comply to the standards of 
People With Disabilities (PWDs) so that patients living with disabilities, including visitation to 
maternity can find it friendly  and that they can enjoy those services. Therefore Mr. Speaker I beg 
to request the Members to support this Report and Mr. Speaker to make sure that the Report 
recommendations will be implemented. I am also requesting Implementation Committee to take 
up th is matter seriously and it should not be a tradition whereby we come here, we go to the field, 
we come before this Honorable House we table Reports, the House passes the Motions but when 
it comes to implementation, we are not seeing results. I will be seek ing that after three months or 
six months; I will be back here to request for the implementation status of these Reports because 
we have a tendency as a Country of passing Legislations and Reports but we end up putting the 
Documents on shelves and to gathe r dust while other Counties come taking away our policies and 
they are doing well.  
Therefore, I would wish to request the Implementation Committee, the Lands Committee and the 
Security Committee to take up this matter and go to the field and come up with their 
recommendations and fastrack this matter so that these facilities can stand comfortably and offer 
services to members of the public. I beg to support and request the House to pass this Report. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Th ank you Chairperson. I now want to put it to question  
Question proposed that this House adopts the Report of the Committee on Health Services on the 
visit to Langa Langa Sub -County Hospital on the 28th February 2023  
(Question put and agreed to)  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honorable Members, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow Wednesday 9.30 in the morning.  
The House rose at 5.15pm  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 