COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Friday 3 rd  November, 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:45 AM  
 [The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION(S) FROM THE CHAIR  
APPROPRIATION BILL N o. 7 of  2023.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Members. I wish to inform you that pursuant to the provisions 
of Standing Order 32 ,  I received a request from the L eader of the Majority Party asking me to 
appoint a day for a Special Sitting to deliberate on the Nakuru County Supplementa ry  
Appropriation Bill N o.  7 of 2023. A ccordingly, and in line with the provisions of Standing Order 
32 (2) I was satisfied that the request was indeed urgent and of utmost importance .  Subsequently ,  
today's S itting was gazette d  through the Kenya Gazette Notice No. 14706 . Therefore ,  Honorable 
Members ,  t his S itting is properly convened.  
COMMUNICATION (S)  FROM THE CHAIR  
VISITING DEPUTY SPEAKER  
I wish to inform you that today we are privileged to be joined by the Deputy Speaker of  the County 
Assembly of B ungoma ,  t he Honorable Stephen Wafula Wamalwa , who  is seated within the 
Chamber.  
(Applause)  
I wish to take this opportunity to welcome the Honorable  Wamalwa to our  Chamber and the 
Assembly ,  and further appreciate t his friendly gesture. Karibu sana.  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
APPROPRIATION BILL NUMBER 7 of  2023  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a P rocedural Motion by the H onorable Alex Mbugua ,  
the Chairperson  Committee on Budget and Appropriations.  
H on. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Speaker, I wish to stand on Procedural Motion THAT  
Notwithstanding the provision of Standing Order 119, this House resolves to reduce the 
Publication Period of the Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Bill N o.  7 of 2023 from 7 
days to 1 da y .  
Mr. Speaker,  within the current Budgeting P eriod ,  and more so this period, there ha ve  been so 
many changes within how the Government is operating. There has been introduction of new taxes, 
there has also been introduction of new NHIF billing and also, we have those of our Contractors 
who did  their work in the previous Financial Year , and th ose People Mr. Speaker cannot be 
accommodated in the current  Budget until a Supplementar y is made to be coherent with the order 
of the day.   
Mr. Speaker, w hen this Supplementary Budget passes, it will allow the economy of Nakuru to 
move ahead with coherent and everything that is supposed to be herein.  Mr. Speaker, I wish to ask 
the House to adopt this and I wish to ask Hon. Alex Lang’at to second this.  
The Majority Leader ( Hon. Alex Lang’at ) : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to second the 
Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): T hank you. The Moti on is properly before the House; and the 
Motion is THAT  Notwithstanding  the provisions of Standing Order 119, this House resolves to 
reduce the Publication Period of the Nakuru County  Supplementary Appropriation Bill N o.  7 of 
2023 from 7 days to 1 day. The Motion is open for Debate.  The Honorable Leader of Minority  
Party .  
The M inority L eader ( Hon. Philip Wanjohi ) : Thank you Mr. Speaker .  L istening to the remarks 
made by the Chair Budget Committee and also the support evidence given by the Majority Leader, 
Mr. Speaker I wish to agree that we proceed with the Procedural Motion because there a re issues 
ahead of us that need  to be deliberated on ,  and to be sol ved before Christmas. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker,  I support .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Deputy Leader of the Majority Party.  
Hon. Rose Njoroge : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I also want to support the Motion ,  so that we can 
help in hastening  developments in our County. Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Member for Hells Gate who is also the Minority 
Whip.  
Hon. Virginia Wamaitha : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the Motion ,  bearing in mind 
that some projects were rolled over to this Financial Year and they had not been factored in the 
current Budget. There are C ontractors who had  already completed their Contracts yet they cannot 
be paid until we pass the Supplementary Budget. So  Mr. Speaker , I stand to support , thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Honorable Member for Maai Mahiu and then 
there will be another order.  
Hon. Eliud Chege : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this chance. I also like to second and 
support the Motion. Mr. Speaker, m any Contractors  have done their work but they  cannot be paid. 
So, I think this matter is urgent and as the Assembly, we need to push this matter and put it to rest 
so that we can give a chance to our County to develop.  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I  do support .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Honorable Member for Subukia and then the 
Member from Rongai . r.  
Hon. Isabella Makori : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I also like to support this Motion. In fact, on 
the ‘ ground ’  things are very difficult. We need this Supplementary like yesterday. Thank you  Mr .  
Speaker, I support.  
Hon. Doreen Korir : Thank you so much Mr. Speaker, I also stand to support the Procedural 
Motion and  the issue of Budget. Mr. Speaker a ccording to the Budget, I know there is an allocation 
for the Municipalities ,  both Molo and Gilgil . So  to ensure that this starts as soon as possible, Mr. 
Speaker I support that we move with speed. Also the issue of Bills that are pending, like the 
Electricity bills need to be settled, so I support.  A nd also ,  reading the mood of the House, I propose 
that you put it into ques tion .  Thank  you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon Members ,  I will  proceed the M otion to put it into question .  
The Motion  is:  -  THAT Notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order 119, this House resolves 
to reduce the Publication Period of the Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Bill No.7 of  
2023 ,  from 7  days to 1  day.  
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
BILL(s)  
First Reading  
THE NAKURU COUNTY SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION S  BILL N o . 7 of  2023  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon orable  Members ,  the Bill which is the Nakuru County 
Supplementary Appropriation Bill No .  7 of 2023 ,  is now committed to the  Committee on Budget 
and Appropriation s  for consideration and report to this House.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members this House stands adjourned to today at 2.30 pm in the Afternoon  
The House rose at 11.00 AM  
 