COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday, 27 th September 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House Met At 10: 25 AM  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): In the Chair].  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
NAKURU WEST SECONDARY SCHOOL . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): I wish to recogni se visiting teachers  and 120 students  from 
Nakuru West Secondary School, Kaptembwo Ward. The team is led by 4  Teachers  namely;  
1. Mr. Edward Owiyo  
2. Mrs. Shirley Ombati  
3. Mrs. Silver Nyabayo  
Karibuni sana.  This is your House. We sit here to deliberate important issues that concern you as 
citizens of this great County.  
MOTION  
VISIT TO SHABAB DIGITAL CENT RE 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Motion by Hon. Hezzy Kariuki , the Chairperson 
Committee  on ICT and E Government.  
Hon. Eliud Chege: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. On behalf of the Chair person , Hon. Hezzy Kariuki 
and on behalf of the Committee  on ICT, I beg to move a Motion that this House adapts a Report  
on the Committee  … 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order Hon. Member ! What is the reason that you are standing 
on his behalf?  
Hon. Eliud Chege: Mr. Speaker sir, on behalf of our Chair person , Hon. Hezzy Kariuki and that 
of the Committee , I beg to move the Motion on behalf of the Committee  on ICT and E-
government … 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honorable Member for Ma hi-Mahiu, the Chair is in the 
House so what makes you move the Motion on his behalf?  
Hon. Eliud Chege: Mr. Speaker sir, the Chair person  has requested me because he is unwell.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Okay. Understood.  
Hon. Eliud Chege: Now, I beg to move a Motion that this House adapts the Report  on the 
Committee  on ICT and E-government  on Shabaab Digital Cent re, laid before the Table  of the 
Assembly on Tuesday, 26thSeptember, 2023, during the  Afternoon Plenary.  This is Report  on ICT 
visit to Shabaa b Digital Cent re which was held on 11th July, 2023.  
The Sectoral Committee  on ICT and E-government  is established under the Second Schedule of 
the Nakuru County Standing Orders and is mandated to deal with all matters relating to Access, 
Development, Use and Skill  in ICT and E-government . Access to information for PWDs.  
 
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Mr. Speaker sir, when we came back from recess, you did inform us that 
all Report s will be on our gadgets here but unfortunately, we are struggling to get it and therefore, 
unless the other Members are able to access it. I do not see the Report  here.  
The Speaker (Hon.  Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Report  is on your screens. What you use is the 
Password  which is your ID number and then you  click okay then there you go, y ou have your 
Report s. 
Hon. Hassan Ali: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I can confirm the Report  is there and as I said 
yesterday, we just need a little training  to use these gadgets, through your Office . Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. That is well noted. Proceed.  
Hon. Eliud Chege: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I beg now to proceed.  
The objective of the visit was to:  
1. Check on the status of the Digital Cent re. 
2. Check on the achievements of the Digital Cent re, challenges and areas of improvement as 
far as service delivery is concerned.  
Shabaab Digital Cen tre is located in Shabaab Ward at Nakuru West Sub County, Nakuru County. 
It is where Youths  between the ages of 22 -35 years are trained on the basic Computer Packages , 
Data Analysis, Essential Skills, Community Sessions and Comprehensive Curriculum. The 
Training takes a maximum of 8 Weeks and another 6 Weeks of a Mentorshi p Program. The 
Mentorship Program is done at Menengai Digital Cent re. The Training  is fully sponsored by the 
County Government of Nakuru in collaboration with Generation Program Kenya.  
The Generation Program Kenya works in collaboration with the County Government of Nakuru in 
training the Youths  on Online System in particular Digital Freelancing Program . The qualification 
requirements to the Digital Freelancing program are as follows:  
• Between the ages of 22 -35years.  
• Minimum Form 4 education.  
• Ability to read, comprehend and communicate in English.  
• Computer literacy & Certification  and Typing skills would be an added advantage.  
There are three hubs where the Generation Program Kenya is working on in Kenya namely: 
Nakuru Hub at Shabaab Digital Cent re, Nairobi and Mombasa. The objective of this partnership 
is geared towards addressing unemployment challenges among the Youths  through ICT in Nakuru 
County.  
More than 260 youths  in Nakuru County have benefited from digital literacy training through the 
collaboration between the County Government and Generation Program Kenya. Currently, the 
training  is ongoing at Shabaab Digital Centre with 80 youths  benefiting from the Digital 
Freelancing  Program. The training seeks to equip the youths  with digital skills to work Onlin e and 
get a decent earning. Through the Program, our youths  will be engaged in online  work and it will 
reduce the rate of crime, substance abuse and idleness among the youths  in the County.  
Shabaab Digital Cent re Program operates in two shifts, the Morning Shift is between 7.00am -
12.30pm while the Evening Shift is between 1.00pm -6.00pm. There are 3 Instructors from 
Generation Program Kenya who train the students  on Technical Skills, Behavioral and Mindset 
Skills. Currently this is the 7th Co-Host and there are 30 students in the Morning Session . However , 
Mr. Willis who is in charge of the  Cent re from the County Government stated that in some 
instances the capacity would go up to 40.  
Nakuru County has 7 Digital Cent res namely ; Shabaab, Kuresoi South, Subukia, Rongai, 
Menengai East, Kabazi and Naivasha and they are spread across the County and run similar 
Programs. The objective of the Digital Cent res is to provide a platform for  youths  to train, work 
Onlin e and also provide space for  Innovations and Research  at no cost, thus a way of reducing 
youths  unemployment . 
Committee  Findings and Observations  
The following are the Findings  and Observations that were highlighted by the Committee  and 
Managemen t of the Shabaab Digital Cent re during the visit;  
1. Shabaab Digital Cent re has 30 Computers.  
2. Out of the 30 Compute rs, 28 are fully functional and Online.  
3. 2 Computer s are not functional due to  Hardware hitches.  
4. The Digital Centre  has 1  Internet service provider  
5. The Digital Centre  has 1  Server Room.  
6. The Digital Centre  has a good Software  for transcription.  
7. In case of power out rage, the Server  has a backup installed separately.  
8. Shabaab Digital Centre  is using N Computing Technology System  
9. The Training  Program is free to youths  between 22 -35 years courtesy of the County 
Government of Nakuru.  
10. The facility has been able to mentor over 260 youths . 
11. The Digital Centre  is currently at the 7thCo-host.  
12. Two Computers  in the Digital Centre s are not functional.  
13. The Centre  experiences frequent Internet instability.  
14. The floor of the Digital Centre  is not tiled thus prone to dust which affects the  Computers . 
 
Committee  Recommendations  
From the above  Observations , the Committee  made the following recommendations;  
1. The In -charge Officer, Mr. Willis should work closely with the Director ICT to fast track 
on repair of the 2 non -functional Computer s.  
2. That, there is in need for the County Government of Nakuru to ensure contracting two 
Internet Service providers which to minimi se frequent Internet  instability.  
3. The County Government of Nakuru should consider budgeting for floor t iles for the 
Shabaab Digital Centre  to reduce dust which exposes the Computers .  
4. That, the County Government of Nakuru should consider having a substantive Chief 
Officer in charge of ICT for effective execution of the Departmental activities.  
 
Mr. Speaker, the ICT Department does not have a substantive Chief Officer and this is a Committee  
where we have one CECM but we have different Accounting Officer s. As a Committee , if we do 
not have a substantive Chief Officer, even in terms of budgeting . Currently,  the Department 
Director is acting as the Chief Officer.  
 
Mr. Speaker i n our recommendation s, we urge this House and also you that you may help this 
Committee  at least have  a substantive Chief Officer that even in case of budgeting, this Committee  
will be facilitated and whatever we are requesting will have a n office  where our cries will be heard 
because we share the same CECM with the Committee  on Education and it is not  that we are 
lamenting,  but it is somehow as if this Committee  on ICT is neglected because when we do not 
have a Chief Officer and on the other e nd we see like all the resources are being directed to the 
Committee  on Education.  
 
Mr. Speaker, w e are requesting that we have a substantive Chief Officer because we are running a 
digital world and all services in our County Government should be digitali sed and thus, this 
Committee  on ICT should not be looked down on. Therefore, we request that we are given at least 
a substantive Chief Officer.  
 
Mr. Speaker, t hat was the Report , the finding s and the Committee  on ICT did recommendation s. I 
would wish to thank you and the  Members of the Committee  for their commitment during the 
Committee  visit to the Shabaab Digital Centre , held on 11thJuly, 20232. I also wish to thank the 
Office  of the Speaker and th at of the Clerk for their facilitation during the visit. I now request Hon. 
Ann, who is the Vice Chair of our Committee  to second.  
 
Hon. Ann Njaguara: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I second.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you. The Motion is properly seconded.  
The Motion is that this House adopts the Report  of the Committee  on ICT and E-government  on 
Shabaab Digital Centre  that was laid before the table of the Assembly on Tuesday, 26thSeptember, 
2023 during the Afternoon Plenary.  The Motion is open for Debate.  The Honorable Member for 
Shabaab, Hon. Wathiai.  
 
Hon. David Wathiai: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I stand to congratulate the Chair person  of ICT 
Committee . Despite him being an elder, he has been able to lead the ICT Committee  well and 
indeed, he gave a very good Report . I would also like to welcome the Nakuru West Secondary 
students  to this House. The MCA for Kaptembwo is out on official duties …  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable Member …  
 
Hon. David Wathiai: Sorry Mr. Speaker sir. I had not seen him come in.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): On that, the Honorable Member for Kaptembwo, are you in the 
House?  
 
Hon. Peter Kajwang’: Mr. Speaker sir, I am properly in the House.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Honorable Member, proceed.  
 
Hon. David Wathiai: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I would like to welcome the students  of Nakuru 
West Secondary  School . This is where we do our work and this is how we do things. When you 
get out of this place, make sure you learn something. In regards to the ICT Centre , I would like to 
confirm that indeed, the Committee  on ICT visited Shabaab Ward and they came to check on the 
status and the achievement of the Digital Centre . The ICT Hub has really benefitted many youths  
from the area . About  260 have gone thr ough the  Centre , this being a joint venture  between 
Generation Program Kenya and the County Government of Nakuru.  
I would like to request that in future during the graduation of these students, maybe they organi se 
a graduation ceremony so that they can highlight the good work that is being done in that Centre .  
 
Mr. Speaker a s I finish, we also do not have a Chief Officer in charge of ICT. I also second the 
Committee  on this and pray that the County Government employs a Chief Officer for ICT so that 
we can get efficiency in service delivery to the people in regards to ICT.  
 
Mr. Speaker, i n regards to the tiling of the ICT hub, I would like to confirm that in the next 
Financial Year , we are going to factor in the issue of tiling the ICT hub so that we can reduce the 
dust that is affecting the  Computers in the ICT Centre . I stand to second the Motion.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Honorable Member for Keringet Ward.  
 
Hon. William Mutai: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I stand to appreciate what the Committee  on 
ICT has done. The Report  that has been presented is quite encouraging, bearing in mind that this 
is the direction to go now and in the future. I really want to appreciate the County Government and 
the Generation Program Kenya for these efforts and it is my prayer and I believe the prayer of my 
colleagues that if this can be extended to cover the wider area in our County, our youths  will 
achieve quite a lot.  
I want to appreciate the objective that has been drawn to our understanding that the youths  will be 
… 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Hon. Doreen?  
 
Hon. Doreen Korir: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to seek your indulgence on whether 
Honorable  Rottok is in decorum. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable  Rottok, be upstanding. Are you in decorum?  
 
Hon. Isaac Rottok: Mr. Speaker sir, I think I am in decorum . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon orable  Rottok, yesterday, we had a back and forth discussion 
about what it means to be in decorum in this House and the way that you are dressed, you are 
totally out of decorum. Kindly …  
 
(Honourable Rottok leaves the House)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): … and that discussion is closed. Proceed the Hon orable  Member 
for Keringet.  
(Laughter! ) 
Hon. William Mutai : Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was talking about the objective to 
engage the young generation and keep them away from drug s and substance abuse. I want to echo 
this and congratulate the people who initiated the Program because sincerely speaking this one is 
a City and in the suburbs of the town we expect this kind of drug s and substance abuse. It is one 
way of addressing the youths  challenges, so I want to appreciate that.  
However  Mr. Speaker , when it comes to the eligibility, this age is between 22 and 35 years and 
you will concur with me that there should not have been a maximum age limit of 35. It should 
have been open. You saw how our colleague Hon orable  Wanjohi was struggling to get into the 
system. This indicates that if he has time he can be updating himself in such kind of Centre s and I 
am very sure that this one is also affecting quite a number of us in the House and s ame to the 
elderly in the community. Mr. Speaker if the age limit can be extended, it will benefit many.  
Lastly  Mr. Speaker , there is something that I want clarification on and this is with one objective 
that has been pointed out in the Report  that the Program engages the youths  so that it can promote 
their Technical Skills , Behavioral Skills , and their Mindset. If I can get some clarification from the 
Chair person  or a Committee  Memb er, I think I will be very comfortable and I am going to support 
the Report  100%. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon orable  Member for Keringet. Hon. Hassan.  
Hon. Ali Hassan : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity so I can debate on this 
matter. Allow me to welcome these young fellows from Nakuru West Secondary School. I want 
to encourage them and tell them that we were once in the same age like you and s ome of us went 
to public  Secondary  Schools . We never went to Academies  or International  Schools , but we went 
to schools similar to these and we are now here. I want to encourage you that your inspiration s to 
be here will also come true  in future .  
Mr. Speaker, I support this Motion from the Committee  on ICT, and congratulate them for the 
good work they have done. One thing that stands out in this Report  is that employment has been 
created for almost 260 young people. When they are in these ICT hubs,  as we have been told from 
the Report , they do a lot of research and a lot of innovations. This basically gives them time to 
engage in these activities and keep off from criminal activities like drugs and substance abuse.  
Mr. Speaker, th is is a very good thing and we want to ask the County Government of Nakuru to 
make sure, of course the other day when we were going through this year’s Budget we want to 
commend the Governor because she did place a lot of money in these ICT hubs. This is very good 
and commendable. Once we have these ICT hubs around the County  I am sure many youths  are 
going to get employment through ICT and they will stay away from crime and issues with drugs. 
If the ICT hub in Shabaab alone can create employ ment for around 260 people through  Innovation 
and Research , what if we had around 50 ICT hubs in Nakuru? That tells you that we are going to 
have a lot of youths  engage in these activities and they will stay away from drug s and crime .  
So Mr. Speaker I support this Report , and I thank the Committee  for doing a good job.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon orable  Member for Kiptagich and then the 
Honorable  Member for Turi in that order.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech : Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir, I want to concur with the Committee  on ICT 
and E-government. First Mr. Speaker,  I heard that the minimum qualification for joining the ICT 
hub is one has to have cleared Form 4. I am requesting they drop it to Class Eight . Some of them 
did not go to school because they lacked school f ees and we need to reduce crime, substance abuse, 
and idleness.  
Secondly  Mr. Speaker , I do appreciate that there is an ICT hub In Kuresoi South but for our 
students to have to travel from Kiptagich to Olenguruone which 21kms. This becomes very hard 
for some of the students  to go study in Olenguruone and back. So I am requesting that , every Ward  
should have a Digital Centre . I have heard that one year down the line there is no ICT and E-
government  Chief Officer, I am requesting the County Government to engage a Chief Officer with 
immediate effect. Thank you.  
Hon. John Macharia : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I rise to support the Report  as well to commend 
the Committee  for the job well done under the Leadership of my senior here Hon orable  Hezzy 
Kariuki. The Committee  has done a very good job because they have been able to su bmit to the 
House their findings so that we as a House can get an opportunity to give our input and maybe 
rectify some of the areas where it can be a great help to the Shabaab Digital Hub Centre .  
Mr. Speaker, i n the findings, I can see that the  Centre  is experiencing a problem of dust and I am 
happy because the Hon orable  Member for that area is in the House and he has told the House that 
in the next Financial Year, he is going to put a Budge t to ensure that the  Centre  will have Tiles  so 
that the Computer s and student s who are there will have a good learning environment.  
Secondly  Mr. Speaker , there is the issue of computers, in the Report  they have indicated that there 
are 30 Computers but only 28 are in good working condition. It is my prayer to the Committee  that 
they make a follow -up and ensure that the other two  computers are repaired so that they can offer 
training to a greater number of  students who are there.  
Thirdly Mr. Speaker, is the issue of instability of the Internet and when we have instability of the 
Internet that  means they cannot train all through;  therefore I  also want to ask the Committee  to 
make a follow -up on that so that the issue of Internet  instability is brought to an end.  
Finally  Mr. Speaker , I have heard the head of State  stating that he wants all the  Wards in Kenya to 
have a Digital Hub Centre . I am putting a request together with the House that we as the elected 
and the Nominated H onorable  Members who are here , we are going to join hands with the National 
Government to make sure that the plans of the Head of State  are going to become a reality so that 
we become  a Digital Centre  in every Ward. That will help us do away with unemployment because 
it is going to be one way of creating job opportunities in our Republic and we are going to help 
our youths  to a large extent. Thank you Mr. Speaker, I do support.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon orable  Member for Kapkures the n 
Honorable  Member Mercy Kilel from Kuresoi South then the Hon orable  Member for Kabazi, 
Honorable Talam in that order.  
Hon. Robert Ruto : Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me first welcome students from Nakuru West 
Secondary School. Mr. Speaker, I am an alumn us of Nakuru West Secondary School  and I am 
happy to see my students in this House. This is evidence that no man is limited and that if they 
give a chance to Education  then one day one time they might be in this Hon orable  House.  
Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the Report  of the Committee  on ICT and E-government . Having 
educated 260 youths  in the society will help reduce the crime rate in our Community .  As we all 
know an idle mind is a devil’s workshop ; once our youths  are given these skills they will employ 
themselves. Giving employment to our youths  and reducing idleness in our society  will help reduce 
crime rates. I support the Report  100%. Thank you so much Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you. The Hon orable  Member of Kuresoi South, Mercy 
Kilel.  
Hon. Mercy Kilel : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I am from Kuresoi North not Kuresoi South . I wish 
to thank you for this opportunity and to take this moment to welcome the students  in the Gallery 
from Nakuru West. I w ish to tell the students that apart from  Education being the greatest equalis er, 
you can use the opportunity you have at this moment to open doors in your life and the future.  
Mr. Speaker, c oncerning today’s Motion, I w ish to thank the Committee  and the Chair man for 
taking their time to work on this Motion knowing very well that technology is the Fourth 
Revolution of this world and that we need to be able to continue taking up technology in our 
Country . It is one of the key items in the Manifesto  of the Kenya Kwanza Government and we 
know that the Ministry through the Cabinet Secretary has said that we are going to have 1 450 
Digital Hubs and 25  000 Wi -Fi Hotspots Nationwide. I do not know how far we are as a County  
in this implementation because Nakuru being a City, ought to be among the top in terms of 
technology uptake.  
MR. Speaker, I noticed on page 5 that the Committee  mentioned that we have ICT Hubs in 
Shabaab, Kuresoi South, Subukia, Rongai, and Menengai but they did not specifically mention 
where those Hubs  are. Additionally  Mr. Speaker , we need to be keen to implement these ICT Hubs 
going forward because we cannot be saying that we want to be a Leading ICT H ub in the East 
African region , yet we are not doing enough as a Country . Mr. Speaker, I also want to urge the 
County  to be keen,  to be  intentional , and increase t he Courses in terms of this technology because 
they have just mentioned that students  are taught the ability to read, comprehend, and communicate 
in English. Mr. Speaker, t hat is too little . We need to teach our  students how to code, things like 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) because that is where the world is moving to.  
So Mr. Speaker w ith those few remarks, I wish to support the Motion and ask this House to fully 
support the ICT Committee  in implementing their future endeavors. Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon orable  Member for Kabazi.  
Hon. George Talam : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity so I can also 
commend the ICT Committee . First of all, I want to thank the ICT Committee  for doing a very 
good job led by our elder here who is leading this ICT.  We should also emulate them as young 
men.  
Secondly  Mr. Speaker,  is just to welcome Nakuru West Secondary School to this House of order 
so that they can learn more. I know in future you will be the L eaders. I have seen in this Report  
that we have ICT Hubs in Subukia and Kabazi. I want to thank the ICT Committee  for considering 
Subukia but I hope that next time you will also consider Waseges so that they can learn about ICT 
online because it is in the far end and I know those people normally suffer. When you come from 
those sides of Kanyutu which is about 30kms to Subukia.  
Mr. Speaker, I just want to congratulate the Committee  and ask them to consider those sides of 
Waseges. I also want them to visit Kabazi so that we can get to know what this ICT Hub in Kabazi 
is doing, how many Student s they have, and if these old men can be incorporated as the  Member 
from Keringet has said , there should be no age limit. It should be open because I know that old 
men also want to learn more. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon orable  Member for London and the n 
Honorable Member for Kaptembwo.  
Hon. Bernard Gatuso : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to give my input. 
Allow me to welcome students  from Nakuru West Secondary School. I believe that with all the 
challenges we have as a  Country , moving forward we have this generation that is coming up and 
who will help us address all the challenges and also the worries that we have.  
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the Committee  on ICT for the good work they have done under 
the leadership of Chair Hezzy.  
I would also like to commend you Mr. Speaker for the good job you have been able to do for this 
Assembly, ensuring that we are techno -compliant. We  appreciate you for that. Also, I take this 
opportunity to say that we  have to follow suit by ensuring that we have our students are taken to 
in ICT Hubs so that they can  use the technology either in transacting or because  the world is a 
Global Village  where we can do business and other things. They can also learn sports like how 
Athletes  from these other Countrie s have been able to learn from us and that has raised our flag 
high as a Country .  
Mr. Speaker, I can attest that I had time to visit and benchmark from the ICT Hub in Shabaab and 
the setup is quite good. It is also upstanding in terms of giving our young generation what they 
deserve to have so that they can be independent in computer  and self -employment. I was able to 
engage our young generation there and they took me through some various options that they have , 
like when the students  are done with training, they are incorporated within their confines where 
they are employed for a year a s a way of training them so that they can  be independent after that.  
Mr. Speaker, l ast but not least, I want to commend Generation Kenya which is partnering with the 
County Government of Nakuru for the good job they are doing. To some extent, even in London 
Ward, we have been able to emulate that and w e have allocated a  Budget for an ICT Hub in my 
Ward that will equip our younger generation and prepare them for the job market. Thank you  Mr. 
Speaker, I support . 
Hon. Peter Kajwang : Thank you  Mr. Speaker. I am very proud today  that s tudents from my Ward  
have visited this honorable  House  and are  the Plenary, so that they may have a touch of what goes 
through in this House. Nakuru West Secondary School is one of the very good Schools we have 
in the Country  not only in the County. It is a state of the art built High School that is actually within 
my Ward. 
Mr. Speaker, I want to invite the ICT and Education Committee  to come and benchmark at Nakuru 
West Secondary School. If we could have many such Secondary Schools, I am very sure that the 
standards that we would have as a County  in regard to the infrastructure that we build for our 
schools  would be quite high.  
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my neighbour  Mheshimiwa  for Shabaab for always standing in 
for me; yes, I am thankful because neighbours should be helping each other. Also, I want to thank 
him for this great initiative that is happening in his  Ward in regard to the ICT Hub; I want to say 
this is the future and we have to move in the same direction . 
Mr. Speaker, i t is a big challenge to some of us who have not managed to get these ICT Hubs in 
their Wards  but I am greatly challenged as a person and a Leader as well as a Representative of 
Kaptembwa Ward. I want to assure the House and even the Nakuru West fraternity that this must 
feature in our next Financial Budget . I think I have enough Infrastructure and I will consult widely 
on how they have done it in Shabaab. We would also want to do the same in Kaptembwa Ward  so 
I am very pleased with what is hap pening there.  
However  Mr. Speaker , as much as we are dealing with Infrastructure except for the ICT Hubs, it 
is also important that we build the capacity ; we need to challenge the County Executive to put in 
a Budge t in order to build the capacity for the  Trainers so that i t is not only about teaching people 
on basics of Computers  but we can go a little further and introduce some very Technical Skills at 
an early age in th ese ICT Hubs. Things  like Codin g at least we should nurture our youths  early 
enough . So, this will re quire the Department for Education t o look at it in a manner that as much 
as we are employing Teachers  or Instructors in our Polytechnic s, in our  Nurseries , we also need to 
see how we should get proper Instructors  to handle the ICT Hubs. So  I stand to say that I support 
this Motion  and I am greatly challenged; thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the Hon orable  Member for Kaptembwa, Member s 
who had risen up to comment or be part of the discussion . In the interest of time we are going to 
allow  Honorable  Doreen Totona, the n Honorable  Wamaitha, the n Honorable  Hellen Megek and 
the last one is the Member for Flamingo in that order.  
Hon. Doreen Korir : Thank you Mr. Speaker I also rise to support this Report  by the  Committee  
on ICT but I reali se in the Committee  recommendation s, there is an observation that has been put 
under  recommendations; on the issue of budgeting, I observed that they could have included the 
issue on increase  on the budget for this I CT Department because you realise  that ICT Department 
is one of the Departments that receive the low est Budget  Allocation.  
MR. Speaker, I think we should consider increasing their  Budget because the World  is going 
Digital and we need to spread ICT Hubs in  all the Ward s to ensure that they receive as Hon orable  
Rose had commented, Mr. Speaker we should ensure that we move this ICT  Hubs to Mwananchi 
which  will benefit not only the youths  but also women  and the men of this County . ICT I plays an 
important role in fighting poverty and combatting diseases which  can be accomplished through 
ICT and also in creating awareness.  
On economic growth Mr. Speaker,  it is very important  to note  that widespread ICT opens 
employment opportunities. Most  of the  Members have even mentioned it her e and it is very 
important. So Mr. Speaker sir, I think this Report  is well done by the Committee  and I commend  
the Committee  led by the Chair person  of the  Committee  who is Hon orable  Hezzy. Thank you so 
much  Mr. Speaker.  
Hon. Ann Wamaitha:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to give my views 
on the Motion . I would like to start by commending the  Committee  on ICT and I stand to support 
the Motion.  
Mr. Speaker, I have a few clarifications I would like from the Committee . First of all, from the 
Report , it has stated that it takes  six to eight Weeks for the Training . I would like to understand 
what happens to the Trainees  after they graduate. What is the transition rate? Are we able to absorb 
them in the different Job Groups in our County ?  
Mr. Speaker sir, I would like to know about the 260 youths ; where are they right now , are they still 
in employment, have they gone to  College , have they graduated, have they been absorbed in the 
different Institutions within our County?  
Finally Mr. Speaker sir , I would also want to know once they are done with Digital Training, are 
we able to give them tablets so that they can continue to do the Online  jobs and what kind of Online  
jobs are they getting? Are we having a Markup in terms of the wages th at they are going to get ?  
Therefore  Mr. Speaker , if we are able to  get that; the n we can get the  invest ment  and the rate of 
return for the County  of Nakuru and the Budget that we have invested in the different ICT Hubs. 
Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Hon Member for Visoi, the Hon Hellen 
Chemu tai. 
Hon Hellen Mengek:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for this opportunity . First I want to applaud the 
Committee  of ICT and E-government  for the commendable job that they did and I want to urge 
this House that in all 55 Wards , let us improve and allocate money so that we can build ICT Hubs 
in our Wards. Also, equip them so that we can get computer s in all our Wards . It is very important 
for ICT in our communities because, one, it is going to improve learning efficiencies and also 
reduce the burden of teachers . It also creates employment for our young people in the society  and 
reduces the influence of drug abuse and idleness in the community. I rise to support this Motion; 
thank you so much Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the Hon orable  Member for Flamingo and then the 
Chair person  or the mover to respond.  
Hon. David Muraya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for giving me this opportunity to contribute to 
this Motion . I would like to commend the Committee  of ICT which is headed by Hon orable  Hezzy 
and the team for the good work that we have been doing. I also appreciate that our Count y 
Government of Nakuru is doing a very good job  in partnering with Generation Kenya to make sure 
our Children who cannot access  further education  after they complete Form Four or Class Eight , 
can now have that opportunity to proceed with their learning.  
Mr. Speaker, a ccording to what I have heard when our honorable Chair person  was taking us 
through the Report , I heard him say ing that in the ICT Hub which is in Shabaab Ward , I would 
request that as we move forward, we as an Assembly would want to add more money during the 
Budget  making process so that we can put  tiles on the  floor in those classroom s because the gadgets 
themselves are not friendly being installed on a dusty area. Also, we do not have enough t eachers 
and once we put a Budget  in that area, we  are going to make sure  students get quality education 
which can take them to another level.  
Mr. Speaker, a s our able MCA Mercy Kilel has said,  the Digital Revolution  is taking over in future  
and I would like to invite the ICT Department to come to my Ward  in Flamingo where we do not 
have an ICT Hub because there is no way, you can go  to Biashara Ward where we have one in 
Bondeni and then we have another in Shabaab whereas we do not have any in Flamingo Ward. So, 
Mr. Chair person  for ICT , I invite you there we find a place where we can put one. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker I support you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; there was a Member  from Nakuru West who had 
requested to be part of this discussion and then the  Chair to respond to all the issues that have been 
raised by the  Members . The Hon Member for Barut.  
Hon. Bernard Kirui:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker for this opportunity. First, I would like 
to welcome Students  from Nakuru West and the Teachers to this honorable  House. Mr. Speaker 
being a  Member of this Committee  I would like to congratulate my fellow colleagues for 
supporting this  Motion because I have seen they have a goodwill to pass this Motion . I would like 
the Chair person for  Implementation Committee  to ensure that all recommendations in this Report  
are followed to the letter. Thank you very much.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, The Hon Membe r who is moving to respond.  
Hon. Eliud Chege:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I would also like to thank the Hon orable  Members 
for their input. As you all know, these Committee s are just a branch of the House and whatever we 
are doing is on behalf of this House. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to respond to some 
issues or input that has been raised by a few  Members . I will begin with an issue raised by 
Honorable Rose who was requesting that we do something concerning  the age of admission where 
they are admitting students  aged 22 -35 years. Mr. Speaker, this is a Generatio n that is partnering 
with the County Government and is offering this service to the youths .  
Mr. Speaker, I would like to urge the House as they are recommending that we need to do 
something to adjust our Budget  so that we can enhance it so that at least from the County  level we 
can be in a position to accommodate everybody who feels that they need to equip themselves with 
ICT knowledge. Also, she requested for establishment of more Digital Centre s; as you are aware, 
that is why I was requesting this House that we should have a substantive C hief Officer (CO)  
because currently, the National Governme nt says  they want to establish an ICT H ub in each Ward 
across the Country .  
Mr. Speaker, w e need to come together as ICT, as a mother Department  to partner with the National 
Government so that we can work together as a team, to be in a position to understand their  Program. 
As the Hon orable  Member is requesting, it is our wish that we would have a Digital Centre for 
each Ward. Also, I want to thank the Hon orable  Member for Shabaab, Hon. Wathiai, because he 
has committed that he is going to do a Budge t from the Ward Kitty to do tiles and that allocation 
will help the Centre .  
Mr. Speaker, there is an issue from Hon orable  Mercy Kilel who was requesting Hon orable  Doreen 
that we did  not mention specifically where  these Digital Centres  are. Mr. Speaker, this House 
knows that  last week we did a Report  on Rongai Digital Centre  and today we are doing Shabaab . 
As a Committee  on ICT and E-government , we are going to visit each Digital Centre so that we 
table Report s before this House  so even as a  Committee  we are learning as we go around.  
So Mr. Speaker , the Hon orable Member should expect  that very soon , we are going to table another 
Report  so that they can be made to understand all these Digital Centres , where they are and their 
status.  
Also  Mr. Speaker , there was an issue raised by Hon orable  Ann who was asking what usually 
happens to those student s after completing their course, she also asked whether we give them a 
Tablet .  
Mr. Speaker as we all know , we have limited resources in ICT Department and for sure what we 
are doing, assuming they are building youths  so that at least we can be in a position to compete 
even with others. So, what there is in those Digital Centre s, is that the c andidate s are only training 
and not in a formal set up that they are going to be absorbed but they are sharpening them to 
compete in the Digital World and we are recommending even to our County Government, to 
consider the  youths  who have undergone training in our Resource Centre s.  
Mr. Speaker, t here is another issue from Hon orable  Kihumba  who requested the Committee  to 
visit his Ward and that they do not have a Digital Centre at Flamingo. Maybe he welcomes us for 
a cup of tea as a  Committee  but in …  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa what would be the meaning or the input of tea?  
Hon. Eliud Chege:  Mr. Speaker it was on a light note because we are saying we are moving 
around  to all our Resource Centre s and table Report s. The Hon orable  Member from Flamingo 
knows very well that his Ward  does not have a Digital Centre . Maybe in future, if he has a plan to 
do so ; and that is why I am saying he can invite us and at least give us what is in their mind on 
what they want to do , and as a Committee , we are going to engage.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): And confirm that tea is not going to be part of that meeting . 
Hon. Eliud Chege : Yeah! 
(Laughter ) 
Hon. Eliud Chege : Thank you  Mr. Speaker , that was on a light note Mr. Speaker I meant that 
maybe he is generous in that he wants to invite the  Committee  when he said I would wish the 
Committee  to visit my area. So, the intention I was thinking maybe he was calling us to c ommend 
us for the good work. So  Mr. Speaker, I would like to urge this House to adopt this Report  so that 
it gives us power and ability to move around all other Digital Centres , so that at least we can table 
those Report s here and be in a p osition to know the status of our Digital Centre s.  
Mr. Speaker, I urge all Member s to support this Motion  so that it can become a Report  of the House 
and not a Report  of ICT. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the Hon. Member. I want to put it into question  
(Question proposed that this House adopts the Report  of the Committee  on ICT and -E-
government  on their visit to Shabaab Digital Centre that was laid before the table of the 
Assembly on Tuesday 26th September 2023 during the afternoon plenary. ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Honorable  Member s this House stands adjourned to today 2.30 pm  
The House rose at 11.30AM  
 
 
 