FEBRUARY 8, 2022                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 8th February, 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10.40am  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu) in the Chair]  
PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu):  Good morning and good year Honorable Members , Happy  new 
year!. This is 2022,  ‘yenye tulikuwa tunasema, sindio?’  
                                                           (Laughter ) 
2022 is here. Let us apologize that we were not able to have the prayer as scheduled, because I 
think there was some miscommunication. We had invited two preachers, one who his father passed 
away and was burying him today and the other one who was not able to come.  They have sent 
apologies but we shall plan for the pray ers when we have good time because this is the time when 
we need those prayers. So, we apologize for that, we were trying to wait for the other one but he 
said he could not make it on time.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
SPEAKER ’S OPENING REMARKS FOR THE SIXTH SESSION OF THE SECOND ASSEMBLY  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu):  Honorable Members I have few remarks to make, during this 
opening session and I want to say it is my pleasure to welcome you back for the final session of 
the Second Assembly. The House resumes its previous sitting today, 8th February, 2022 after a two 
months recess period in accordance with the Assembly calendar. As per our traditions and in line 
with provisions of the Standing Orders the House is expected to immediately constitute the H ouse 
Business Committee and table it for approval.  This will pave way for the allotment of time for 
other agenda and crucial business lined up for consideration.  
Honorable Members, as it is apparent that we are on the verge of exhausting the Constitutional  
term of this Assembly, as a result it is imperative that we have a candid discussion on our 
performance for the duration we have been in this office vis a-vis the expectations of our 
electorates. As I have reminded you before the public has become more ale rt and emboldened by 
FEBRUARY 8, 2022                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 the Constitution to continuously monitor our legislative activities. As we come close to the end of 
the term of this Assembly, the public will definitely have a scorecard to evaluate our performance.  
Honorable Members, the Second Assem bly has had its fair share of challenges, owing to the 
unprecedented outbreak of Covid -19, especially in the year 2020 and 2021. As expected,  this 
largely interrupted our legislative activities but that notwithstanding permit me to highlight some 
of the ke y achievements we have made together since we assumed office in the year 2017.We have 
just but a few, which I believe really impact on the mwananchi.  
Besides the many Bills that we have passed, is the Nakuru County Enterprise Fund, Act No.6 of 
2019, which I am told had a very big impact and mwananchi is taking advantage of that Bill.  
This Act have paved way for the Government to enter into agreement with financial institutions to 
assist traders recover from the effects of Covid -19. It is through these legis lations that the Kenya 
Commercial Bank set aside Kshs 800m that targets small and medium enterprises while the County 
Government has set aside Kshs 52m as interest subsidy and credit guarantee.  
Honorable Members, I encourage you to continue coming up with  legislation that directly 
promotes the economic well -being of Nakuru Residents. Kindly let us monitor the 
implementations of such laws to ensure that the objectives are met.  
The House has also passed laws aiming at generating revenue and maximizing on the  County 
resources for economic gain, key among them and let me also say besides the Nakuru Enterprise 
Fund Bill we also had the Nakuru County Trade Act No. 5 of 2019, we also had Tourism and 
Marketing Act No.4 of  2019 and Nakuru Co -operative Revolving Act  No.9 of 2019.  
 Besides those ones we also had ;- 
1. The Nakuru County Revenue Authority Act which paved the way for the creation of the 
County revenue body.  
2. The Nakuru Flower Service Act No.3 of  2020,  
3. The Nakuru County Tea Cess  Act No. 4, which unlocked a lot of money that had been held 
by KTDA into our revenue accounts. Other notable Acts touching on various areas include  
4. The Nakuru County Climate Change Act No.7. Aware that climate change is a global 
menace the Assembly enacte d this piece of legislation to put in place the framework and 
mechanism for mobilizing and facilitation of the County Government communities and 
other stakeholders to respond effectively to climate change through appropriate adoption 
and mitigation measure s and actions. This act also paves way for the County to benefit 
from a World Bank Fund that will assist in climate mitigation. We also had  
5. The Nakuru County Waste Management Act No.9 of 2020. We all take judicial notice of 
the rapid expansion of Nakuru City hence increase in the volume of the waste generated in 
the County. In this regard you enacted this legislation for the organization in art icle 42 on 
the right to acclaim a healthy environment and Article 43 on health and sanitation and 
FEBRUARY 8, 2022                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 implementation of section 2(g) of the forcage of the Constitution of Kenya in relation to 
waste management. Honorable Members, you also passed  
6. The Nakuru Cou nty Water and Sanitation  Service Act No 8 of 2020  
The Constitution of Kenya 2010 came to effect in 2013 declaring water supply and sanitation 
services as a basic right and devolving key water  and sanitation functions to the County level  
Honorable Members K udos to you, you were also able to pass the following Bills ;- 
1. The Nakuru County Peace Building and Conflict Management Act No. 11 of 2021  
Nakuru County has experience election violence in the past, since the introduction of multi 
part elections, cognizant of this fact and the mess created by the violence, the assembly enacted 
this bill for the establishment of County peace Council, to provide for the institutional 
framework for cohesion, peacebuilding conflict management  
2. The Nakuru County Child Care Facilit ies Act, No.16 of 2019  
3. The Nakuru County Civic Education Act No.17 of 2019  
4. The Nakuru County Honors and Awards Act No. 15 of 2019  
5. The Nakuru County Animal Welfare Act No. 4 of 2021  
In the same breath, the following Bills are pending before various committe es:  
1. The Nakuru County Land Management Bill - Committee on Lands, Housing and physical 
planning  
2. The Nakuru County Assembly ( Members Offices) Bill - Committee on Members Welfare  
3. The Nakuru County Maternal, New born and child health bill - committee on Health 
Services  
4. The Nakuru County Community Health Bill - Committee on Health Services  
5. The Nakuru county Valuation and Rating Bill - Committee on Lands, Housing and Physical 
Planning  
6. the Nakuru County Housing, Estates, Tenancy and Management Bill - Committee on 
Lands, Housing and physical planning  
7. Nakuru County Livestock Sales yard Bill - committee on Agriculture  
8. The Nakuru County revenue authority Bill - Committee on Finance  
9. The Nakuru County Animal Disease control Bill - committee on Agriculture  
FEBRUARY 8, 2022                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 10. The Nakuru County Public Service Bill - Committee on Labour  
11. The Nakuru County Urban food and agriculture Bill - Committee on Agriculture.   
Honorable Members if these Bills are cleared  with together with what we have passed, we will 
be a County Assembly in this republic that has passed the most Bills that are touching on the 
welfare of our people. So far we are not doing badly, we already have passed 15 and if we are 
able to pass even h alf of these we will have broken the record.  So I urge you to take your time 
we clear what we are left with and Mwananchi will rate us based on what we have done.  
PETITIONS , MOTIONS AND REPORTS  
Similarly, the House has considered a total of forty -three Petitions, forty -seven Reports, and forty 
Motions touching on various departments.  
BUDGET CYCLE  
Honorable Members  
This being an election year, there are significant changes in the budget cycle. The assemblies will 
now be required to pass the budget estimat es by 24th March 2022 and subsequently pass an 
appropriation Bill by 31st March 2022. With these adjustments, it is clear that the Budget 
committee will be required to work within these timelines and prepare the necessary documents 
and Reports before the Assembly for consideration.  
Honorable members  
I urge you to accord the committee maximum cooperation even as we keep a keen eye on all the 
documents presented for deliberations. I am aware the report of the committee on Budget and 
appropriations on the Co unty Fiscal Strategy Paper is expected to be laid before the floor in the 
course of the week. Members are reminded to interrogate the documents and ensure that it 
represents the views and aspirations of Nakuru residents . 
It is also worth appreciating that it is during the tenure of the Second Assembly that we have 
witnessed crucial developments projects. This House, in its endeavor to create an enabling 
environment for members to effectively discharge their duties, allocat ed funds for the construction 
of the ultra -modern debating chambers with a capacity of around one hundred members.  
FEBRUARY 8, 2022                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The chamber also boasts of ample space in the gallery to facilitate interested members of the public 
to follow the live proceedings of the Assembly. This gesture demonstrates members’ commitments 
to go out of their way, despite the limited financial resources, to improve the Assembly 
infrastructure for posterity. I sincerely want to thank you for this wise move.  
We also take pride in being th e first and the only Assembly to host H.E the President of the 
Republic of Kenya. This demonstrates that Nakuru County Assembly has grown and matured in 
its political heir and has exhibited the professional capacity to attract leaders of such high caliber 
for national discussions. Congratulations.  
On the issue of City Status, it should not be lost to us that during your term, the Nakuru 
Municipality was formally conferred with city status. Bearing in mind that we were required to do 
some legislation, I wan t to thank you for your critical involvement in the process of transitioning 
from Nakuru Municipality to the City. Key among the roles involved in passage of Nakuru 
Municipality Charter, allocation of funds to prepare the Municipality to a City status and adaption 
of the Ad -Hoc Committee report recommending elevation of the Nakuru Municipality to a city. 
This exercise involved in depth consideration and analysis of all preset conditions by law to qualify 
Nakuru Municipality as a City, a process that you per formed with zeal and dedication.  
I however want to challenge you to note that a s an Assembly, we are charged with enormous 
responsibility of making laws and policies that will be required to run Nakuru as a City without 
imposing an extra burden for Nakuru . We must encourage collaboration and cooperation with 
relevant players in ensuring that County Government puts in place an enabling environment for 
both local and international investors.  
Finally, I am cognizant of the busy schedule before Members owing to the upcoming General 
Elections. However, I urge Members to strike a balance between attending plenary sittings and 
Committee sittings and attending to other political activities in their respective Wards. The House 
Business Committee shall take into con sideration key elections timeline s when preparing the 
calendar for adoption in the House. In the meantime, the relevant Committees with pending 
businesses are urged to urgently come up with work plan and ensure that  they are concluded before 
the House brea ks for a long recess in preparation for a general election . I once again welcome you 
back and wish you a successful session. I also want to wish you all the best during this campaigning 
time and God bless you.  
 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
HOUSE DEBATES APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO HOUSE BUSINESS COMMITTEE  
FEBRUARY 8, 2022                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): Mheshimiwa Majority Leader, karibu.  
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Moses Kamau ): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to thank God 
because since we were here last year, God has been faithful during our long recess and we have 
come b ack healthy. Allow me to move  a procedural Motion ;- 
THAT  notwithstanding the provision of Standing Order 49, this House resolves to debate the 
Motion of appointment of Members to House Business Com mittee. As you are aware, we need a 
new House Business Committee and therefore, I want to move this procedural Motion to that 
effect. Thank you.  
Mheshimiwa Kajwang’ to second.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang’ : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I second  
 
(Question proposed t hat notwithstanding the provision of Standing Order number 49, that this 
House resolves to Debate a Motion on appointment of Members to the House Business 
Committee ) 
(Question that notwithstanding the provision of Standing Order 49 under the Notice of Motion, 
the House resolves to Debate the Motion on appointment of Members to the House Business 
Committee  put and  agreed to ) 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu):  What is the point of order?  
Hon. Machembu Chege:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I want to just to bring to your attention that 
you have moved a bit faster…  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu):  I checked around and no one stood up to debate so we are going 
to the next order…  
Hon. Machembu Chege:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, it’s only that I saw...  
The Speaker (Hon. J oel Kairu):  No, he was saying…you see, we were debating whether we don’t 
follow the Standing Order No 49 which requires the Motion to be given notice. Already you have 
said OK and we can go to the next order and I think that’s where you want to contribute.  
Hon. Machembu Chege:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
   
                                                                       MOTION  
                                   HOUSE APPROVES APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO  
                                                                  HOUSE BUSINESS COMMITTEE  
The Speaker (Hon: Joel Kairu): Motion by Leader of Majority.  
The Leader of Majority (Hon: Moses Kamau ): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, there is a Motion of 
appointment o f members to the House Business Committee that pursuant to the provision of 
standing order 154 (1) (e), the house approves the appointment of the following members to the 
house business committee.  
1. HON. JOEL KAIRU MAINA _ Chairperson  
FEBRUARY 8, 2022                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 2. HON. WILSON MARITIM   _   Vice Chairperson  
3. HON. MOSES NDUNGU    _   Leader of Majority  
4. HON. MELVIN KUTOL  
5. HON. STANLEY KARANJA  
6. HON.GRACE MWATHI  
7. HON. LEAH SANG  
8. HON.ELIZABETH GICHUKI  
9. HON. WILBUR ONYANGO  
10. HON. LILIAN KONES  
11. HON. CICILIA KARANJA  
12. HON. ALICE KERING  
13. HON. ERICK GICHUKI  
14. HON. HUMPHREY MWANIKI  
15. HON. HUMPHREY KAMAU GUTHENGI  
16. HON. SAMUEL TUNUI  
17. HON. CATHERINE NYAMBURA KAMAU  
18. HON. WILSON MWANGI  
19. HON. ROSE CHEPKOECH  
20. HON. PETER PALANGA  
21. HON. PETER NGANGA  
22. HON. JOEL KARURI MAINA  
23. HON. PETER NYAGUTHII  
24. HON. IRENE CHEBICHI  
25. HON. ANN  KIMANI  
26. HON. EDDY KIRAGU  
27. HON. DAVID MALEL  
28. HON. GEORGE KIERE  
29. HON. JOEL KARURI MAINA  
30. HON. JOSEPH BETT  
31. HON. MICHAEL NJOROGE  
32. HON. JANE NGUGI  
33. HON. ZAITUNA IBRAHIM  
34. HON. PETER MBAE  
35. HON. WAHOME JAMBO KENYA  
 As you are aware in our second Assembly when we came here through your guidance, we had a 
setup of various committees and we are very grateful because every member of this House has 
FEBRUARY 8, 2022                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 four or five committees and therefore, we have fond it good to bring the same members who were 
there last session so that they can continue with the exercise of the House Business Committee.  
You are aware if there would be any change, it will alter the whole set up of the committee 
therefore I request this House to adopt the na mes as they are for this House Business committee. 
Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon: Joel Kairu)  Seconder?  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Moses Kamau ); Am sorry, the seconder is Minority Leader Honorable 
Kajwang.  
The Minority Leader (Hon. Peter Kajwang) : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, on this Motion I think 
I have a reservation so I will not be available to second so may be somebody else can do it.  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Moses Kamau ): Mr. Speaker sir, thank you. We have the Deputy 
Speaker Hon.  Tonui to second the Motion.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tanui):  Thank you, I second the Motion.  
(Question proposed that pursuant to the provision of standing order 154i(c) the house   approves 
the appointment of the members listed thereof to the house business comm ittee.)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): Minority Leader maybe we could get your reservation now?  
The Minority Leader (Hon. Peter Kajwang):  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, for giving me this 
opportunity and all members who are present it has been long since we were in this House and I 
hope that everybody has got a good chance during this recess to look on other issues apart from 
parliamentary duti es. I have a reservation on the names that have been listed here to be members 
of the House Business committee. The reason being is that as am standing here am the Leader of 
Minority and traditionally has to be a member of the House Business committee  and am surprised 
that my name has not been listed and that make s me wonder the Leader of Majority and the 
chairperson who is the Speaker went through this list and consider it favorably and in line with 
House tradition. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu) : Thank you, I think that is a valid observation. I can see the former 
Minority Leader at number twenty. Majority Leader can you respond.  
The Leader of Majority ( Hon. Moses Kamau ): Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, it is very true that 
honorable Kajwang who is Minority Leader has a very valid point, am requesting to move an 
amendment, Hon.  Joel Karuri had appeared twice in the list and therefore we replace number 
twenty -nine to read honorable Peter Kajwang as Minority Leader. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu):  Someone to second?  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon Samuel T onui): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I stand to second the 
amendment of the list.  
(Question proposed that pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 154 (1 e) the House 
Approves the appointment of th e members listed with amendment to the House Business 
Committee ) 
(Question put and agreed to)  
FEBRUARY 8, 2022                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
  The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu):  The name may now be replaced. Go back to the main Motion. 
Yes…  
Hon. Machembu Chege: Mr. Speaker sir, thank you very much for us also getting back to this 
Assembly and also in good shape. I had stood on a point of order and I had made that observation. 
Joel Karuri’s name is appearing twice on the list and I also looked at the Chairperson, the Vice 
chairperson and the Leader of Majority. Because he was sitting next to me, I thought we should 
also add his name and therefore, my concerns are already answered. Thank you, I do support.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu):  Thank you.  
(Question p roposed  that pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 154 (I)(e) the House   
approves the appointment of the members listed thereof to the House business committee.)  
                                                       (Question put and agreed to)  
                                                                     
                                                                        ADJOURNMENT  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): Honorable Members this House stands adjourned to 2.30 pm 
today.  
                                                                     (The House rose at 11.10 am ) 
 
 
 
                                           
 
  
 
 
 
 
    