COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday  4 TH  October 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10 : 05  A M  
[ The Temporary Speaker ( Hon . William Mutai ) In the Chair]  
PRAYER  
MOTION  
REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): Honorable Member s, there is a Motion to be 
moved by Hon. Simon Kamau, Chairperson  for the  Committee on County Public Accounts and 
Investments.  
What is it Hon. Member ? I thought the Chairperson of the Committee is in the House.  
Hon. Simon Kamau: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker . Yes, I am in the House but of course, 
as we agree d  as Member s of the Public Accounts and Investment Committee is that either the Vice 
Chairperson, the Chairperson or any other Member  f rom  my Committee can comfortably handle 
that Report . For that reason, I have delegated Hon. Ruto to do it on my behalf.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): Okay. Hon. Ruto, you can carry on.  
Hon. Robert Ruto: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker . On behalf of the Chair, I wish to move a 
Motion that this House ad o pts the Report  of the Committee on County Public Accounts and 
Investment s  on the Report  of the Auditor General on the Financial Statements of Nakuru Rural 
Water and Sanitation Services Company Limited of Nakuru County for the year ended 30 th  June, 
2020, laid before the table of the Assembly on Tuesday, 19 th  September, 2023 during the afternoon 
P lenary.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, o n behalf of the Member s of Nakuru County Assembly  Public Accounts 
and Investment s  Committee, I beg to move the adoption of the Report  of the Auditor General on 
the Financial Statement s  of Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Services Company Limited for the 
year ended 30 th June, 202 0 .  
Introduction  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he Public Accounts and Investments Committee is a Select Committee 
estab lished under Standing Order No. 188 and is responsible for the examination of the working of 
Public Accounts and I nvestments.  
Mandate of the Committee  
Mr.  Temporary  Speaker, t he Committee is mandated to:   
a)  Examine the  Accounts showing the A ppropriation of the sum voted by the House to meet 
the public expenditure and of such other Accounts  laid before the House as the Committee 
may think fit.  
b)  Examine the Report s and Account s of the Public Investments;  
c)  Examine the Report s , if any, of the Auditor General on the Public Investment s ;  
d)  Examine, in the context of the autonomy and efficiency of the Public Investments , whether 
the affairs of the Public Investments , are being managed in accordance with sound financial 
or business principles and prudent commercial practices.  
Challenges Experienced by the Committee  
i)  Mr. Temporary Speaker, Member s noted time and resources allocated to the  Committee is 
too little in comparison to the work load and clearing of backlog from the previous 
Committee.   
ii)  Tracking of the Implementation Status of previous P ublic  Accounts and Investments 
Committee Reports was difficult as Status Report on Implementation was not available.  
Committee Proceedings  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he Committee held S ittings in which it closely examined and heard 
evidence from the Management of Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Company Limited.   
Mr. Temporary Speaker, in  its inquiry into the A udit response of Nakuru Rural Water and 
Sanitation Company for the year ended 30 th June 202 0 , the Committee heard and received both oral 
and written evidence from the Management.   
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he records of evidence adduced, documents and notes received by the 
Committee f r om the basis of the Committee’s  Observations and Recommendations  as outlined in 
the Report  and can be obtained in the Hansard Report s of the Committee available in the County 
Assembly .  
Committee’s Objectives  
Mr. Temporary  Speaker, t hese observations and recommendations ,  if taken into account  and 
implemented will enhance Accountability, Effectiveness, Transparency, Efficiency , prudent 
I nvestment and F inancial M anagement of  Nakuru Water and Sanitation Services Company 
Limited.  
 
Nakuru County Water Entities    
Mr. Temporary Speaker , Nakuru  County  has three Water Entities, namely: -  
1)  Naivasha Water and Sanitation Company Limited   
2)  Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Company Limited  
3)  Nakuru Water and Sanitation Services Company Limited  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, the Committee highlighted some Errors in the Financial Statements 
presented and disclosure in Queries.  
And the Audit Queries Mr. Temporary Speaker  highlighted by the Committee are: -  
1.  Billing Adjustment s   
2.  Long Outstanding Trade Receivables  
3.  Loan from African Development Bank which was  amounting to Kshs 170 99 9 201  which 
is not incorporated in the Financial Statements , thus the Statements  of the Company’s 
Assets  and Liabilities  could not be concluded.  
4.  The Property Plan t  and Equipment;  Mr. Temporary Speaker, the Software classified as 
Tangible Assets instead of Intangible Assets . The variance of Kshs 3 670 906  not reported 
in the Cash Flow Systems Mr. Temporary Speaker, in progress in Salgaa Water Project 
funded by the VEI  and paid directly to Suppliers, therefore no cash received by the 
Company.  
5.  Mr. Temporary Speaker, there was another Query of Share Capital  that the Company was 
incorporated under the Company’s Act  CAP 486  on 14 th  September  2006, through 
C ertificate No. C . 128339  according to Article 4 of the Amended Article s  of Associations 
2014. The Share Capital of the Company is Kshs 500 000 d ivide d  into 5000 Shares  of Kshs 
100 each.  
However  Mr. Temporary Speaker , there was no proof that the above Shares had been issued 
and paid at the time of Audit.  In addition, no  evidence in form of Share Certificates was 
produced for Audit to confirm the ownership of the Company. In the circumstances, the 
ownership of the S hare C apital of Kshs. 500,000 reflected in the Statement of financial position 
could not be confirmed.  
Committee Observations   
Mr. Temporary Speaker, The Committee observed that:  
i)  The Company Management has dragged its feet on this issue for many years.  
ii)  The Management response has been the same without any solution in sight.  
 
Committee Recommendations  
i.  Management should provide clear documentation on how the Shares were issued and 
paid - up for to the Committee by 30 th  October 2023.  
ii.  The Management should furnish the Committee with the Share C ertificates for 
confirmation of Share ownership by the same date.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, There was also an Audit query on trade receivables and consumer 
deposits.  
6.  Non - Revenue Water  
Mr. Speaker, w ater production records indicate that the Company produced 7,913,191 cubic 
meters of water during the year of which 3,591,120 cubic meters (45%) were billed to Customers. 
The balance of 2,343,773 cubic meters denoted as Non - Revenue Water, which was 20 points 
above the normal 25% set by the W ater Service Regulatory Board.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, i n the circumstance s , the Non - Revenue Water is a significant 
contributor to the Company’s unsatisfactory financial performance and status. Management has 
not indicated the actions, if any, taken to control the loss.   
Mr. Temporary Speaker, on that Query the Committee observed that NARUWASCO Management 
has managed to reduce the previous years’  Non - Revenue Water to 44% from 68%.  The 
Management still has a long way to improve the dilapidated Infrastructure .  
Committee Recommendation s   
(i)  Determine the accuracy of production Meters by testing and calibrating, and replacing if 
faulty or inaccurate.  
(ii)  Eliminate major Commercial losses by servicing, testing and replacing faulty Customer 
Meters and identifying illegal uses (starting with large and then medium Customers).  
(iii) Install Meters for U nmetered Customers and identify U nbilled Customers through 
Customer Identification Survey (CIS) and issue them with bills.  
(iv)  Reduce the time taken to repair bursts, surface leaks and overflows   
(v)  Management should seek funding to upgrade its infrastructure which is outdated to prevent 
Non - Revenue Water and adhere to Water Regulatory Authority Services Board    
 
7.  Lack of Risk Management Policy  
8.  Lack of Information Technology Strategic Committee  
Committee Observations  
(i)  T his was a recurrent issue raised by Auditors and the Management had not acted 
on it.   
Committee Recommendations  
i)  Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Company Management should adequately plan to 
setup an ICT Strategic Committee. The importance of this Committee is to review 
Nakuru  Rural Water and Sanitation Company policies and research on best practices 
for ICT D evelopment and I nnovation in order to improve their services.   
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I take this opportunity to commend the Member s of the Committee for 
their devotion and commitment to duty, which made the consideration of the Auditor General’s 
Report  on Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Services Limited successful.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I also wish to thank the offices of the Speaker and the Clerk to the 
Assembly for the support extended to the Committee in undertaking this important assignment.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I wish to ask honourable Njenga to second.  
Hon. Michael Njenga: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker  sir. I rise to second the Report .  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): Thank you Honorable Member . Now  I propose  
that this House ado pts the Report  of the Committee on the County Public Accounts and 
Investment s  on the Report  of the Auditor General on the Financial Statement of the Nakuru Rural 
Water and Sanitation Services Company Limited of Nakuru for the year ended 30 th June, 2020, laid 
before the table of the Assembly.  
(Question Proposed)  
The Motion is now open for Debate.  
Yes, Hon. Robert Lang’at.  
Hon. Robert Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I stand to support. First of all, let 
me thank the Committee for the job well done.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, the Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Company as mentioned earlier 
by Hon. Ruto is one of the E ntities. The Company’s coverage is on rural Sub - Counties; that is 
Bahati, Gilgil, Kuresoi North, Kuresoi South, Rongai, Molo, Njoro and Subukia.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  I would like to thank the Management of Nakuru Rural Water and 
Sanitation Company because five  years ago, it was on its death bed. They were nearly running on 
zero. As we stand today, the  C ompany at least has some few achievements. When we sat down, 
we noticed that it has done some few things which we need to commend them. Like the way 
Mheshimiwa Ruto has said, they have reduced the Non - Revenue Water from 45 to 39 as per this 
year.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker ,  a s I had said earlier on, Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Company is 
largely covering our rural Constituencies. It has a connection of a round 31,000 c ustomers. At the 
same time, their revenue stands at around Kshs  28  000  000 per month. Their target as per this year 
is that they want to connect 100 Kilometers per year. That means they are doing almost a  Kilometer 
per month.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, a s I finish, I want to encourage our Member s here to partner. This is the 
only E ntity which we can partner in improving Rural Water Supply P rograms i n our Wards. I want 
to encourage our fellow Member s here that it is very important if we leave our w ater provisions to 
them and encourage them to manage for us because most of the water connections in our Wards 
do not last long because of Managemen t; t hey get disconnected because of things like e lectricity 
and many things.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  I want also to commend them because last year, they were rated number 
18 out of 88 Water Service P roviders. They were also ranked the best in r eport ing i n the whole 
Countr y. So Mr. Temporary Speaker, I  support.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): What is it Mheshimiwa  Wanjohi?  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I want to be informed by the 
Honorable Member  for Amalo. He is giving us data that is not contained in this Report . I want to 
ask whether that is in order. I think we are discussing a Report  from the Public Accounts and 
Investment Committee and now he went ahead to tell us about  that  they were number this and that 
other position , which is not contained in the Report.  Maybe he is a S hareholder in the Company. 
He should let us know.  
Hon. Robert Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. As I had said earlier on, this is 
what I extracted from our questioning on the C ompany earlier on .  We  had informed the Company 
that during the 2023 Report , they should add there. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): Possibly Hon. Lang’at, you have been asked a 
question and you did not clarify very well where you got the information from.  
Hon. Robert Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I have said it that I got the 
information when we were questioning the Company and we have requested them that during this 
year, 2023 Report , they should annex most of this Report . Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): Hon. Wanjohi, I think you are well answered, 
that he went an extra mile and he extracted more information …  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, as much as I want to agree with him, that 
information should have been brought to the Report  and if you have any evidence to that effect, I 
think the Honorable Member  needs to table it here so that it becomes a D ocument of this House. 
But what he is now telling us Mr. Temporary Speaker is hearsay and a reflection that he is probably 
a Board Member  of  that Company.  
Hon. Robert Lang’at: Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I have some few D ocuments here and I think 
it …  
Hon. Simon Kamau: Point of Information .  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): What is it?  
Hon. Simon Kamau:  [On a Point of Information .  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker . I want to 
defend the  Member  from  the  Committee. We as a Committee of Public Accounts and Investment s  
are dealing with Accounting issues, the issues that have been raised by the Auditor General and 
this is what is contained within the Report . I want to humbly ask the Member s here whether in my 
Committee or out of my Committee, let us contain ourselves with the issues of Public Accounts.  
The issues on things dealing with A ccounts, not any other issue.  
Of course, we got that information. I want to agree with him so that we  come and  interrogate the 
Management of Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Company Limited , w e had to get some more 
information but this information is not supposed to be discussed within the House. What is 
supposed to be discussed within the House is anything that has Q ueries from the O ffice of the 
Auditor General.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): Honorable Kamau , are  you cautioning the 
Member  of your Committee?  
Hon. Simon Kamau: Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, not cautioning. In fact, I wanted to inform the 
Minority Leader that the information that one of the Member s of my Committee is giving here is 
right ,  because for us to narrow down to the A ccounting issues, then we had to drag some other 
issues so that we get to the bottom of the issues that were raised by the Auditor General . I am 
saying that these particular issues are not supposed to be discussed here. They are supposed to be 
discussed within our Committee, not  within the House.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): Well taken Mr. Chai r man . However, next time, 
you have to caution the Member s of your Committee not to bring the same information to the 
House, especially the information that you do not want us to discuss because already, it seems like 
the information has landed in the House.  
Hon. Simon Kamau: Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I am well guided.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): Hon. Palang’a.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I want to start my input from where 
the discussion is,  in regards to the Report  presented before us as an Assembly.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he basis of our discussion is the Report  before us. It is presumed that 
when the Committee had its own hearings  t hey gathered a lot of information and also com pil ed 
the Report  for us. It will not be fair for us to imagine and assume that all the Member s of this 
House are part and parcel of the Committee proceedings because the information that is not 
contained in the Report  is presumed to be not part of the Report . We should not be bringing in 
some information outside the context of the Report  and that should be stated very clearly Mr. 
Temporary Speaker .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I want to start with the Report  itself and sympathi s e with the Committee 
regarding their challenges from the onset. They talked of a lack of resources to enable them to 
undertake some mandates. That is an issue that I may also echo that going forward we need to 
consider it. Having served as the Chair person  for  Public Accounts and Investment s  Committee  
( PAIC )  for the last ten years in the previous Assemblie s, I understand the magnitude of the work 
and the backlog they could be having. It is wanting and I wish to have this point noted.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t heir second challenge is that they could not even get the Report  of the 
Implementation status. That then takes me back to, do we even need to discuss these Report s?  Has 
the Committee for instance found out what has been the problem in implementing this?  In the 
previous Assemblies, Hon orable  Njuguna and Hon orable  Isabella were part of the PAIC 
Committee under my L eadership and Hon orable  Kajwang’s L eadership at some point. We did 
several Report s which should have culminated into the implementation of those R eport s.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he Report  says that the Non - Revenue Water component has been 
reduced to 39% yet the last time we interrogated this  Company , the Non - Revenue Water collection 
was at 35% if not 34% having been reduced from 45%. They took advantage of the newly elected 
Member s of the Committee. They are now purporting to have improved the N on - R evenue 
C ollection of water which again was not the case there before because we ought to build from the 
the historical position where it was.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I think that is a point for another area but it is important to note Mr. 
Chair man ,  that those challenges you have mentioned in terms of the previous Report , form the 
basis of a lot of mischief and misinformation to the Committee. Going forward, I want to advise 
that any other Committee taking over from the previous Committee should have the continuity of 
the Report s and even information. This Committee suffers the absence of any person with 
historical information and that is why they were duped with that particular information concerning 
Non - Revenue Water .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t here is also another area where they have talked of Consumer  D eposits. 
They ought to have had Kshs 26  Million but then when the accounts were checked, there w as  only  
Kshs.  2  000  231 m illion . This means that the  Kshs 24  m illion is not explained and yet the 
Committee goes ahead recommending and observing that going forward these people should be 
providing this information. It beats logic that some money has been lost, no explanation has been 
given and we are only recommending the way forward. We need to up our game and give measures 
that are supposed to be taken against these culprits who have siphoned this amount of money.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I would have expected them to have some punitive actions against these 
particular persons because they were there. There is no way that the Minute s have not been signed 
yet the Secretary  of the Board is the Managing Director and the custodian of all the proceedings. 
What does that mean? It means that there are some gaps and lapses somewhere. They say that 
Statutory  D eductions and other D eductions were not done. Hon orable  Njuguna and any other 
Member  who is here, this was an Audit  Q uer y over time; w e discussed this issue, we made some 
recommendations and we even said that action should be taken against such people.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I wonder how  then 7 or 10 years down the line ,  the Institution  is still not 
paying the Statutory D eductions. What happens to Hon orable  Wathiai who is an employee and 
ceases to be an employee of that particular E ntity? I am just using him as an example or Hon orable  
Palang ’ a who hap pens to be an employee of that F irm and after some t ime he ceased to be an 
employee.  S tatutory  D eductions have not been done and re member  that  Statutory D eductions are 
the Management ’s obligation.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, i n the Committee’s recommendation s , they say that they have 
harmoni s ed it and going forward it is going to be paid. We need to make sure that t his  Institution  
does what it is supposed to do. The previous year’s balance was  Kshs.  272 Million . These are 
disparities that we expect the Committee to have made some serious Observation s and subsequent 
Recommendations  for these people to act  on. We cannot keep on moving around and making 
recommendations that are not implemented.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, a s I end my submission s , I stand here as the former C hair man  for PAIC 
and a very disappointed person to the Assembly and the Executive. We have made so many 
recommendations that ought to have improved the services. If these recommendations are 
implemented they will enhance accountability, efficiency, transparency a nd prudent investment. 
It beats logic because this is what we have been talking about for a couple of years. If we are going 
to pass this Report  for it to just gather dust on the shelves of some people’s corridors ,  then I think 
this Assembly and the Hon ora ble  Member s are being taken for a ride.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, If I had powers, I would have said that we cannot continue without 
knowing the implementation of the Report s from the same Committee  before pointing fingers at 
the current Chair person  and his team because I think there is a total mess and I am disappointed ,  I  
am confused on whether to support it or not. Thank you.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.William Mutai): Hon. Palanga, as you are quite aware of the 
setup of our system from the last election to the next election, we do not have something called 
the “ Handing Over ” . I wish there was some Handing Over that could be done but I think you have 
posed a very great challenge to the Implementation Committee. They should look into this matter 
seriously. Hon. Njuguna.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker. I have listened carefully, followed 
the proceedings and the presentations that were made by Hon orable  Palang ’ a who has a lot of 
experience with the P ublic A ccounts C ommittee (PAC)  and P ublic I nvestment C ommittee (PIC) . 
The kind of Report s we have been receiving from NARUWASCO are alarming. If you look at 
what the Auditor General has been saying, those Report s have been very adverse and I can tell you 
that they are very bad Report s.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker. Report s of Companie s we are talking about are under and they are 
supposed to be written off.  That is not a Compan y that is making any  p rofit s;  they are making 
l o s ses year in and year out. We wonder what sort of a  Company it is, that it cannot remit  Statutory  
D eductions. We are talking about the lives of the s taff  working there. Their KRA remittance, NHIF 
and NSSF are not remitted. If for instance today one of the  s taff m ember s gets involved in an 
accident and is taken to PGH, they will not be attended to because paying cash is very hard. We 
need to come up with proper recommendations for dissolving that Company  to be carried by other 
Companies  because as far as I am concerned ,  that C ompany does not make any profit s .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker. That is like a dead Company  that needs resuscitation and the only way to 
resuscitate that Company is by coming up with strategies for how the  Compan y will be absorbed 
by other Companies . There was a time when we said that rather than having three Companies  in 
one County , we should amalgamate those Companies  so that they could have one CEO at the helm 
who w ould look out into  the critical issues that are affecting these  Companies . That Company  
called NARUWASCO is dead and we are not sup posed to be behaving like morticians as this 
PAIC Committee  does.  We need to give it life by making sure that the recommendations we put 
in place are being followed.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker. Some of the recommendations that we re  put forth in the previous years 
have never been implemented. I do not know whether the Assembly has been forwarding those 
recommendations to those Companies . It could be that the fault is not with the Compan y but within 
ourselves and the premise of the Assembly. I wish to request the Chairperson PAIC to follow up 
and know whether those recommendations and Report s we had written were submitted to the 
relevant A uthorities for Implementation. Matters of these  Companies require the Water  C ommittee 
that is the Environment Committee to call the Committee E xecutive Committee Member  (CECM)                      
and the C hief O fficer (CO)  of the Water  D epartment to interrogate some of the issues that have 
been raised here because I do not believe that we should be having such kind of a C ompany.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker. I also sympathi s e with the Chairperso n because he has two Committees  
in one ;  h e has P ublic A ccounts C ommittee (PAC)  and P ublic I nvestment s  Committee (PIC) . It is 
high time this Assembl y sat  down and reconsider ed  splitting that Committee. If you look at the 
matters that are there, they are just operating like Mortuary  A ttendants. Their work is just to look 
at things that have been dealt with by the Companie s. They are working on postmortem and the 
kind of Report s they are bringing here are not even able to diagnose some of the things that are 
making that Company  die. What I am requesting this House is ,  if we are going to amend this 
Standing Order ,  then let u s think of coming up with PIC so that, i f you look at Order No. 88 where 
we established this Committee and look at the  mandate in part two of that Order, y ou reali s e t hat 
the PIC Committee is supposed to be looking at  
a)  Accounts showing the A ppropriations of the sum s  voted by the House to meet the 
Public Expenditure and of such other A ccounts laid before the House as the Committee 
may think fit.  
b)  The  Report s and Accounts of all County Public Investments.  
Hon. Simon Kamau : Point of Information.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura :  Mr. Temporary Speaker, I do not want to be informed. I can inform him. 
I have experience in this Committee.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Order! Order! Order! Yes, it is from the 
Chair person .  
Hon. Simon Kamau : Mr. Temporary Speaker, we  as the Committee of PIAC are deriving our 
mandate from Standing Order 188 not Order 88 as the Hon. Member  for Elburgon is saying.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai ): I hope Hon. Njuguna is well informed.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: I am not informed and if we can retract that O rder, I have said 188 unless 
maybe I started with a lower tone when I was mentioning one. It is okay but  …  
Hon. Simon Kamau : No! No! No!  Mr. Temporary Speaker,  the honourable Member…  
The Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  Hon. Kamau take your seat.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker. It is Order No. 188. I think these 
terminologies of science have been confusing the Member  but allow me to proceed and say that if 
we can have PIC ,  they will be looking at I nvestments. Once that Company  has sat down and come 
up with a budget I think those Report s are supposed to be submitted to P ublic I nvestment 
C ommittee (PIC)  so th at the PIC Committee will analys e and see whether such kind of  Investments 
adhere to the Report s of PAC.  
Mr. Tempo rary Speaker ,  as it is currently, these people only wait for the Report  of the Auditor 
General to be tabled before this House so that they can proceed .  But  Mr. Temporary Speaker, there 
are other procedures that have been faulted  before and we have seen them bringing the mess to 
these Companies . Therefore Mr. Temporary Speaker, I w ish  to request this House to be cogni s ant 
of the same. That Committee  today  has 14 Member s and how I wish Mr. Temporary Speaker those 
Member s c ould be split into two ,  seven  to go to PIC and seven to PAC ;  and by doing so you will 
find that some of the Report s they will be generating will assist in the resuscitation of such  
Companies and Investment s that we have in this County.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, if  we continue enjoying the laxity of PIC and PAC we will be  los ing  the 
point  because the PIC has a big role as far as analy s ing these Report s and I nvestments is  concerned. 
But  today Mr. Temporary Speaker, I sympathi s e with the Chair person  because the kind of 
workload they have and the kind of Report s they are supposed to generate are too much for them 
and I believe they have not even touched the work of PIC. I want to request this Hon orable  House 
including the Chairperson PAIC to move for the amendment of this Standing Order so that we can 
have a Committee that will assist him in  carrying some of the mandates so that t here will be a 
smooth follow - up of issues and they will have an easy way of dealing with issues.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, o n the issue of debts in that Company , I am served by that Company  in 
my  Ward ; my constituents are served by NARUWASCO. But I want to tell you Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if you skip a single m onth without paying you will be disconnected forever and it can 
take you up to five m onths before you are re connected back to the  Water system. There fore Mr. 
Temporary Speaker, there is  no need of seeing such kind  of debts and yet they have not put some 
measures in the ground.  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon. William Mutai): Hon. Njuguna ,  you have put it very clearly that 
if you  skip one month without paying ,  you will be disconnected forever then you retaliated again 
and said that it will be reconnected within five m onths . Put it clearly.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Mr. Temporary Speaker, a llow me to explain. What I meant is that the 
majority of the M ember s who a re being served by NARUWASCO were disconnected and have 
never been connected back.  Hon orable  Hezzy will confirm that ,  he comes from Njoro. If you go 
to Molo or Elburgon today those Member s who were disconnected from NARUWASCO  back  in 
2014  to this  very day , they  have never been re connected back. Kids born within that period will 
tell you that they have never seen Wate r from NARUWASCO yet they have a lot of Borehole s 
and Water sources but they do not re connect people back.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , if  there is any fault in that line ,  it will take  m onths before they re connect 
it back or look at the systems. That is what I meant Mr. Temporary Speaker . I wish to invoke this 
House to recommend and pass this Report  with amendments, that w e want a Forensic Audit to be 
conducted urgently so that we can know what is ailing this Compan y because those were just some 
of the recommendations that we were giv ing  in the previous Report s ,  w e would wish to see the 
Forensic  Report s of this Company  and people being held l iable because of the misconduct we have 
been seeing in that Company.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  I beg to rest my case but I request that matters of NARUWASCO be 
followed keenly so that we can have a way forward as far as  that Company  is concerned. But as 
far as I am concerned ,  that  Company is dead. Therefore, let us operate this B ody so that we can 
see what is remaining that we can extract from that B ody.  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon. William Mutai): Hon. Jane from Maiella W ard.  
Hon. Jane Gituku: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker  Sir. I want to thank the PAIC Committee 
for the Report  they have just tabled and if my memory serves me well, I think we also looked at 
this matter sometime back and what I can say is, that, unfortunately, we have to deal with such an 
issue that has  glaring mismanagement of a level you cannot explain. If you look at this Report  and 
the Standing Order that the Member  for Elburgon is referring to ,  i f I can read from my softcopy ;  
it says that this Committee als o has the mandate to establish whether the particular body being 
investigated is managed by sound Financial  or Business  P rinciples and P rudent Commercial 
Practices .  
So Mr. Temporary Speaker, if  we have that mandate ,  then what we are doing here is dealing with 
a B ody that is long dead but we are just giving it an opportunity to be a conduit to siphon public 
money for their private use. If you look at all the recommendations that the PAIC Committee  
made ,  there are so many that require further action. I do not know whether we have the power s  to 
give timelines so that these people can be engaged to produce results within a time frame line, 
because what we are doing here timeline is, w e are looking at a Report  that I am not sure we shall 
not forget it once we finish this B usiness .  And  what assurance do we have that these people will 
continue to provide  all the recommendations our Chair man  has called for?  Or we wait until next 
year  so that again, as one Member  for Olkaria ,  a  man who has taken a lot of salt in this House to 
again bring another Report  and that we shall remain so toothless. What we should be 
recommending as a House ,  because and we are still learning these things and  I believe through 
you  Mr. Temporary S peaker ,  we should be recommending that this Outfit called NARUWASCO 
be disbanded or be given an opportun ity for a full House Committee, because fro t he villages we 
come from Mr. Temporary Speaker, I  being one of the people who have a War d with a lot of wa te r 
problems, I have already discovered for the few years that I have been here that  w ater is not the 
problem ; the M anagers are the problem. Every other  Water point in my  Ward has had a very 
serious problem of the people at the helm corrupting every single coin they collect from the public.   
So Mr. Temporary, I think t his is just a replica of what we are having at the ground and we should 
not just leave it at this. We should be in a position to follow it up. Wakiingia kwa  shimo , we get 
into those holes  because  one of the  Hon orable  Member s  sounded like he want ed  to protect these 
people  and no wonder somebody was asked whether he is a Shareholder  because these are not 
people you can protect. We  should be calling for mass action for people who are being served by 
this Outfit  because if you look at pages 16, 17 and every recommendation that has been made by 
our Chair person  is j ust asking a question and when I should bring back the Report .  
And therefore  Mr. Temporary Speaker,  because this seems like many years when we were not here 
and many years when we will be coming back ,  we  shall be able to save Wanjiku who has deposited 
their money and who expect s  results but they do  not seem  to be forthwith coming.  So  I recommend 
to this House that we do away with this Report  because I do not know whether that is still within 
our Standing Order. Member  for Elburgon will also guide me because of this issue of Standing 
Orders ; we should know whether we can to do away with this Report  or whatever it is that we 
should do and make sure these people are answerable as quickly as yesterday.  
So  Mr. Temporary Speaker,  I believe that Member s  will also look at this Report  as a reflection of 
what Wanjiku expects from us and our Governor was very passionate about w ate r whe n she went 
around this  County talking about how we were going  to provide water; so, I wonder  how we were 
going to achieve that Manifesto  of  Water for our people with this kind of M anagement and this 
kind of O utfit. So, can it be also an example for the others so that we can move  forward as a people 
who will be counted to have stood  for the interest of Mwananchi .  Thank  you, Mr. Temporary 
Speaker, sir. By the way, I have not…  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): What is it the Hon. Member ?  
Hon. Jane Gituku:  I have not supported or rejected; I am still waiting for direction because I do 
not know where I stand even as I conclude.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Okay; Mheshimiwa  Geru .  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker ,  for the record my name is Anthony 
Kamau Kanyere representing the great people of Nakuru East. “ Geru ”  is another name you can 
call me outside this House. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Thank you for that clarification; that was the 
most popular name we have ever known. Continue  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : I stand Mr. Temporary Speaker just to support my fellow  Member s who 
have spoken before me,  especially a Member  of Elburgon who was so eloquent and seemed to 
understand this thing .  But  I am a little bit confused because according to the Report , Article 217  
about the ownership of the Company. I think we are even discussing something that has not been 
ascertained i f it belongs to the  Public ,  because according to the Report , it seems that the share 
Certificate  was not provided and so according to the Report , we cannot asce rtain who owns the 
so - called 5000 Shares of the Company .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I do not know if we are to discuss these Companies  since we cannot 
ascertain the ownership of the Company. Also, in bullet 212, there are unconfirmed balances ;  there 
is a huge amount of m oney  to the tune of Ks h s  134 m illion being referred to as bad debts and 
according to the Report , they are saying there are no strategies from the C ompany  to recover that 
money. So I want to support those who have spoken before me ,  let us look for a way to dissolve 
this Company  because in my  Ward , I am putting m oney and investing in w ater  and when I am 
through with the Investment  when I do the boreholes and other related projects, I  will forward it 
to the relevant  Company like NAW ASCO or NARUWASCO .  So  if they cannot give us value for 
m oney, I do not think we are going to put more resources to this Company  Mr. Temporary Speaker .  
And  as a representative of the people, we need to get value for money and also getting from my 
fellow Member s ,  it seems that their services are not at  par because what has been said if you do 
not pay the  Water B ills, you are disconnected. So  Mr. Temporary Speaker , I wonder where the 
bad debts are coming from.  
So  Temporary Speaker , let me stand here to support those who have the opinion that this Report  
should come out with some recommendations to dissolve this Compan y or give them time to prove 
their worth so that we can keep on pumping more  public resources into this Company . Thank you, 
Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Hon orable,  who  is p opularly known as 
“ Kamwana ” , MCA from Turi  
Hon. John Mwangi:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, so, I am not Kamwana but I am 
Hon orable  CPA John Mwangi Macharia, the Member  for Turi.  According to the Report  that I have 
gone through, I can state with confidence that this  Company is just but a m e re sham .  There  is no 
Compan y in existence and there are a lot of Audit  Queries.  One , arising because the Company 
went ahead to borrow a loan from African Development Bank and the purpose of the loan cannot 
is not clearly indicated. Therefore, the  Company is going ahead to pay the interest for the loan 
from the African Development Bank and  th e Company cannot be able to state clearly the purpose 
or the use to which the money was being put into.  
Secondly  Mr. Temporary Speaker +,  the issue of what we call Account Receivables ; the Debtor s. 
They have a huge  Debtor Balance  where they cannot indicate what the purpose of the debt  was . 
Also, the issue of what we call Account Payables , the Creditor s and therefore my recommendation 
is that the Compan y should be put under Receivership  so that it can be investigated and eventually 
if the Company  cannot be able to go back to life, it can be put Under Liquidation. Thank you Mr. 
Temporary Speaker .  
Hon Peter Palang’a : Point of information Mr.  Temporary Speaker; just to inform the House .  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): What is it Hon orable  Palang’a?  
Hon. Peter Palang’a:  [On a Point of Information] I just wanted to inform you and note that 
listening from Hon orable  John Macharia as an  Accountant ,  it is important to note that his 
comments are not from a m e re MCA like  myself but it is coming from a Certified Accountant .  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): An A uthority of Accounts .  Hon. Mike .  
Hon. Michael Nding’uri:  Thank you Mr.  Temporary Speaker; first of all I would like to say that 
we are looking at these documents from the wrong perspective because things like Bad Debts ,  
NARUWASCO is incurring B ad D ebts as far when it was the E ra of the  Defunct  Municipal 
Council and I think with Audit ,  and my friend can also confirm, Hon orable  Mwangi, you cannot 
just remove a B ad D ebt from a D ocument just because you have not been able to recover it. So, 
this B ad D ebt does not mean that there is someone who has disconnected Wate r currently or in the 
last three m onth s .  These  debts go back as far as City Hall times back when they were under County 
Councils .  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Point of information; according to ….   
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): What is the information Hon. Anthony ?  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere :  [On a Point of Information] . T hank  you so much Mr. Temporary 
Speaker ,  I was basing my argument on the Report  because here they have said K sh s  134 m illion 
has remained uncollected for over 120 days. So, when he purports that these debts came from the 
Defunct Municipal Council, I think he is misleading the House. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Hon. John, carry on .  
Hon. John Mwangi:  Mr. Temporary Speaker, Let me inform my friend; we usually say in 
Accounting Terms ,  “ Whe n B ad D ebts arise, then if they recur for several years, we refer to them 
as B ad and D oubtful D ebts ” . Eventually, there is a time frame when they are removed from the 
B ooks of Accoun t and referred to as “ Bad Debts Written Off ” .  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Hon. Mike can you continue .  
Hon. Michael Nding’uri : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker,  any Audi t D ocument does not start 
from one yea r,  so if there is a Q uery that for example there is this Bad D ebt;  if it is not sorted 
within the next year, in the next Audit Y ear, it will remain as a B ad D ebt but that does not mean 
that the B ad D ebt was incurred within the Financial Year U nder R eview.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he reason they  say the money remained uncollected for 120 days is 
because ,  usually they are given the requirement that they need to collect this money.  But  now the 
problem comes in that the Company  is not able t o  collect this debt because they are far stretched. 
That is why even in our discussion we gave them t imelines, if you check  on  page 19, we told them 
they need to give us another Statu s Report  to see how we can Write Off these debts. Another issue 
that we are discussing ….  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  [On a  Point of Information] .  Point of information Mr. Temporary 
Speaker; allow me to jog the mind of the Member  and Hon orable  Palang’a and Hon orable  Isabella 
will correct me. This is not the first Report  that has Bad D ebts of the NARUWASCO. This is a 
continuous thing that as ….  
T he Temporary Speaker (Hon. W illiam Mutai): Hon. Mike remain  seated ,  a  Member  is on the 
floor .  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Mr. Temporary Speaker this is something that has been occurring year 
in and year out. Naivasha Water Services that is NAIVASCO had the same thing that emanated in 
2007 on the issues of IDP’s C amps; they were serving them with water and that they were dealing 
with issues of S anitation and the Company  went ahead to give some mitigations towards making 
sure that these B ad D ebts were dealt with. But our Compan y  here, NARUWASCO, ha s  
continuously disregarded the recommendations that were put forth and that is why Hon orable  
Palang’a said, let us go back to the previous Report s that we advised the Company  to put some 
measures in place so that they can deal  with these issues of B ad D ebts.  
However  Mr. Temporary Speaker,  the Department of Water and Services ,  also the C hief O fficer 
(CO)  for Water is a Board Member ; they know and reali s e that they had some strategies that we 
had recommended to be put in place so that we can clear this issue of B ad D ebt s . However  Mr. 
Temporary Speaker , Bad D ebts in NARUWASCO are just but a conduit and part of the way of 
navigating towards  Audit Q ueries that is why they keep on appearing and reappearing and if you 
look at it critically, when they are asked of the D ocuments to substantiate themselves, they usually 
do not provide those D ocuments to the Auditor s; and we had issues with them.  
Therefore, this issue of being told that these are B ad D ebts, that appeared this year, they appeared 
during the time of Municipalitie s a nd I do not know any other time,  Mr. Temporary Speaker, this 
is but a process whereby you find that these B ad D ebts are just excuses, and  p eople are just hiding 
behind those excuses to squander money from that Water  B ody.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Hon. Kamau .  
Hon. Simon Kamau:  Mr. Temporary Speaker .  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): There are two critical information . Hon. 
Palang’a .  
Hon. Peter Palang’a :  Sorry Hon orable  Member s ,  e specially  Member s  from the Committee .  You  
may think probably  we have an issue but it is not; I want to inform the House that the one in charge 
of the NARUWASCO, CPA Korir, is a Senior Accountant for years. He is not just an ordinary 
person or Manager  but an  Accountant by profession. It is important to note that even these issues 
are coming year in , year o ut ,  are under the watch of a Senior Accountant in this Publi c E ntity.  
Hon. Simon Karanja:  Mr. Temporary Speaker …  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Yes Mheshimiwa  Kamau .  
Hon. Simon Karanja:  Yes ...  
Hon. Peter Maina : Point of information Mr.  Temporary Speaker.  Mr. Temporary Speaker …  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Yes .  
Hon. Peter Maina:  [On a Point of Information]  Mheshimiwa Michael was making a very good 
case and we are very much interested in listening to what he has to say. Why do  you not  allow him 
to speak uninterrupted because he was making a very good argument? Thank you .  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Mheshimiwa  Mike, do you have some more 
presentations to make? Or  you allow your Chair man  to take it over from you? It is okay .  
Hon. Simon Ka mau :  Mr.  Temporary Speaker, before my very able V ice comes to the stage ,  I 
wanted to answer some of the honorable  Member s and of course, I understand them and somehow,  
I agree with them. But you see this is a Committee  that is one year old and we have started doing 
our own things. The Committee s that were there previously never implemented what the 
Committee resolved, we cannot go back to what they did as  Committees and Hon. Palang’a and 
Hon. Isabella were a part of those Committee s. So, we have just started as the Committee of Public 
Accounts and Investment s.  What  we are going to do is up to us as a  Committee .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, For instance, now I have listened to Hon. Jane  Gituku  from Maiella 
saying that we are just making Statements. We are not making Statements  as a Committe e, I stand 
as a  Chair ;  we  have recommended that we give the  Company timelines and if they will not provide 
what we have asked for as a  Committee , then stern action is going to be taken against them by this 
Committe e and not what Hon. Palanga ’ s or Hon. Isabella’s Committee. Again  ...   
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : [On a Point of  Information ]  allow me Mr. Temporary Speaker to inform 
the Chairperson.  O nce a Committe e has gone out to investigate and write a Report , they do not 
write the Report  on their behalf but they do so on behalf of the House so that the House can come, 
deliberate, give their input and th e  input once adopted by the House, it  become s  the Report  of the 
House. Therefore, we are not discussing the Report  of the PIAC we are discussing the Report  that 
belongs to this House unless this is an alien Report  that comes from a certain Com mittee that is 
not an O rgan of this House. Therefore  Mr. Temporary Speaker , I would wish that the Chai r be 
refrained  from saying that this is their Report; t his is a Report  of this House and that is why it was 
tabled before this House and before the Mace ; the  Authorit y of the House  Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
Hon. Simon Ka mau :  T hat  is wh at  I am saying  Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Alright, Order !  Order Member s !  Mheshimiwa  
Kamau  r emain seated !  
Hon. Simon Ka mau : Mr. Temporary Speaker, I  want to answer! I  have been mentioned  Mr. 
Temporary Speaker !  I have been mentioned!  Mheshimiwa  Palang’a has not been mentioned!  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Remain seated !  I will give direction .  
Hon. Simon Ka mau : Mr. Temporary Speaker, I have been mentioned !  I  have to answer !  
Hon. Peter Palang’a : Mr. Temporary Speaker, I just want to inform him…  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai):  Order !  Order Member s !  Order! Order! Order 
Mheshimiwa  Palang’a! Remain  seated!  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Order Member s! Order Hon. Palang’a !  And 
remain seated.  Order  Hon. Kamau !  Remain  seated. Hon orable  Member s in the House from the 
look of things, I have read the mood of the House and it is like most of the Member s cannot decide 
for now. I want to request a Member  of that Committee  as per the Standing Order 95 to make a 
request to go look for more F indings because this is a very critical area of discussion. One of the 
Member s  said that we want to resuscitate, and another  Member  said  that NARUWASCO is already 
dead.  So , from the look o f things, this Company  appears to have been playing a very critical role 
in Society  but from the recommendations that have been made here, it seems as if we want more 
information in this House. What do you have to say as the  Chair ?  
Hon. Simon Ka mau : Mr.  Temporary Speaker I want to agree with you ,  that of course more time 
is needed ;  but if you look at the recommendations and observations of the  Committee , where we 
had some doubts about the Company , we have given some timelines. Therefore, we are waiting 
for these timelines to elapse so that we can see whether this Company  is going to furnish us with 
the information that we require as a  Committee on behalf of the Whole House.   
Mr. Temporary Speaker, f or instance, when we are talking about the issue of B ad and D oubtful 
D ebts, I agree with the Hon orable  Member s ,  and that is why I started by saying I agree with what 
the Hon orable Member s are saying because this Report  does not belong to me as the Chair person  
of PAIC or my  Committee . I agree with the Hon orable  Member s in what they are saying and of 
course, they are doing this for the interest of the people whom they represent and I respect them 
so much. But we have written our recommendations and submission for instance on the B ad and 
D oubtful D ebt, we have given the Managemen t of NARUWASCO timelines; we have told them 
that by 30 th  December this year, they should furnish us with the information that is lacking so that 
now we can r eport  back to the County Assembly.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, a nd if the Whole Assembly will not be convinced by the Report  that is 
going to be given by the Managemen t of NARUWASCO, then that is when maybe we can go on 
and do what Hon. Njug una from Elburgon is suggesting;  we can disband the Company  because I 
have known it is a Company  that is providing services in my Ward . So again, that  Company is not 
providing services the way it should  be and of course, as a Committee , we have  given timelines 
and we need to wait for them to give the informati on that we need to get. Like what Hon. Njuguna 
and Hon. Palang’a are saying, those are the kind of information and of course, we are giving them 
timelines so that at least they can furnish us with. Once we are not convinced then that is when we 
can act .  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Hon. Chair, I think I will allow Palang’a to make 
his remarks then I will give direction  
Hon. Peter Palang’a:  Mr. Temporary Speaker and Hon. Kamau whom I have a lot of respect  for , 
let us understand this ,  when the Hon. Chair person  is  saying that you are giving timelines up to 30 th  
December for you to receive the Report  or some more information, re member  my brother that this 
Report  as we speak today, is being discussed in this Assembly. So, this means you will have 
suspended this Report  because from today this Report  if adopted, it ceases to be your Report . The 
C ompany will not bring the Report  to you but to the Assembly.  
And therefore, looking at these gaps ,  I want to advise you hon orable  Member  not for anything 
attached ,  having looked at what the issues regarding that Company  are ,  you had given a correct 
direction that let us suspend the discussion for us to look at more issues. It is in the interest of all 
our electorates and our community and will serve us well. Hon .  Chair person  let you not feel 
offended ,  we will move together to see that some of the issues that we had discussed are addressed.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker that  is the best direction that I wish to advice .  Na W aheshimiwa wenzangu, 
m ze e akikaa chini ya m t i na akwambie maneno ,  ameona mbali kuliko kijana. H aya  mambo ya 
K ampuni ya  NARUWASCO ya naleta shida na si shida moja ama kidogo, wacha tukubaliane 
tuone vile tukavyo saidia  w atu wetu .  Kwa manufaa ya watu wetu  ndugu zangu naomba kwa 
heshima, kwa sababu tumeshapitia na tus h ayaona; kuna shida.  So, Hon. Temporary Speaker that 
is the right direction; twende njia hiyo tutasaidia watu wetu.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Thank you very much .  from the look of things, 
there are quite a number of issues that need to be clarified and just as the Chair person  stood and 
requested for more time and by the Standing Order  96, I have just been corrected that by Standing 
Order 95 ,  I want to adjourn this debate until a further N otice as the  Committee embarks  to  get 
more F indings so that we can have some prudent discussions and just as one Member  said we want 
to resuscitate the Compan y, I believe through our discussions here, we shall be able to really 
resuscitate the Company.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Member s, this House stands adjourned until today afternoon at 2.30 pm  
The House rose at 11.20 AM  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 