COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 21st November 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House Met At 11: 30 AM 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): In the Chair].  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 BUSIA  MEMBERS   
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Honorable Members, I recognis e Members 
from County Assembly of Busia, Committee on Lands, Housing and Physical Planning , led by the 
Commit tee Chairperson Hon. John Omumi  and the following Members.  
1. Hon. Wandera                     Majority Leader  
2. Hon. Ronald Ocharu  
3. Hon. Shardrack Masinde     Chairperson, Sports Committee  
4. Hon. Kamias Obada             Whip  
5. Hon. Monica Mung’ala        Deputy Minority Leader  
6. Hon. Concepta Om ondi         
7. Hon. George Wesonga  
… 
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Mr. T emporary Speaker , I think it would be  in order when a name is 
called upon, they stand so that we can appreciate them.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mic hael Gathanwa):  Well, that is quite in  order. I am going to 
start the Communication.  
Hono urable Members, I recogni se Members from County Assembly of Busia, Committee on 
Lands, Housing and Physical Planning led by the Committee Chairperson Hon. John Omumi and 
the following Members;  
8. Hon. Wandera                    Majority Leader  
9. Hon. Ronald Ocharu  
10. Hon. Shardrack Masinde    Chairperson, Sports Committee  
11. Hon. Kamias Obada            Whip  
12. Hon. Monica Mung’ala        Deputy Minority Leader  
13. Hon. Concepta Omondi         
14. Hon. George Wesonga  
15. Hon. Isaac Wamalwa  
I also recogni se members of staff from the County Assembly of Busia accompanying the Members, 
namely;  
1. Brenda Okumu  
2. Lydia Matisi  
3. Millicent Sewe  
4. Wilberforce Obola  
In our tradition of recogni sing and welcoming visitors, I take this opportu nity to welcome you all 
to the County Assembly of Nakuru. I would also wish to request the Chairperson of Lands 
Committee to welcome the Committee from Busia and say a word.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker . It is my individual  pleasure  to welcome 
you to Nakuru County. Nakuru County is a place to be and I am happy that you chose to visit this 
good County, a County of diversity .  
As you can see, the person speaking to you comes from your neighbo uring County. I come from 
Bungoma County and Busia County is within my neighborhood. Feel at home and feel at peace. 
This is a County where you have one of your own.  
That notwithstanding, it is my time as a Chairperson to say that feel at home. This is a pl ace that 
we will want you to sample. After this Session,  you need to move around to Shabaab and other 
neighbo uring Ward s so that you also sample the sceneries and the good facilit ies that we have. In 
case of anything here, Hon. Wathiai being the Mayor of t his Town, will take care of you. Make a 
point of seeing him and Hon. Bethseba Kerubo; not forgetting Hon. Okumu and many other 
Members.  
I am very sure that with our Hospital ity, they will take care of you and you will have somewhere 
to spend very comforta bly. I therefore wish to say karibuni sana nyumbani. Mjiskie mko mahali 
pa ‘Ingo’. 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa): Thank you. It ha s been brought to my 
attention that we missed to recogni se one Member, I apologi se for that.  
We have Hon. Mercy Wanyonyi  
(Applause)  
 
 
MOTION  
MOLO SUB -COUNTY HOSPITAL  REPORT . 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Michael Gathanwa):  We have a Motion by Hon. Njuguna 
Mwaura, Chairperson Committee on Health.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker . I rise to move a Motion that this 
House adopts the Report  that the Committee went to Molo Sub -County Hospital  and tabled th e 
Report  before this House. Unfortunately, there was an issue somewhere that the Report  was not 
deliberated on as expected.  
However  Mr. Temporary Speaker , we still have our day; we are here and I believe that the 
Members are going to see that Report  and pass it th e way it is.  
There is a background information and because the Members have this Report on their desks, I  am 
going to summari se because of time and I am going to over emphasi se on the issues that made the 
Members to go to Molo Hospital .  
BACKGROUND INFORM ATION ON MOLO SUB COUNTY HOSPITAL   
  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , the Molo Sub County Hospital  is located in Molo Ward , Molo Sub 
County in Nakuru County. Molo Sub County Hospital  was established on 19th October, 1946 by 
British  Colonialist as a Station to serve the local community that w as living around Molo and its 
environs.  
 
Mr. Temporary Speaker , in 1952 the Facility  was elevated to a Cottage Hospital  under Doctor 
A.H. Macleon who was the first District Surgeon.  If in the past you would have gone to that 
Facility , you would have realised  that they donated even the houses that were meant for animals 
but all the same, there are some of the construction that are ongoing, though they have not been 
completed.  
 
 
SERVICES AND PATIENTS SERVED AT MOLO SUB COUNTY HOSPITAL   
The Facility  offers Outpatient Services, Comprehensive Care Clinic (CCC), M other Child Health 
(MCH) , Antenatal Care (A NC), and Family Planning Services, Laboratory Services, Theatre 
Services and In  Patient Services where there are two Wings being Male and Female Ward s. The 
Facility  also has a Morgue.  
 
 
STAFF ESTABLISHMENT AT MOLO SUB COUNTY HOSPITAL  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he Hospital  has 56  staff. It comprises of one Medical Superintendent. 
The normal standard  should be one, so t hey do not have a deficit because they already have that 
cadre.  
They have one Health Administration Officer but they are supposed to have two, so t hey have a 
deficit of one.  
They have three  Medical Officers. They are supposed to have 16. Mr. Temporary Speaker, allow 
me to emphasise there; a Facility  of such nature , that is a Referral for the Sub -County and other 
surrounding Sub -Counties ought to have 16 Medical Officers. Unfor tunately, they only have three . 
That means something ought to be done as far as H uman Resource is concerned.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t hey have three  Pharmacists. In normal standard  they should have  four, 
so th ey have a deficit of one.  
They have two Pharmaceutical Technologists. In normal standard , they are supposed to have eight . 
Therefore, there is a challenge there. I believe something is being done.  
They have 10 Clinical Officers. They are supposed to have 30. They have a deficit of 20.  
They have 15 Nurses but the standard  of a Level Four  Hospital  should have 131. They have a 
deficit of 116.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  it therefore means that we have some challenge s as far as t he Human 
Resource is concerned and  we would wish that when this Report  is passed, other relevant 
Committees including the Labo ur Committee would take up this matter so that they also 
investigate on what is happening as far as the Human Resource issue is co ncerned in that Facility . 
 
PHYSICAL VISIT AT MOLO SUB COUNTY HOSPITAL  
MALE WARD  
 
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  the Male Ward  is utili sed for Medical Services, Surgical Services, 
Orthopedic and Isolation Ward . There is only one nurse under the male Ward. This is 
overwhelming, bearing in mind that there are several activities undertaken in the Ward .  
 
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he Male Ward  was used to receive the accident victims from 
Sachangwan. There is only on e Isolation Ward  which in the Male Ward;  however the Isolation 
Ward  is not well ventilated and the beds are too close. The linens and the blankets were too old 
and needed to be replaced. I believe that is the r eason men do not like going to  Hospital  is bec ause 
of mistreatment that we are receiv e in some of the F acilities that we have.  
The linen is old and it is like we are throwing away our men to suffer at our Hospital s. 
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  the floor of the Male Ward  is in bad condition and needs refur bishment. 
On the same, we usually say the en vironment itself is therapeutic and it is supposed to cure the 
patients who usually go to that Facility  but if you go to Molo Sub -County Hospital , the condition 
is poor and the Facility , especially that Male Ward had issues. We  even to the bathroom. You 
could see the patient while outside. That is not the standard  of this County and we would wish to 
that something is done as far as that is concerned.  
FEMALE WARD  
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  the Female Ward  is utili sed for Medical services, Surgical S ervices and 
Pediatric services. It is the busiest Ward  in the Hospital . It has a bed capacity of 26 and they serve 
60 patients per day.  
Therefore, something ought to be done there and I want to commend them because I do not know 
why we prioriti se that Ward  so much such that the Male Ward  was given little  support. If you were 
there, you would have thought that you are in a different Facility  and not in the same Molo Facility  
that we went to.  
Therefore, as you can see from the pictures, it is clean and beautiful. I know this is a reward  for 
our mothers because they are giving  life and they are adding  the number of citizens as they are  
required but they are also doing the work of creation. I think that is why that Ward  was so clean 
and well-kept, and we really enjoyed being there.  
MATERNITY WING  
The Maternity Wing is combined with the Newborn Unit because of  staff shortage , since there are 
only five staff working under the New Born Unit. The Unit is served by two N urses.  Ther e are 
approximately 240 -280 new borns monthly.  It is a busy Facility  and ought to be giv en the proper 
attention that it deserves.  The Maternity Ward  has a Bed Capacity of 28.  
COMMITTEE FINDINGS AND OBSERVATIONS  
 
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he Committee made the following F indings and Observations during the 
visit;  
1. The Hospital  has no title deed. This is a song that we have continued singing on this floor 
as far as the Hospital  tittle deeds are concerned.  
2. There is acute shortage of staff in the Facility  especially D octors, Nurses and Clinical 
Officers. Also, the Labo ur Committee must note that we have been here and we have been 
crying about shortage of staff and something ought to be done.  
3. The Hospital  has a huge accumulated debt of Kshs . 36 million  to Suppliers. This has been 
the tradition of all our Level Four and Level Five Hospital s that they have debts and the 
debts are growing day -in-day-out. Therefore, I would wish that the Public Accounts and 
Investment s Committee would take up  the matter and come up with a Policy and institute 
something that will lead to the E xecutive coming up with a Policy that will regulate the 
kind of debts that our Hospital s are in.  
4. They have a fully operational X -ray Unit. H owever, they require a speciali sed Radiologist.  
They do not have a  Radiologist despite  having a big machine that is  very expensive. We 
really wish t o have this machine  properly utili sed. 
5. The Hospital  lacks a proper Waiver System for needy cases.  
6. The Hospital  has inadequate Psychiatric Services due to understaffing and lack of Ward  
for the patients.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, allow me to emphasis e on that point. With the current economic 
challenges that we are facing, it means that the psychiatric issues are going to rise and therefo re, 
if we do not have proper P sychiatric Services , it means there is a challe nge. It is only the degree 
that varies. Every person has his own element of psychiatric issue that needs to be checked.  
Therefore, I want to emphasi se on that because we have been told by statistics that Molo Ward  has 
been leading on issues of suicide. We  really need to see that Facility  improving on Psychiatric 
Services.   
7. The Hospital  has dilapidated infrastructure especially the Male Ward . 
8. The Hospital  has an ongoing construction which has taken  long. I mentioned that even the 
patients that are in those  Ward s are squeezed. Therefore, if that Facility  that is ongoing 
there that is worth Kshs  240 million can be completed, we can say that we ha ve already 
sorted the issue of congestion  and patients will be able to enjoy proper services.  
I would wish that the  Implementation Committee follow s up on that so that things can be 
done smoothly.  
9. The Hospital  has a small Morgue which needs expansion and a trained Morgue Attendant.  
We are still on that age where those who do not have jobs are just given those jobs and 
there are specific qualifications that are required for  Morgue  Attendants. We need the 
County to move a step further and start employing trained Morgue Attendants who will be 
able to offer proper services to our Facilities.  
10. The Hospital  has no proper parking for Ambulances especially when picking and dropping 
of patients.  
11. The Hospital  has no Youth Friendly Centre. We passed a Bill here ; the Maternal, Child, 
Youth and A dolescent Bill which is now an Act and requires that every Facility , including 
a Level Two and Level Three to have a Y outh Friendly Centre  because of many challenges 
that our youth are going through.  
Such a Facility  which I said would be  a Regional Facili ty without such kind of Facility , it 
is a joke , and we really need something to be done there.  
12. There is inadequate drug supplies in the Hospital  despite it being a Distribution Hub for 
Small Facilities. I believe that the Implementat ion Committee is going to take on that 
matter because we passed the budget with more needs that were supposed to be directed to 
buying the Non-Pharmaceuticals and Pharmaceuticals . 
 
COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS  
From the above Observations, the Committee recomm ends the following;  
1. THAT, the Department  of Health should work in collaboration with the Department  of 
Land s, Housing and Physical Planning to fast track on the issuance of the title deed.  
2. THAT, the Department  of Health should allocate funds for recruitment of Doctors, Nurses, 
Clinical Officers, Speciali sed Radiologist and Morgue Attendants.  
3. THAT, the Hospital  Management should fast track on settling the huge accumulated debts 
to the Suppliers.  
4. THAT, the Hospital  Management should come up with a proper Waiver System to address 
the increasing needs.  
5. THAT, the Department  of Health Services should ensure that the Psychiatric Services are 
improved by having proper staffing and coming up with a Ward  for the pat ients.   
6. THAT, the Hospital  should give the Male Ward  a facelift to change its current state.  
7. THAT, the Department  of Health Services should fast track the Completion of the 
Outpatient Department  in Molo Sub County Hospital . 
8. THAT, the Department  of Health  Services in conjunction with the Hospital  Management 
should work toward s expansion of the Morgue.  
9. THAT, the Hospital  Management should plan a designated Parking Area for picking and 
dropping patients.  
10. THAT, the Hospital  should establish a Youth Friendly C entre. 
11. THAT, the Department  of Health Services should ensure adequate supplies of drugs to the 
Facilities.   
 
Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, when we went to that Facility , there was also a County outcry as far 
as the drugs issues are concerned and I hope that the Executive is going to make sure that because 
we have the monies  and the drugs are going to be distributed.  
 
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he other thorny issue t here is about that land because  of grabbing  risk. 
Recently, we had issues of the Annex, we had issues of Elburgon and we had issues of each and 
every other Facility , including Njoro Facility  which the tittle deed is not ours. Mr. Temporary 
Speaker , something ought to be done and I am seeing the Chairperson here and I know he is going 
to do somet hing as far as the issuance of the tittle deeds to our Facilities is concerned, so that we 
can move as smoothly and we avoid future conflicts that will emanate from whatever we have 
been seeing.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , today as I was coming, somebody told m e that there is no need for citizen s 
to be paying Netflix. They just only need to be entertained by the Government.  
We do not want a scenario that we saw at Annex versus War Memorial. We are tired of such 
scenarios and they could have been evaded if only the County was concerned that that Hospital  
did not have a tittle deed. Today, we would  not find ourselv es in the mess that we are in.  
Otherwise Mr. Temporary Speak er, I wish to request the House to pass the Report . I request the 
Implementation Committee  to take over; they move swiftly and they consider all th ese matters.  I 
wish to rest my case and request Hon. Grace Mwathi to second the M otion.  
 
Hon. Grace Mwathi : Thank you Mr. Speaker  for allowing me to second this Motion  on the v isit 
to Molo Sub-County  Hospital. While seconding the Motion , I also wish to respond to what my 
colleague and my friend Hon Njuguna has said because he has mentioned the Labour Committee  
severally and I am the Chairperson o f the same.  
Mr. Temporary Speake r, I wish to say that we have invited the PSM CEC tomorrow, the HR and 
the whole Committee  on the County  Service Board , and it is good that this Motion  is timely. We 
are going to these questions tomorrow because it is not only in Molo Sub-County  Hospital t hat we 
are lacking staff - but all over the County .  
SoMr. Temporary Speaker , it is our duty as Honourable . Members of this Assembly to move very 
fast so that we know the way forward for our patients and our electorates because health is key. 
You would rather  lack anything but be healthy because there is nothing that can be substituted 
with health. So, I support the Motion  and I request the Exe cutive to work with speed because if we 
lack good and healthy people, I do not know who are going to be our electorates next time. Thank 
you Mr. Mr. Temporary Speaker, and Mheshimiwa Njuguna for bringing this Motion  because it is 
timely; we are going to sa ve Nakuru County  at large. Thank you Mr.  Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathwana ): I now propose the question  
(Question proposed that this House adopts the Report  on the visit at Molo sub -County  Hospital 
on 24th May 2023 laid on the Table of the Assembly on Wednesday 18th October 2023 during the 
morning plenary ). 
The Motion  is open for debate. Hon. Eliud  
Hon. Eliud Chege : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker  for giving me this chance. I also want to 
thank the Committee  led by Hon. Njuguna for coming up with this Report . If I am not wrong, this 
is the eighth or seventh Report  that has been tabled before this House by Hon. Njuguna.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, becaus e I have been in this House; the only difference I can see in this 
Report  is just the name of the Sub-County  and the name of the Hospital . The Report is  almost the 
same. This is a clear indication of what our Health Department  looks like and now we do not 
expect Report s but what we now expect is implementation. If you look at what we are calling 
Human Resource , if you look at the number of Nurses, they have a deficit of 116 and that is too 
big. I am now wondering because we are saying a healthy County  is a wealthy County , now I am 
wondering where our County  is headed because if you look at this Hospital, it can clearly indicate 
the nature and the situation our people are undergoing.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I am concerned about the Male Ward. I do not know wh at is happening 
because if you look at the difference  between  the Female and Male Wards, you might think that 
the Male Ward is a Store for the Female Ward. And this is a clear indication that although our 
mums are procreating , the male gender is somehow neglected.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I also visited Naivasha and I could also see the difference between the 
Female and the Male Wards. I think all those p eople admitted there, no matter their gender, are all 
sick and if I am not wrong, there is no difference between pain of a male and a female. They are 
all admitted because they are sick.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I do not know whether it would be possible in  future , as the way we 
divide Secondary School Boys and Girls, we do the same at the Department  of Health. We have 
Male and Female Hospitals for at least a balance because Hon ourable  Njuguna said in  a male 
bathroom , you can just see through from  outside ; it is a  shame. I therefore call upon our County  
and also to the male gender wapendwa , maneno yetu yanasahaulika . Kwa hivyo tu jiangalie. Asante 
Bw Spika wa Mda. 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa ): Hon. Palang’a  
Hon. Peter Palang’a:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker for allowing me to contribute to this 
Motion . I want to say from the onset that I think there  comes a time when we need to crack the 
whip and be honest with ourselves. I was in a room somewhere; I will give an analogy where  
people were locked in a room, but these very people had a bunch of keys in their pockets. They 
kept on complaining about how the doors would be opened before them so that they could run out 
of that house but little did they know that they had keys in  their pockets;  food for thought Members!  
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  for purposes of this House, I think from where I sit, we hav e done a lot 
of public relation; w e have done a lot of talking . Hon. Njug una here my able ‘Learned Friend’, at 
times I used to call him my ‘Legal Counsel ’, when he was on the other side. He has been the Chair 
in the last term . The very Report s Hon. Kamau you are talking about , the eighth Report ; Hon. 
Njuguna had a lot of Report s in the previous term as the Chair and no wonder he was still re-
elected and he is still the Chair.  
So Mr. Temporary Speaker , I wish even to ask him as the Chair, before we even start ventilating 
into this , Hon. Njuguna, where could be the problem in this Department , having tabled all these 
Report s from the previous  term? This term as well, same issues in terms of lack of staff, The Health 
Department  is one that has a huge chunk of money , more than any other Department  in this County . 
Could it mean then that we do not have value for money, the amount of money that we  allocate 
does not do anything? Hon. Members, Madam Chair for Labour Committee , it is worthy and it is 
in records in black and white that this County  in terms of Wage Bill, we are doing over and above 
the required threshold. Where did the rain start beating us? Where did we go wrong , or does it 
mean we get our priorities  wrong ? I think we need to crack the whip and start being ourselves as 
Hon. Members .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, with your permission, you know Molo Town for example Molo Hospital 
has been  in existence for so long; even before the election of all these Members probably in this 
House. It is shameful to learn that the Facility  does not have a title deed. We have heard Officers 
in that Office being paid taxpayers’ money day in and day out. Do we continue having the same 
situation forever ? Do we continue complaining that we do not have the title deed or do we continue 
saying that we do not have requisite staff? Do we continue talking about the Hospital having a debt  
of Kshs 36 million with F acility Improvement Fund (F IF)?  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, w e have been told , and records have it that this County  has always  
increased the FIF Funds . Does  it mean that the Facility  in question does not have these funds and 
if they have, have they put them to pro per use? To what extent shall we continue talking about 
this? I think Mr. Temporary Speaker, honestly speaking it is important to note that so many issues 
including the parking space; we will want also to wait for somebody to come from Busia, for 
example, to come and fix parking spaces. We also expect something to be talked about the 
Management of these Facilities, we expect even something to be discussed in terms of what 
measures that we need to take to this particular  Management. Mr. Temporary Speaker, f or how 
long have they been there, do they continue drawing taxpayers’ money in form of salaries when 
nothing tangib le is being done?  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I think I am a very frustrated person sitting here discussing the Report  
that similar Report s have b een tabled before this House  and nothing has happened. I think it gets 
to a point where we need to put everything to a standstill and start evaluating the Report s thereof; 
where we  are. It will be shameful indeed that we continue languishing, we continue talking about 
the very issues. I think we may want to have a very serious conversation with the Department , re-
evaluate and have a way forward; if need be, we may not need to have any Motion  whatsoever if 
we have nothing to show that indeed whatever we have discussed ha s been implemented.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I wish to end there by saying that even I do not know whether to support 
or not , because I do not know if it is going to make any difference from what we have done  before , 
I will painfully support waiting for the implementation . Thank you  Mr. Temporary Speaker . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa ): Hon. Anthony and then followed by Hon. 
Wathiai in that order . 
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Sp eaker for giving me this chance. Let me 
join my fellow Members of the County  Assembly , first I want to support this Report  because it 
depicts and it gives the true picture of our Facilities , and says it is a matter of great concern for us; 
given that the p icture repeats itself from one Facility  to another. Also , to say that a healthy County  
is a wealthy County .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I think over the past few days , we h eard that some  changes were done in 
that Department  whereby the CECM that was there was transferred to another Department . It is 
yet to be communicated to this House , but we have that is information . I think there is more which 
needs to be done apart from being transferred and all that. I think as Hon. Mem bers are saying, let 
us see heads rolling and let people take responsibility whenever they sleep on their jobs . This is 
because health issue s start with the psychological  issues  because given the picture that has been 
shown here in the Men’s Ward, it pains  someone to look at  it and I understand this is a Le vel Four 
Facilit y where  all the recommendations that are given  and one of them has repeated itself but is 
not here is the reimbursement from NHIF .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, as we are saying, the FIF and all  that, there is  even  a big ger problem 
where they take time to reimburse the NHIF money to the facilities. So Mr. Temporary Speaker I 
would like to say that with this picture that has been painted to us, I want to join my Senior Hon. 
Palang’a and say it is now time we stop ped everything and put our health issues as a priority 
because Nakuru used to be a point where people used to come and benchmark in matters to do 
with Health.  
However, as we are going now it does not depict the true picture that Nakuru is known for. So I 
want to support and say that action need to be taken  and whenever somebody has slept on his or 
her job , let us see heads rolling . With that Mr. Temporary Speaker, I support the Motion.  
Hon. David Wathiai : Asante sana Bw ana. Temporary  Spika  kwa kunipatia hii nafasi kuchangia 
hii Ripoti. Kwanza nataka  nikaribishe wageni wetu kutoka  Busia.  Karibuni sana  and feel at home.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, Chairman wa hii Committee  amekuwa akifanya kazi vizuri sana akiwa 
na Kamati yake. Kila wakati  wanatuletea Ripoti safi, Ripoti imeandaliwa vizuri na ukiangalia, 
unaona kweli mambo wana yosema ni ya ukweli . Lakini ya leo Mr. Temporary Speaker, mimi hata 
nimeshtuka. Hizi picha ziko hapa hata ukiangalia unashindwa kama hii Hospitali iko na  Medical 
Superintendant anafanya nini hapo. Huyo anafaa kuwa alitolewa hapo kitambo na akapelekwa 
huko Kwa Jack aangalie mambo mengine.   
Hii picha iko hapa unashindwa wagonjwa wanaenda Hospitali inakaa hivi aje ? It is really painful 
Mr. Temporary Speaker to see such pic tures in a Report  and hakuna kitu inafanywa . The Medical 
Superintendent yuko  hapo na ana ona Hospitali inakaa h ivyo na bado anangoja mpaka Chairman  
na Committee  wakuje wakute  the Hospital in such a pathetic  condition.   
Hii Ripoti Mr. Temporary Speaker, I want to support this Report  but again I request that something 
has to be done and as my brother has said, heads have to roll in that Hospital . Somebody has to be 
responsible for leaving that Hospital to be in such a condition and yet th ey are there ; the 
Management is there. What is the work of the Board that is overlooking the Hospital? There is a 
big problem in our Clinics and our Hospitals because tukiendelea kukaa hivi tukiandika Ripoti  
zinaenda  Implementation hakuna kitu . Implementat ion labda kabla hizi Ripoti zote wacompile 
ziende ziwafikie , it will be another year. So, maybe the Chair Health Committee  should go and see 
the CECM and maybe something be done about this.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t his is very painful, I support this Repor t but painfully as said by my elder 
brother Hon. Palang’a. Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a : Mr. Temporary Speaker I know it is against Standing Orders in terms of 
probably giving contributions twice but just an input a little bit. This Hospital or Facility  is run by 
the Board and its Management . I think it is the best time we move away from pol itical 
appointments; just appointing people for the sake of it. Instead, appoint people according to their 
qualifications so that they give services.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, w e are yet to receive some nominees of the Members of the Board to 
these Facilities. I wish that this should not take a direction of just appointing somebody for the 
sake of appointing , for political achievements but for service delivery. Service delivery i s 
paramount and non -negotiable so Mr. Chair, take note of that. I think this habit of rewarding people 
for the sake of it should stop.  The Board has been in O ffice, various Boards ; I will even suggest 
that Mr. Chair as you stand up, we need to know  the act ions we need to take about these Boards , 
even if it means blacklisting them . These people should not hold Office anywhere . That should be 
the punitive way to take for people to give services to our people. Thank you  Mr. Temporary 
Speaker.  
The Temporary Spe aker  (Hon. Michael Gathanwa ): Hon. Palang’a you already indicated you 
are out of order but next time remember to comp ly all your points first time. I will want to allow 
the mover of the Motion , the Chair, to reply.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Thank you Mr. Tempor ary Speaker . Allow me to say that we have noted 
with concern the responses from the Members or the observation of Members as far as the Report s 
are concerned. Mr. Temporary Speaker, I started actually being worried because they had said this 
is a copy and paste. This is not a copy -paste but  different Report s, though  the format is the same 
and even the literature is different and also t he Facilities.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, a ll we are saying is that the issues that we have been raising are congruent 
across the County . The issue of title deeds is the same and that is why I want to share 
responsibilities. That is why we have mentioned different Committee s to take up different ma tters 
so that we clean up the Health System in Nakuru. We want the Committee  for instance of Land s 
to implore the Department  of Lands to know why Government Facilities do not have title deeds . 
Why do  we not  have title deeds for ECDE? And why do  we no t have  them , specifically in this case 
for Hospitals?  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t hese are matters that we are deliberating with the Chairperson for Lands 
and we said the Annex issue, we had gone there previously and we had three Report s from that 
Facility  and rais ed the issue of land. There is nothing that was done; no implementation and so 
forth.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t hese issues of Molo Hospital, we have been to the Facility  I think this 
was the fourth time . There is nothing and that is why I said let the Impl ementation Committee take 
this matter so that the Department  can see it is being put on  its toes. All the Department s because 
they are responsible.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, o n the issue of Human Resource , I want to say thank you because already 
we have give n them the B usiness to be discussed tomorrow so that this least when we go to the 
Hospitals, you can find somebody to attend to you. Let them come up with a proper mechanism of 
making sure that each and every day our people will be attended to and will be given maximum 
services that they deserve.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I usually wonder what is so much in Private Facilities that when a patient 
goes to a Private Facility , they are even massaged; not that because they have more money than 
the Public . At that Hospital,  there is some bad energy  and lack of care by staff ; and I do not want 
to mention  anyone . Maybe because of lack of supervision and so forth that is making our  Facilities 
go down.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, a nother issue concerns the Implementation of the Report s that we table 
here as raised by Hon. Wathiai and Hon. Palang’a. Mr. Temporary Speaker, if you go to the 
Archives of this Assembly  on the Motion s that have  been passed by this House, I do not believe 
that there is any other Committee  that has tabled more Report s than the Committee  of Health. To 
some extent, now the Committee  of Health Members they are tired and are saying that they are 
going to see whether t he relevant Committee s are going to do their work because we have been 
generating Report s after Report s.  
However  Mr. Temporary Speaker , when we go back to countercheck to confirm whether we raised 
these issues, and if they have they been sorted , we find n othing has been done.  Mr. Temporary 
Speaker, w e are tired and are worried if we continue with th is trend, we are going to demotivate 
Members . And if at all they will be going to the ground, maybe they will be going to look into 
other issues but we really n eed to see something being done. Let us not be generating Report s 
because the House need s to have Business , but let  us generate Report s and let there be follow -ups.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , it is high time we start ed impeaching people; why should we  be given 
the power to send people home so that we can motivate those who are back there , but when we 
come we pass Report s, and we sit down to just watch them. A time has come for us to crack the 
whip and I am saying this not because of  any political agenda , but because we need to see these 
services being rendered to the people of Nakuru.  
Therefore  Mr. Temporary Speaker , I would wish that the Implementation Committee  takes up this 
matter and each Committee  that has their m atters mentioned, to take these issues seriously so that 
when we go back to Molo Hospital next year; because we said we do site visits to Hospitals 
annually , I want to see some changes there and if there will be no changes, different Committee s 
are going t o wake up and they will  tell us what is happening.  
Therefore, I wish to move and appreciate the Members’ support  towards this Report  and I am 
hopeful that they are going to pass this Motion  and we are going to see the results at the end of the 
tunnel. Tha nk you Mr. Temporary  Speaker, and I beg the Members to support.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Michael Ngigi): Now Members I wish to put the question . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 9.00 am  
The House rose at 3.45 PM 
 
 
 
 