MARCH 1, 2022               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday , 1ST March 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3: 30 pm 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui) : Good afternoon Honorable Members. Clerk read 
the next order.  
REQUEST FOR STATEMENT  
DELAYED SALARIES FOR STAFF AT IGWAMITI DISPENSARY  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ): There is a request of a Statement from Honorable 
Daniel Kiriethe  from the  Chairperson of the Committe e on Health Services concerning delayed 
payment of Staff at Igwamit Dispensary in Waseges . 
Hon. Daniel Kiriethe:  Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speake r for the chance, I have some two 
workers in Igwamiti Dispensary in Wasege s Ward in Subukia Sub County . I intent to re quest for 
a Statemen t from the Department of Health Services regarding one Jackson Kimutai Koros of ID 
8070049 and one Janet Kwamboka Charles of ID 13047502, both have been working in 
Igwamiti Dispensary for quite some time. It is very unfortunate that they have not been paid 
since January last year .  
 I have taken this bold step to appeal  to this honorable  House so that it can intervene through the 
Department of Health Services if they are aware of the af orementioned matter. In addition,  what 
the County Government of Nakuru through the Department of Health is doing to make sure the 
salaries in question are paid and measures put in place by the Hospital Boards or the government 
to avert such future delays.  I do make the request, thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ): Thank you the  Chairperson for requesting that  
Statement and now I commit the request to the  Committee on Health Services headed by Hon. 
Njuguna  Mwaura  from Elburgon . I direct that  the report  should be tabled in two weeks ’ time . Is 
the Chairperson in?  
MARCH 1, 2022               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Daniel Kiriethe: Honorable Speaker I undertake to make sure  the Chairperson  for the 
Committee on Health Services gets the request because I am a member of the Health Services 
Committee  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui):  Kindly make sure that the report should be ready in 
two weeks. Clerk next order  
(Then) 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
(Order for Committee r ead) 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui)  left the Chair ] 
IN THE COMMITTEE  
[The Chairperson (Hon. Wilson Wachira) took the Chair ] 
THE NAKURU COUNTY LIVESTOCK SALES YARD BILL NO. 10 OF 2019  
The Chairperson (Hon. Wilson Wachira):  Members we are in the Committee  of the Whole 
House and I want to call the House to order , notice is given that the  Chairperson for the  
Committee on Agriculture Honorable Daniel Kiriethe intends to move the following 
amendments to the Nakuru County Livestock Sales Yard Bill No. 10 of 2019. We shall follow 
the sequence in Standing O rder no. 126  
Clause s 3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12.13,14,15  
Hon. Daniel Kiriethe:  Thank you Chairman, it is unfortunate that this Bill has been here since 
2019 so it is my hope that Members are going to work on it as fast as possible. I am humbly 
requesting that we do all the Clauses at ago instead of us doing each separately.  
The Chair person  (Hon. Wilson Wachira ): sorry it is important that we move through all the 
clauses as they flow  that is 3 to 15.  
Hon. Daniel Kiriethe:  Thank you Chairman. I beg to move that  Clause s 
3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12.13,14  and 15 be amended as they are in the Order Paper…Mr. Chair, some 
members do not have the document and it is important they be issued with the Bill so that we can 
be in the same page.  
The Chair person  (Hon. Wilson Wachira ): Honorable  Mover the document is available maybe 
they forgot to pick it from the sergeant -at-arms  
(Question proposed that Clauses 3,4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 be amended as 
indicated in the Order Paper ) 
MARCH 1, 2022               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 (Question that Clause s 3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12.13,14, and 15 be amended as indicated  in the 
Order Paper  put and agreed to)  
(Question that Clauses 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 as amend ed be part of the Bill 
put and agreed to)  
 
Clause 16  
                                 (Question proposed that Clause 16 be part of the Bill)  
(Question that clause 16 be part of the Bill put and agreed to)  
Clause s 17 and 18 
Hon. Daniel Kiriethe:  Thank you Chairman. I beg to move that Clause s 17and 18 be amended 
as indicated in the Order Paper) . 
(Question proposed that Clause 17 and 18 be amended as indicated in the Order Paper)  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(Question Proposed that Clauses 17 and 18 as amended be part of the Bill)  
(Question that Clauses 17 and 18 as amended be part of the Bill put and agreed to)  
Clauses 19 to 23  
(Question proposed that Clause s 19 to 23 be part of the Bill ) 
(Question put and agreed to )  
Clause 24  
Hon. Daniel Kiriethe : Thank you Chair. I propose that Clause 24 be amended as  indicated  in the 
Order Paper.  
Hon. Joel Karuri: Thank you Chair. I propose that Clause 24 be amended as indicated in the 
Order Paper.  
(Question proposed that Clause 24 be amended as indicated in the Order Paper)  
(Question that Clause 24 be amended as indicated in the Order Paper put and agreed to)  
 
Clauses  25 and 26 
(Question proposed that Clause 25 and 26 be part of the Bill ) 
MARCH 1, 2022               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 (Question put and agreed to ) 
Clause  27 
Hon. Daniel Kiriethe : Thank you Chair. I propose that Clause 27 be amended as indicated  in the 
Order Paper.  
(Question proposed that Clause 27 be amended as indicated in the Order Paper)  
(Question that Clause 27 be amended as indicated in the Order Paper put and agreed to)  
(Question that Clause 27 as amended be part of the Bill put and agreed to)  
 
Clause 2  
Hon. Daniel Kiriethe : Thank you Chair. I request to move  that Clause 2 be amended  as indicated 
in the Order Paper.  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Wilson Wachira): Okay so now I propose the question  
(Question proposed that Clause 2 be amended as indicated in the Order Paper)  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(Question that Clause 2 as amended be part of the Bill put and agreed to)  
Clause 1  
Hon. Daniel Kiriethe:  Honorable  the chairperson Clause 1 talks about the short title; I propose 
that Clause 1 be amended as indicated in the Order Paper.  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Wilson Wachira): Thank you  
(Question proposed that Clause 1 be amended as indicated i n the Order Paper)  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(Question that Clause 1 as amended be part of the Bill put and agreed to)  
The Long Title  
We go to the Long title which has no amendment  
(Question proposed that the Long Title be part of the Bill ) 
(Question p ut and agreed to ) 
MARCH 1, 2022               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Wilson Wachira): Hon orable  Members we have finished the Whole 
House I want to request the mover Hon. Kiriethe … 
                                                      PROGRESS REPORT  
                     THE NAKURU COUNTY LIVESTOCK SALES YARD BILL NO. 10 OF 2019  
Hon. Daniel Kiriethe : Thank you chairman for a job well done. Hon orable  Members I beg to 
move that the com mittee do report to the assembly its consideration of the Nakuru County 
Livestock Sales Yard Bill No. 10 of 2019 and its approval thereof with amendments. I request 
Hon. Jambo Kenya to second.  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Wilson Wachira): I think there is not goi ng to be a seconder there.  
Question proposed that the committee do report to the House its consideration of the Nakuru 
County Livestock Sales Yard Bill. No. 10 of 2019 and its approval thereof with amendments.  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Thank you, Members,  
(The House resumed)  
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui) in the Chair] 
THE NAKURU COUNTY LIVESTOCK SALES YARD BILL NO. 10 OF 2019  
(THIRD READING ) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Right; the chairperson  
Hon. Wilson Wachira : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker; I beg to report that the committee of the 
Whole has considered the Nakuru County Livestock Sales Yard Bill No. 10 of 2019 and its 
approval thereof with amendments.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you the mover.  Chairperson  
Hon Daniel Kiriethe : Mr. Deputy Speaker I would like to start by thanking the Hon orable  
Members for doing it so fast with the amendments. Now I beg to move that this House do agree 
with the committee in the said report. I request Hon. Grace Mw athi to second.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi:  Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker Sir I want to second that the House do agree 
with the committee in the said report.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you I want to propose question  
(Question proposed that this H ouse do agree with the committee in the said report ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
MARCH 1, 2022               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Mover  
Hon. Daniel Kiriethe :  Thank you Hon. Deputy Speaker , I beg to move that the Nakuru County 
Livestock Sales Yard Bill No.10 of 2019 be now read a Third Time. Thank y ou 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): I want to propose a question which is that: - 
(Question proposed that the Nakuru County Livestock Sales Yard Bill No. 10 of 2019 be now 
read a Third Time) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(The Nakuru County Livestock S ales Yard Bill No. 10 of 2019 was accordingly  read a Third 
Time and passed)  
ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 9.30 in the morning.  
(The House rose at 3.55pm ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 