COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 26 th September, 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:35 AM  
[Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
A WELCOME NOTE  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): I recognis e Members from Kiambu County Assembly, 
Committee on Welfare, led by the Chairperson Hon. John Njinu and the following Members;  
1. Hon. Peter Njoroge  
2. Hon. Kung’u Smart  
3. Hon. Shiru Mungai  
I also recogni se members of staff from the Assembly who are accompanying the Members . 
1. Ms. Stella Njeru  
2. Ms. Mary Wangui  
3. Ms. Judith Mokei  
4. Mr. David Kung’u  
I also take this opportunity to welcome visiting teachers  and pupils  from Crater View Ngata 
Academ y, Mosop Ward . The team is led by Mr. Oriwo Albert Odulo. Welcome.  
MOTION  
WATER COMPANIES  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Motion by Hon. Chairperson Committee on Public 
Accounts and Investments , Hon. Simon Kamau.  
Hon. Simon Kamau: Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. I beg to move a Motion THAT  this House 
adopts the Report  of the Committee on Public Accounts and Investments  on the Report  of the 
Auditor General  on the Financial Statements of the Nakuru Water and Sanitation Services  
Company Limited , of Nakuru County for the year that ended June, 2021, laid before the table of 
the Assembly on Wednesday 20th September, 2023 during the morning plenary.  
Mr. Speaker , Water is a very important resource in our County and if these Water Companies do 
not manage this resource  efficiently, there may emanate some problems which will affect us and 
Wanjiku  directly. W e have  3 Water Companies within Nakuru. We have  Nakuru Water and 
Sanitation Company (NAWASCO), we have Naivasha Water and Sanitation Company 
(NAIVA WASCO) and we have  Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Company (NARUWASCO).  
The queries that have been laid by the Auditor General  and for this particular session, I want to 
highlight some of the Audit  queries that have been raised by the Auditor General  specifically on 
the Nakuru Water and Sanitation Company.  
Mr.Speaker , on behalf of the  Members of County Assembly Public Accounts and Investments  
Committee, I beg to move the adoption of the Report  of the Committee on the Report  of the Auditor 
General  on the Financial Statements of the three Water Companies of Nakuru for the year that 
ended 30thJune, 2021.  
The Public Accounts and Investments  Committee is a select Committee established under Standing 
Orde r 188 and is responsible for the examination of the working of Public Accounts and 
Investments s. 
Mandate of the Committee includes, among others,  
1. Examining the Account s showing the appropriation of the sum voted by the House to meet 
the Public Expenditure and of such, other Accounts  laid before the House as the Committee 
may think fit.  
2. Examine the Report s and  Accounts of the Public Investments s. 
3. Examine the  Report s, if any, of the Auditor General  on the Public Investments . 
4. Examine, in the context of  the autonomy and efficiency of the Public Investments s whether 
the affairs of the Public Investments s in accordance with sound financial or business 
principles and prudent commercial practices.  
Mr. Speaker , the Committee shall however, not examine;  
1. Matters of Major Government Policy as distinct from business and commercial functions 
of the Public Investments s. 
2. Matters of the day -to-day Administration.  
3. Matters for consideration of which machinery is established by any special Statute  under 
which a particular Public Investments  is established.  
The Committee has powers under the provision of the Constitution, The State Corporations Act 
Cap 446 and the Public Audit Act Cap 412 to summon witnesses, examine them under the oath 
and receive evidence  from them.  
COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP  
The Committee is comprised of the following Members: -  
1) Hon. Simon Kamau   - Chairperson  
2) Hon. Michael Njenga   - Vice Chairperson  
3) Hon. Samwel Ngarama  - Member  
4) Hon. Joseph Muraya   - Member   
5) Hon. Ann Njaguara   - Member  
6) Hon. Kezziah Okumu   - Member  
7) Hon. Bathsheba Kerubo  - Member  
8) Hon. Irene Cherop   - Member  
9) Hon. Robert Rutto   - Member  
10) Hon. Bernard Kirui   - Member  
11) Hon. Robert Lang ’at               - Member  
12) Hon. Neto Sakwa               - Member  
13) Hon. Gathuita Mwangi             - Member  
Mr. Speaker , having called some of these Water Company Management s of course as per the Audit 
queries that were raised from the Office of the Auditor General , we realised that we have some of 
audit queries that of course we wanted this Management  from the NAWASCO to highlight so at 
least we can minimise  some of these los ses in terms of finances  and of course to ensure that there 
is transaparency and efficiency in as far as matters running the Water Companies are concerned.  
And Mr. Speaker , before I go to the audit queries, there are some challenges that we are facing as 
a Committee . 
Challenges Experienced by the Committee  
Members noted time and resources allocated to the Committee  is too little in comparison to the 
work they are supposed to handle.  
Members also noted that Management  of the County Assembly was delaying in tabling Report s 
from th e Office of the Auditor General  and therefore we were affected as a Committee in as far as 
implementing what we were suppos ed to implemt was c oncerned.  
 Committee Proceedings  
The Committee held sittings in which it closely examined and heard evidence from the 
Management  of Nakuru Water and Sanitation Company Limited.  
In its inquiry into the audit response of NAWASSCO for the year ended 30thJune 2021, the 
Committee heard and received both oral and written evidence from the Management . 
The records of evidence adduced, Documents  and Notes  received by the Committee form the basis 
of the Committee’s observations and recommendations as outlined in the Report  and can be 
obtained in the Hansard Report s of the Committee available in the County Assembly of Nakuru.  
Committee’s Objectives  
These observations and recommendations , if taken into account and implemented will enhance 
accountability, effectiveness, transparency, efficiency, prudent Investments  and financial 
Management  in Nakuru Water and Sanitation Services Company Limited.  
Nakuru County Water Entities  
 Nakuru County Government owns three Water Companies. They are;  
1. Naivasha Water and Sanitation Company Limited   
2. Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Company Limited  
3. Nakuru Water and Sanitation Services Company Limited  
Mr. Speaker , of interest today , and in this session, we are going to deal with NAWASSCO  
The Material Issues (Highlights from the Report  of the Auditor General ) 
Mr. Speaker , the Committee, after in -depth analysis, insights and engagement with the 
Management  of NAWASSCO Limited, identified key issues raised by the Auditor General  
which affected both directly and indirectly the performance of the Company  during the year 
under the review; that is the year that ended 30th June, 2021.  
The audit queries are of course so many but of major  cocern are as follows;  
1.  Non-Revenue Water was a major sticking point. This refers to Water supplied but not 
billed due to burst pipes, dilapidated infrastructure or theft of meters. The resultant effect 
is that the Compan y could not reali se enough revenue to effectively sustain its 
operations.  
2. The Committe e also noted that the Company Management  had not instituted strong 
Internal Controls . This resulted to the loss of over Kshs . 3 Million through a fuel theft 
syndicate.  And maybe later, I am to expound on the same.  
The County Government of Nakuru owed the  Company more than Ksh s. 200 Million, which 
are monies owed by the defunct Municipal Council of Nakuru. This contributed to an unhealthy 
financial  
The Committee  appreciates efforts of the Company Management  to improve performance by 
increasing metering and area of coverage which have improved revenue and service delivery. 
However, a lot needs is to be done to realis e the Company’s key mandate of providing Water  
to all residents in its area of operation.  
The Committee  has proposed recommendations in this Report  which if implemented will go a 
long way in making the Company  more effective in delivering services.  
Other matters raised by the Auditor General  and considered by the  Committee are in this Report , 
apart what we have mentioned there above.  
Basis for Qualified Opinion.  
Undisclosed Loan from African Development Bank (AfDB)  
Audit Query  
The Statement  of profit or loss and other comprehensive income reflects operati ng and 
maintenance costs of Kshs  377 119 876 for the year ended 30thJune, 2021. However, the balance  
differs with the amount of Kshs  282 779 924, disclosed in Note 12(a)  which is taxed  maybe behind 
this particular Report,  resulting to unreconciled varianc e of Kshs  94 339 952.  Also Included, in 
the balance is the AFDB  loan repayment amount of Kshs  39 468 545 which has been expensed.  
As previously reported , although the Company  procured the amount of Kshs  994 706 658 from 
African Development Bank ( AFDB ) through Rift Valley Water Works Development Agency 
(RWWDA) and continues to service it, the outstanding loan balance is not reported  on the 
Financial Statements as required by the standards. This is in breach of Section 628(3) of the 
Companies Act No.17 of 2015 which requires accounting records of the Company  to contain day-
to-day entries of all amounts of m onies received and spent.  
Consequently, the accuracy and fair Statement of the Liabilities  in respect of the undisclosed 
African Development Bank (AfDB) which was obtained through the Rift Valley Water Works 
Development Agency (RVWWDA) and which the Company is servicing could not be confirmed.  
Of course we told them to provide  the Management  response, which they did  and I am going to 
read as it is.  
Management  Response  
(a) Operating and Maintenance Costs  
The correct amount of operati ng and maintenance cost is Kshs  282 779 924 as disclosed in Note 
12(a) to the Financial Statements . The amount of Kshs  377 119 876 reflected in  Statement of Profit 
or Loss  and other comprehensive income was due  to a typing error and it does not affect the figure 
of total expenses. This typing error has since been corrected in the Financial Statements for period 
ended 30thJune, 2022, of which as a Committee we confirmed.  
The loan was used in the construction of the Olbanita Project and other related works. We were 
told the other related works were wells that were  dug, springs that were dug  and another sewerage 
network that is from Kanu Street all the way to Njoro River . Those are some of the other networks 
they provided responses  to us .  
After the completion of the project,  RVWSB handed over the project to the Company for 
operations and maintenance but retained the ownership of the Assets  and the Assets  have not been 
transferred to the Company. If we record the loan and the assets in our books , it would result to 
double accounting since the same is already recorded in the books of RVWSB currently Central 
Rift Valley Water Works Development Agency (CRVWWDA).  
However, the Water Act 2002 was reviewed in 2016, has not been fully operationalised through a 
regulation hence Assets  acquired by obligations  by CRVWWDA have not been transferred to the 
Company for proper accounting. The then Transitional Authority also did not remedy this situation 
for the County Government, Water Companies and Water Service Boards.  
Current Status  
The Company is waiting for the tra nsfer of assets  from the Central Rift Valley Water Works 
Agency  as per the Water Act 2016  
Committee Observations.  
The Committee  observed that:  
(i) The issue has been raised over a long period  and the Company Management  has not 
yet come up with a solution.  
(ii) The Company did not disclose the Principal Loan Amount in the Statement s thereby 
contravening Section 628(3) of the Companies Act No.17 of 2015 which requires 
Accounting Records of the Company to contain day to day entries of all amounts of 
monies received and spent.  
Committee Recommendations  
After close scrutiny of the issues raised by the Auditor General  and responses provided by the 
Company Management , the Committe e recommends that:  
(i) All monies received and spent should be included in the Financial Statements pursuant 
to Section 628(3) of the Companies Act No.17 of 2015. Thus, the Principal Loan 
Amount of the loan should be included in the Financial Statements , and also the accrued 
interest.  
(ii) All assets developed from the loan should be transferred to the Compan y from the 
Central Rift Valley Water Works Development Agency.  
(iii) The Company Management  should expedite the transfer process and provide a status 
Report  to this Committee by 30thDecember 2023.   
 
 
Trade and Other Receivables  
Audit Query  
The Statement  of financial position as at 30 June, 2021 reflects trade and other receivables balance 
of Kshs 714 643 719 and as disclosed in Note 19(a) to the Financial Statements.  However, the 
balance includes net trade receivables of Kshs .666 570 684 which is at variance with the supporting 
schedule amount of Kshs .617 528 935 resulting to unreconciled variance of Kshs  49 041 749. 
Consequently, the accuracy and fair statement of the trade and other receivables balance of Kshs 
7 14 643 719 as at 30 June, 2021 could not be confirmed  
Management  Response  
The variance of Kshs 49 041 749 between Financial Statements and supporting schedule relates to 
customer prepayments which had been classified under other payables in Note 25.  
The net t rade receivables balance of Kshs. 666 570 684 as Report ed under Note 19 (a) relates to 
customers with debit balances while the su pporting schedule amount of Kshs. 617 528 935 is net 
of customers with credit and debit ba lances thus the variance of Kshs. 49 041 749. This was 
corrected in the Financial Year 2021/2022.  
Committee Observations  
The Committee  observed that:  
(i) The net trade receivables Report ed did not tally with th e supporting schedule provided,; 
and of course, with a variance of Kshs  49 041 749. 
(ii) The variances were reconciled and corrected in the subsequent Report ing period.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Honorable Member for Kaptembwo Ward?  
Hon. Peter Kajwang’: Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. The Chairman could quickly take us through 
the summary because it is a lot of literature;  we might not be ab le to comprehend everything that 
he is trying to go through very fast so that we can give our productive contribution to it. Thank 
you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank yo u Hon orable  Member for Kaptembwo Ward . Chair, 
take note . 
Hon. Simon Kamau: Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. I take note.  Again, I was not reading everything. 
I was almost. I am only going to give matters of great importance and that is what I am doing, that 
is why I wanted Honorable Members to understand in depth because this is the elephant in the 
room. The others that have  no great importance I am of course going to skip, Hon. Kajwan g’... 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable Chair!  Address  the Speaker . 
Hon. Simon Kamau: Sorry, Mr. Speaker  sir.  Honourable Members, a s guided by the Speaker , I 
am not going to read everything. I am going to take note of the very critical  Audit Queries so that 
the Members can have time to contribute.  So, a nother elephant in the room is Non-Revenue Water . 
This is water that is used by the Customers  and is not billed.  
Audit Query  
Available records indicate that the Company produced 13,358,950 cubic meters of Wate r out of 
which, only 9,130,940 cubic meters were billed to  Customers leaving out the balance of 
4,228,010 cubic meters Non -Revenue Wa ter at an estimated value of Kshs  328,257,551. This 
represents 32 % of the production , which exceeded the set threshold of 25% approved by the 
Water Services Regulatory Board (WASREB) guidelines. No explanations hav e been rendered 
for the high Non-Revenue  Water  and measures being put in place t o resolve the loss in revenue.  
Management  Response  
The Company  is very keen on reducing Non-Revenue Water to the sector benchmark  levels of 
25% and a lot of efforts have  been put in place to reduce Non-Revenue Water  
Some of the interventions which have been undertaken include;  
(i) Rehabilitating the old dilapidated and sp oiled  networks within the supply area which 
recorded the highest of physical losses.  
(ii) Conducting minimum Night Flow Measurements to apportion contribution of physical losses 
in various places to aid in decision making for NRW reduction interventions.  
To highlight on this, I wanted to get a clarification from the Managing Director of Nakuru 
Water and Sanitation Company what he meant by this Night Flow Measurement . He told me 
that we have some of these residential areas within Nakuru City whereby he wanted to 
ensure that they have some machines that they use to see whether there are leakages during 
the night when these people are asleep.  
He told me that between 1 A M and 3 A M when they assume that everybody within the 
residential area is asleep, that is when they use that said machine to test whether there are 
leakages or not and where they note that there are leakages, they go the following morning. 
He told me that the machine  is perfect that when they go the following morning to look 
where there were leakages during the night, they find that there were leakages and they try to 
mend it. Therefore, they are trying to reduce the loss of this Non-Revenue Water.  
(iii)Use of High -Density Poly Ethylene (HDPE) pipes in place of Ultra Poly Vinyl Chlorite 
(UPVC) for network extension and maintenance since HDPE pipes are stronger, can 
withstand higher pressure, have less joints and less prone to leaks and bursts.  
(iv) Replacement of Consumer Meters whereby faulty/old/und registering Meters  are being 
replaced with Automatic Meter Reading (AMR) enabled meters , which are more accurate 
with hope to automate them fully for real time meter reading and easier NRW computations. 
So far , 13,000 Smart Enabled Meters have been installed within  Central and Southern Zones.  
(v) Surveillances  for illegal use rs being intensified whereby the Illegal Use Team have been 
facilitated with a vehicl e, a motorbik e and security reinforcement where necessary . 
I interrogated further on these Enforcement Officers. The Managing Director told me that 
there was one of his staff who was almost killed because as I have said, water is very critical 
and anybody coming to withdraw water services from them, you are going to face it rough. 
That is why they have to use the Enforcement Officers.  
(vi) Relocation of 3 ,500 Consumer Meters to the nearest mains in the low -income areas which 
have high number of water theft cases  
(vii) Automation of water production sites by installing more efficient meters for accurate    
meter reading  
(viii) Replacement of 13 ,000 old and faulty meters with smart meters.  
 
Committee Observations.  
The C ommittee observed that:  
i) The Company  contravened W ater Services Regulatory Board guidelines , which 
recommends allowable loss of unaccounted for water to be at 25%.  
ii) The installation of Smart Meters is a good strategy by  Management  to reduce water 
loss. 
iii) Dilapidated infrastructure continued to aid Non -Revenue Water.   
 
Committee Recommendations  
After scrutiny  of the issues raised by the Auditor General  and responses provided by the Company 
Management , the Committee recommends that:  
Pursuant to the Water Services Regulatory Board, - Non-Revenue Water Management  standards 
in Keny a Guideline June 2022, Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Company  Management  should 
adhere to  the following guidelines on non -revenue water  reduction measures.   
i) Determine the accuracy of Production Meters by testing and calibrating, and replacing if 
faulty or inaccurate.  
ii) Eliminate major commercial losses by servicing and testing (and replacing faulty) 
Customer Meters and, identifying illegal uses (starting with large and then medium 
customers).  
iii) Install Meters  for unmetered Customers  and identify unbilled Customers  through 
Customer Identification Survey (CIS) and issue them with bills.  
iv) Reduce the time taken to repair bursts, surface leaks and overflows  
v) Management  should seek funding to upgrade its Infrastructure, which is outdated to 
prevent Non-Revenue Water and adhere to Water Regular Authority Services Board .  
 
Committee Recommendation  
After close scrutiny of the issues raised by the Auditor General  and responses provided by the 
Company Management , the Committee recommends that:  
(i) The Company Management  should update its Assets Register by including all 
serialized water meter numbers.  
Acknowledgement  
I take this opportunity to commend the Members of the Committee for their devotion and 
commitment to duty, which made the consideration of the Auditor General ’s Report  on Na kuru 
Water and Sanitation C ompany Limited  successful.  
I also wish to thank th e Offices of the Speaker  and the Clerk to the Assembly for the support 
extended to the Committee in undertaking this important assignment.  
Lastly, I wish to thank the  Management  of Na kuru W ater and Sanitation Company Limited who 
submitted written responses of the Report , and who appeared before the Committe e to give further 
clarity to issues raised by the Auditor General .  
At this juncture, I wish to request Hon orable  Lang’at from Amalo Ward to second the Report . 
Thank you.  
Hon. Robert Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. I rise to support the Motion. I do not want to 
dwell much on what the Chairperson has said.  
First of all, let me thank the Committee for the job well done. Thank you very much for burning 
the mid -night oil to come out with this Report . As the Chairman has said, we had the Management  
Response  and as the Committee, we did some observation. After that, we came with 
recommendations, which  the Chairperson has really highlighted.  
On the positive Report  on Nakuru Water and Sanitation Services, the Company is rising. Up to 
today, they have a base of 48,000 Customers on Water  and almost the same number on the  Sewer 
connections. Given opportunity and sound Management , Nakuru Water and Sanitation Company 
has a very high potential.  
As we speak today, their monthly revenue stands at Kshs . 90 Million per Month . There is an 
ongoing project of about Kshs. 5.4 Billion , which is on networks of  Water and Sewage . Given 
time, after the completion of the said projects, Nakuru Water and Sewerage  Company will be able 
to give out on 24 -Hour  basis and there would be no much difficulty on water.  
At close scrutiny, Nakuru Water and Sewage Company ar e doing additional 20 boreholes . These 
boreholes will increase the production of 20 cubic liters of water per day. They will also increase 
the production of 48, 000 cubic liters to 65,000 cubic liters. I stand to second the Motion. Thank 
you. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Motion is now properly seconded. The Motion 
is that this House adopts the Report  of the Committee on the County Public Accounts and 
Investments  on the Report  of the Auditor General  on the Financial Statements of the Nakuru Water 
and Sanitation Company Limited, Nakuru County for the year ended 30th June, 2021, laid before 
the table of the Assembly on Wednesday 20thSeptember, 2023 during the morning plenary.  
The Motion is open for Debate.  
The Honorable Leader of Minority Party.  
Minority Leader (Hon. Philip Wanjohi ): Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. I take this opportunity to 
thank the Committee led by Mheshimiwa Simon for coming up at least with the first Report . There 
has been a concern that this Committee has had more than 20 Report s and we were getting worried 
that they were not submitting one Report  in this House.  
Therefore, this Morning, we are happy as a House because we are able to come up with a Report  
and the Report  they have given us is an extensive one. However, although the Honorable Member 
for Amalo Ward says the Company is doing well, if you look at the entire Report , to me, the 
Compan y is doing poorly. However, because it is a Report  they have given, I am concerned 
because if you look at every other part they are losing money. People have not been paid and if 
you look here, they are saying 1,600 Meters  have not been serialized.  
That is a loophole where they are losing money. Individual Meters  have not been captured. The 
Assets  have not been registered. All that and 13,000 faulty Meters, fuel theft money being spent 
and being lost is a very worrying trend and as a County, we are putting money into that company. 
Therefore, because we have the Chairperson for Implementation Committee and the Committee 
for Implementation and the Chairperson f or budget is here.  
We will be looking at that Company  critically and say whether it deserves to get more money 
because it is not using the money for the value that it is intended for. However, I thank the 
Committee for that Report  but in future, we need to look at these Companies , the Nakuru Water 
and Sanitation Company, Naivasha Water and Sanitation Company, Nakuru Rural Water and 
Sanitation Company and see whether they are giving value to the people of Nakuru County. Thank 
you. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karu ri): Thank you. The Honorable Member for Subukia Ward.  
Hon. Isabella Makori: Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. Water is life but if the Report  will go through, 
unless with amendments, I am not in support. On page 12 on Committee recommendations, bullet 
1 which says the County Government should put plans of payments amounting to Kshs . 215 
Million and this debt is for former Municipal Council. The County works under budget and I do 
not see where Kshs . 215 Million which is not allocated for the Company  where we can get Kshs . 
215 Million.  
I come from a rural set up where we have a lot of problem with water. By chipping in Kshs . 215 
Million to Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Comp any, they do not give water for free. They 
usually sell. They make a lot of money and so I differ on that bullet. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Hassan  
Hon. Hassan Ali: Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. Allow me as I support the Report  from the 
Committee of Public Accounts and Investments s, allow me to also thank your Offic e for these 
gadgets that we are using here. This World  is going paperless and I think we are the first County 
Assembly to go paperless in this Country and your Office should be thanked enough for doing 
this. You do not have to see me carrying a lot of these papers. It becomes a mzigo  to me. Thank 
you to your Office  for doing this wonderful work.  
As I stand here, I also wish to support the Report  but there are so many issues that are coming up 
on this Report  and needs to be addressed immediately. There is the issue of pending bills that the 
County Government is owing to the Water  entity. I think that is an elephant in the House and it 
should be addressed immediately so that these people can proceed doing their work.  
There is also the issue of Undisclosed Public Loan . This loan should be made public and as a 
matter of fact, it should be tabled in this House so that we know how was this money spent.  
Water is still a problem in Nakuru and I think every Member would agree with me that we still 
have a big problem with Water  in Nakuru. So many people are still complaining of not getting 
Water  and we have these entities that have been using a lot of public money and they are not doing 
their jobs. I think Water  is still a problem in Nakuru and should be addressed immediately.  
There is also an issue of high bills. People are receiving high bills that the water entities cannot 
even explain. These bills, let us say, you are living in a domestic House but once they bring these 
water bills, it is becoming and read as commercial water bills . You are wondering if you have a 
factory in your house. Through the Committee, this matter should be addressed because this is a 
matter of concern to the citizens of Nakuru and there is a lot of complaints. I ask the Committee 
to take up that matte r and make sure that it is addressed. Thank you. I support.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Now, there is an issue of precedence. The Deputy Leader of 
Majority Party  and then  Honorable Member for Lakeview Ward.  
Hon. Rose Njoroge: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I want to congratulate the Committee for the good 
work and I would like to add that it was long overdue. This is what we have been waiting for and 
now that it is on the floor, we are grateful that we are going to discuss it.  
Mine is to add pressure  to the Company  because I feel it has a lot of incompetence. There is no 
good work going on there, the high bills that cannot be accounted for; they cannot explain how 
that bill has come up. Also, according to the period that we are, we have been devolved for a very 
long time and water has not reached to most of the residents and those people with water, it is not 
well managed. You find that there is no good flow of how this water is coming  to the people’s 
houses. There is need to discuss this Motion or to have more time awarded to this Motion or rather, 
to the Committee to go to the depth of it because they have alleged that they have got some debts 
and this should not be a reason why they have incompetence in the office.  
I would like to commend the Committee and also urge the Members to discuss this Motion in 
depth and come up with a solution for our people because there is a lot of outcry. In Gilgil, new 
areas that have been occupied, like Mbegi and Kikopey are not able t o access these water pipes. If 
there is a breakage, it is becoming very difficult to come and repair that breakage. They complain 
that they have no pipes, that they have no money and then we wonder, where do they expect us to 
go? I recommend the Report  but still there is more to be done. Thank you.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. Let me start by acknowledging Members of the 
County Assembly from Kiambu County who are seated amongst us here ; my friend Hon orable  
Kung’u Smart and the Committee on Welfare. I also start by appreciating the pupils  among st us 
here. We are setting a good precedent to a future generation that we can inspire a generation and 
these are the same people who will occupy these seats in years to come as we rise the ranks of 
politics and leadership in this great Country an d even the world.  
There is this book ‘ Why Nations Fail’  and it was written by James A. Robinson. In this book, you 
will find that different nations have been given different parameters of rising and even failing. 
Why African Countries have not met the threshold of popularity that should have beem met yet 
we have gold, diamonds and major resources within this continent and yet other Countries of the 
world do not have such resources but have prospered more than us. Take for example Singapore.  
When I look at this Report  on Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Company and more so the 
Auditor General ’s Report  on Nakuru Rural Water and Sanitation Company, I am perturbed. First, 
I felt very bad that the Chairperson Public Accounts and Investments  Committee indicated that …  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable Alex, are we referring to the wrong Report ? Because 
the Report  that was presented is for Nakuru Water and Sanitation Company.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Mr. Speaker  sir, it is Nakuru Water and Sanitation Company. I think it is just 
the agitation of what is there because that Organisation should just be rebranded for the sake of 
good precedents and saving public resources.  
The Chairperson, when he was on the floor, indicated that there are some Report s that are within 
this Assembly and I do not know which entities are not tabling this Report  because it was a concern 
that this is the first Report  that is being tabled here. I think that one should have caught your ears 
becau se it is important that we get  to know why they are not being tabled because that is a concern 
from the Committee.  
On the part of the undisclosed loans from the Africa Development Bank, I feel that these loans 
should be contained and curbed by this House. There is no way that we get to learn from  a Report  
that major loans were taken by such Companies and we are  not even aware as a House or as Nakuru 
County , and yet these loans will later come to affect us.  
Among some of the development plans that the Chairperson has indicated  is that the Company  has 
a plan to do projects worth a bout Kshs 5.5 . If these projects will be funded or serviced by loans at 
the exploit of the people of Nakuru , then I think we need to get to the bottom of these loans Mr. 
Speaker . There is another glaring matter that the Chairperson mentioned on the unreconciled Kshs . 
94. 3 Million . I felt very perturbed and in the reply from the  Management , they quoted and said 
that it was a typing err or yet from the Auditor General  it is not reflecting within the major accounts 
and the major Statements.  
I am reminded of May 5th, 2008 when the former President  then the Minister of Finance  claimed 
that there was a “computer error”  that incurred a Supplementary Budget with an increase of Kshs 
120 million dollars. Is this the same case that we are having in Nakuru County and more so in 
NAWASCO? These are things that make  many Nations  and Counties fail . There are some springs 
that have been quoted by my Chair person  and when I am told that springs, wells and boreholes 
have been dug then I wonder how do you dig a spring Mr. Speaker ?  
A spring  for those who did Geography in form one, is a natural exit of water where the water is 
oozing out of the ground from an aquifer that is just below th e rock. So,  when they tell us that they 
are digging a spring then I think it is only Jesus Christ who can save us from such things. I am of 
the opinion that the Report  is very good , having that the Committee is bringing its first Report  here 
but as a County we need to be very much agile in what we do.   
Water is a resource that supports life and without taking this urgency into account , then we shall 
fail Nakuru as a city. This morning I welcomed Members from Kiambu County and I told them 
that they are sandwiched by two cities, the Nairobi and the great city of Nakuru Count y and we 
must set precedence here. Thank you. I  support the Report  but with recommendations as stated.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. On my right, the last Honorable Member, the 
Member from Maai Mahiu then we cross over to the left side.  
Hon. Eliud Kamau:  Thank you Mr. Speaker  Sir for giving me this opportunity. First,  I would like 
to recommend the Committee on P ublic Accounts and Investments .  As a County of Nakuru and 
the honorable  Members of this House we know very well that the most crucial thing and the biggest 
agenda we have is water , Nakuru is unique in some way because we do not have service water. 
We depend on boreholes and if we are not careful with these Water Companies they might lead us 
to a mess. In page 14 minute 218, they ar e saying that they produced 13,358,950 cubic meters of 
which they only billed 9  130 940 cubic meters and 328  257 551 went unbilled.  
You should look at that deficit because that is almost 32% of unbilled water. If you talk about 32% 
of water is unbilled then that becomes an issue of great concern. If you go to the same page that is 
page 13, they are talking about uncounted money for fuel.  They lost fuel worth Kshs 3 219 256. 
Although in the recommendation s they are saying that the matter is in court  but if this is the route 
that is going to be taken by all other Water Companies, then I think we are going in the wrong 
direction.  
Mr. Speaker, i n the Committee recommendation s, they should question the Leadership of those 
Companies  because they say that the lost fuel was caused by  employees and a Leader should take 
full responsibility. We are not talking of employees stealing water worth hundreds of thousands 
yet we are talking of stolen fuel worth Kshs 3 Million.  As much as they are saying that this matter 
is in court, I feel that the problem is the Leadership of these Water Companies and if as a House 
we are going to adopt this Report as it is , then we will be throwing our County  into a pit and for 
us to come out of it, it might take years.  
Mr. Speaker, w hat I am seeing here is , they are talking about our Water Services Companies and 
Rift Valley Waters ; what are the demarcations between the two ? Because it looks like a game 
between our Water Services Companies and Rift Valley Water ; and that is a trend in other Water 
Companies. When you go question them they only blame Rift Valley Waters . How are these 
services  demarcated?  In one of their recommendations they are saying that some of the projects 
are not given back to our Water Body Services. There should be a clear line between the Rift 
Valley Water and County Water Companies. This Report  should be looked at in another way.  It 
requires an extension where as a  County we need to look at this Report  before we allocate more 
funds  to these  people. They must first be responsible for the ones we have given them. Thank you  
Mr. Speaker  for giving me th is chance.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Member for Maai Mahiu. The Hon. Member 
for Eburu.  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I also wish to support the Report  but with a 
few amendments. To begin with, I would go to the Committee recommendation on page 12 where 
they are recommending in clause one that the County Government should put a plan to pay the 
Kshs .215 Million owed but in the Second Clause they are saying that the Company Management  
should make a provision for bad and doubtful debts owed by dormant customers. You realis e that 
in clause one, we are calling  the defunct Municipal Council of Nakuru then in clause two , we are 
saying that we should be given wha t we are calling bad debt defunct Institutions . I think that is 
contradictory.  
Secondly  Mr. Speaker , given what we are reali sing from the Finance Audit, I would also wish to 
recommend for an overall audit where you will audit the Supply Line, the Customer Register , the 
Human Resource and also the  Store because if they are stealing fuel , we are not sure whether the 
pipes and other repair materials are also safe. Finally  Mr. Speaker , I believe because we have seen 
that the Company  is handling a lot of  funds and a resource that has interest of Nakuru City, I would 
also wish to recommend that the Committee or the  Management  of these Companies  be brought 
through the Assembly for vetting and also approval as we move forward. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Member for Eburu -Mbaruk . The Hon. 
Member for Kivumbini.  
Hon. Neto Sakwa : Thank you Mr. Speaker  for giving me this opportunity. I stand as a Committee 
Member for P ublic Accounts and Investments  and also in support of this Report . There are some 
observations that honorable  Members are coming up with and within our Report  we have 
highlighted some observations and some recommendations. This is not the first time a Report  on 
Nakuru Water and Sanitation Company is coming to the flow of this House, we have had some 
other Report  before this Committee came in place and there were also some recommendations.  
Mr. Speaker, t he Auditor General  had some queries and when we were examining the Officer s 
responsible , we found that some of the observations that honorable  Members are coming up with 
are the same observations that were there before some other Committees and some 
recommendations were done during that time. During that time Non-Revenue Water was almost 
above 30%. There were some recommendations that were done to the same Companies and now 
we can see that when the Auditor General  was giving this Report , Non-Revenue Water should be 
at 25% and when this Report  came, Non-Revenue Water is now at 28% . So, we can support and 
say that the Nakuru Water and Sanitation Company has been putting our  recommendations into 
action . Now that Non- Revenue Water  is at 28%, I urge Members to adopt this this Report  and 
leave some recommendations then we shall do something about the 3% Non-Revenue Water that 
is getting lost and also those customers that still have some areas of dissatisfaction.  
Mr. Speaker, d uring our observations , we captured that 1,600 consumers  had meters which were 
not seriali sed. Our observations and our recommendations are on the same lines. We are 
recommending the Water Company to come up with strong debt measures and mechanisms to 
collect debts owed by active accounts.  
Mr. Speaker, t he installation of Smart Meters was good to curb Non-Revenue Waters, install 
Meters for unmetered  Customers and bill customers through digital systems. All these measures 
we are coming up with as a Committee are in line with the Audit Q ueries from the Auditor General  
and it will help strengthen the working relationship of this Company  and the complains that are on 
the ground. As I sit down , I still support that if these recommendations  are not  followed to the 
latter we will bring the same  Audit Q ueries or the same questions that  honorable Members are still 
coming up with . So, honorable  Members we had observations  and we had recommendations. 
Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Nakuru East.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Thank you Mr. Speaker  for giving me this opportunity to give my input 
on the Report . First and foremo st is to commend the good work done by this great Committee , and 
of concern to me is the issue about the bad debt or the pending bills. If you critically look at what 
has been provided as the pending Water bills amounting to  Kshs . 245 Million,  a big chunk of that 
money amounting to Kshs 215 703 000 emanated from the defunct Municipal Council so it is upon 
this honorable  House to come up with measures that are going to deal with the Balance Sheet 
because as we all know,  we have the duty to appropriate money.  
Mr. Speaker, f or the betterment of the Books of such a Compan y, as a House we need to come up 
with recommendations or regulations to see how we are going to address the bad debts. It has been 
tabulated here what each and every Department owes and it is now like ten or eleven years since 
we had the Nakuru County G-overnment. If you look at it we only have 29 million coming from 
Nakuru government so as a House we have the duty of seeing how we are going to address the 
issue of the unpaid water bills. I understand the ownership of Nakuru Water and Sanitation Service 
Water Company (NAWASCO) 100% belongs to the Nakuru County government so it is upon this 
House to come up with measures that will help address this issue. Having said that I am a little bit 
disturbed by what has been highlighted by the Committee on a lot of seepage of funds. We have 
been told that money to a tune of Three Million is lost in terms of fuel and the unbilled water.  
I recommend that the Management  of Nakuru Water to come up with measures and to tell this 
House how they are going to address such issues and also non-digiti sed Meters . We are now in the 
digital era so they should come up with a way they can get rid of non -digiti sed meters. There was 
also an issue on Disaster Management  that was highlighted during the COVID 19 period. They 
lost a lot money and also as a Country we are going to face El Niño very soon and it is going to 
affect the Water Infrastructure so even the Company should tell us the measures th at they have put 
in place to address such issues. From what I understand the statue that formed this Water 
Companies have  no aspect of profit making. They are supposed to do service delivery and also to 
help on the last mile, those people who have not been connected to water. Something that is of 
great concern to me is that in Nakuru City there are many people especially in my ward who have 
not been connected to the water from NAWASCO. The NAWASCO Company should tell us the 
measures they have put so as to connect those people who have not been connected to their grid 
since they purport to be in the city but most of them depen d on rain water and some water we do 
not even know its source. I want to support this Report  with some few recommendations that has 
been highlighted by most of the Members. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Member for Nakuru East , Hon Kanyere. The 
Hon. Leader of Majority party then later the Hon. Kajwang then the chairperson will respond. 
What is it the Hon. Kajwang?  
Hon. Peter Kajwang: Mr. Speaker  if you allow then I could go before the Majority Leader. He is 
the senior most and I think if he makes his last recommendation…  
(Laughter ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! Order! The Hon. Majority leader.  
The Majority Leader  (Hon.  Alex Langat): Thank you Mr. Speaker . I rise to make my contribution 
first as a Member of this Hon orable  House and before I do that allow me to also recogni se the 
Pupils  who come from Crater View Ngata , which is part of the area I represent. I just want to 
welcome them and encourage them to continue working hard so that God will continue blessing 
them and they can be able to sit in such an Honorable House. Together with the Teachers and all 
the Staff  that are around , kindly feel very much welcomed.  
Mr. Speaker, l et me also take this opportunity to welcome the honorable Members who have 
visited this House . On behalf o f County Assembly  of Nakuru , kindly feel welcome. I want to thank 
the Committee that after a long time , they sat and worked on this great Report . I have taken time 
to conceptuali se what  the Committee has written and the findings they made. My only worry about 
the Report  is that there are very many recommendations that have been done. I want to believe 
that when a Report  comes to this House basically it should continue being active so that it will not 
end up lying somewhere in the shelves and I hope major actions are taken on it.  
Mr. Speaker, i n my view, the way to make it active is to attach it to workable plans so that we can 
follow up on the Report  as a House. In  Research, there is something that we call  SMART and any 
Report  should conform to the principles  of SMART.  This Report  is Measurable and what is 
missing  is just one thing , Time bound on recommendation. We have seen very good 
recommendation s and the  Management  should apply this. It should put Systems in place and work 
on issues to do with recovery of debts. Most of our Report s are not time bound. My 
recommendation as I support the Report  is... 
Hon. Isaac Rottok: Point of order Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What order Honorable Rottok?  
Hon. Isaac Rottok : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think the School  that has been mentioned that is 
Crater View Academy is in Menengai West , not in Mosop  as the Hon orable  Member said. Thank 
you. 
(Laughter! ) 
The Majority Leader (Hon.Alex Langat): That was a point of Information. Okay , thank you Mr. 
Speaker . We will not , through the Chair , fight for the votes over Institution . We will let the 
Honorable  Member have his time for now but later on  Mr. Speaker  I will find out where the school  
is located.  
So Mr. Speaker, I was actually saying that w e attach our recommendations to a time frame  so that 
we can follow up a Report  that we when pass as a  House , we can go back and instill some action 
so as to save the resources that are being lost. We can increase efficiency in service delivery of  
Water to this great County. So as I support, in  most of the recommendations , there are few that 
have given us their time frame . Therefore, t his Committee can add a timeframe like for how long  
or by when do we really want to see the recommende d changes done so that we can go back to the 
same Company  as a House without even the Auditor General ’s Report  and find out whether they 
have taken the recommendations of this House  seriously or they would to make a nice story and 
for them to be able to just shelf it and put it somewhere and say it was passed in the Assembly;  the 
Assembly has heard us.  
We need more action after the Report  has been passed in this Assembly and what can attach that 
one is when we really expect some of these recommendations that are doable to be implemented 
and by a set time frame . Thank you , Mr. Speaker, I support.  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Thank you the Majority Leader. Hon orable  Member for 
Kaptembwa . 
Hon. Peter Kajwang : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I stand to appraise this Committee for the work 
well done. I think they made very good observations based  on the Report  that was brought, the 
Management  Response and the queries that emanated from the Auditor General .  
Mr. Speaker, Just to retaliate on what the Majority Leader said , is that when we are looking on the 
recommendations we should actually insist on timelines , and this is a call for the Implementation 
Committee that these recommendations should not just end here in papers. The Implementation 
Committee should also come with a program on how to give closures on recommendations that 
have come from previous Committ ees on issue that have been raised on the flo or of this House.  
Mr. Speaker, o ne thing that has  been coming up from the Report s emanating from P ublic Accounts 
and Investments  Committee (PAIC) is that this Committee , and I am speaking as a fo rmer 
Chairman of this Committee,  I appreciate th e worklo ad that this Committee has. Mr. Speaker, It 
is impossible for lack of any other description for this Committee to implement its work effectively 
if it is not properly facilitated , and also given enough time ; otherwise we will be getting copy paste 
of recommendations and observations of so many Report s that are bestowed upon this Committee.  
Mr. Speaker, t his Committee is taking care of two aspects. There is Public Accounts ( PAC ) and 
there is the  Public Investments  (PIC), and my recommendation Mr. Speaker, is that this  House 
might now consider splitting this Committee into two Committees so that we have PAC to deal 
with issues of the Auditor General  and we have PIC to deal with the issues of Investments s, 
because we are seeing that as D evolution matures , we are seeing Investments s are also increasing 
day by day and from Counties.  
So Mr. Speaker, the  Chair man did not want to say, because we are here and i t is one year down 
the line,  this is the first Report  we are receiving in the flo or of the House. We have been expect ing 
that we should have dealt with more than twenty Report s from the same Committee. But it is 
impossible if you ask me, for this Committee to deal with these so many Report s. The meagre 
resources  that I am sure they are dealing with, we will be having a Committee  that probably is just 
a Talk Show and not a Committee that is able to execute duties for the benefit of this County .  
Mr. Speaker a s I wind up, I want to say that NAWASCO has improved greatly because a few years 
ago NAWASCO was at forty something percent with water that was not billed , which was a very 
bad. If you look at today’s Report that  NAWASCO is now posting 28%, and you know the global 
recommended percentag e of the unbilled water is 25%, then I think it is a matter that we need to 
applaud this  Company for having  improved tremendously .  
Mr. Speaker, l ast week in my residence I did not have water for three day , and when I inquired 
they told me that they had just replaced my old line with a new line. My old line was depleted so 
they had replaced it with the new line . That means that the Company  is now concentrating in new 
infrastructural Investments  to improve water supply. That is a very big plus for the NAWASCO ; 
let them keep it up.  We want to see them at 25% and even come down  to around 20% , because in 
other Counties like Kericho, right now  it is at 18% which is highly recommendable. So, I think 
there is still  room  for improvement and NAWASCO should take that challenge to get us to that 
level.  
Otherwise  Mr. Speaker , I want to say that the Committee did a good job but the burden is too much 
on them . This is just NAWASCO ; they have not shown us what is happening in NAIVAWASCO, 
NARUWASCO and this is just a Report  of one Financial Year. Just imagine all th ose Financial 
Years accumulated. Mr. Speaker  we need to do something to help this Committee to deliver. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon orable  Member for Menengai West. Since 
there was a question as to whether Crater View Academy is in Mosop Ward or Menengai West 
and already the Leader of the Majority Party has gone ahead to welcome the school  so the Member 
for Menengai Wes;  he has gone out? Is there a further conte ntion around that?  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Langat): Thank you Mr. Speaker , I would like to make the 
Member of Menengai West a bit comfortable. He is actually my neighbo ur; and if you read my 
English very well , I said that I am welcoming the students  from Mosop Ward who are in Crater 
View Academy . So, we are neighbo urs. The school  is physically in Menengai but I donate most 
of the  students  from Mosop Ward . They just cross the road to the other side . So Mr. Speaker, there 
is no much conte ntion, and  I have many  of my Mosop pupils  up there so I was only welcoming 
them being their Leader in Mosop but the school  is owned by the Hon orable  Member and I really 
want him to be comfortable so that we do not fight for votes. Thank you  Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. It is now clear that physically the school  is in 
Menengai West but then the school  could mean the pupils , so if they came from whatever part of 
the County whether Menengai East or even Nakuru,  the Leaders are at will to welcome th e pupils  
who go to school  in that particula r institution. The Chairperson.  
Hon. Simon Kamau : Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. I want to take this opportunity to take the 
comments from all the Hon orable  Members positively because I believe every Hon orable  Member 
who has spoken here has talked with an interest of his or her Wanjiku  at heart and therefore I want 
to take all of them positively and maybe to put some of these comments into perspective.  
Mr. Speaker, t he question that was raised by Hon orable  Isabella from Subukia about the  Kshs. 215 
Million  that is supposed to be paid or a request was put by the Management  of this NAWASCO 
that this Kshs 215 million be paid by the County Government of Nakuru , is emanating from the 
defunct Municipal Council. So w hen I talked  to the Managing Director NAWASCO, he was 
making a plea to the County Assembly if it is possible for them to offset this , otherwise if it is not 
done then it will keep reccurring as an Audit  Query because as per what he was saying , they are 
not ready to offset these loans that were accrued from the Defunct Municipal Council .  
I am also praying and begging if it is possible and if this Hon orable  House finds it fit they can help 
and the Chair person  Budget Committee  is here. If he can see it fit to appropriate some of these 
monies  to offset it because at the end of the day as long as we put measures . this money , and I 
want to assure the Chair Budget  that I am going to be very strict on this to ensure that the Kshs. 
215 Million that is going to be allocated to NAWASCO will be put into proper use and it is going 
to help Wanjiku.  He m ight not be coming from Nakuru but I believe that the services of 
NAWASCO are extending all the way to Naivasha where he is. Therefore,  it is going to benefit 
his Wanjiku.  This is a humble plea from the Managing Director of NAWASCO.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Chairperson, the Member for Lake View Ward who is 
the Chairperson Budget, is it information or new information?  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  [On a point of Information] . Mr. Speaker  it is a point of information that I 
am a bona fide citizen of Nakuru County and I come from Nakuru County. He has stated that I do 
not come from Nakuru.  
Hon. Simon Kamau : Agreed and point taken Mr. Speake r. So Hon. Duale  is the Honorable 
Member from Mosop Ward, and I want to agree with him that s omething need s to be done as far 
as AfDB is concerned. This was a loan that was given to this Water Company through  Central Rift 
Water Development Agency and it is a major concern even to the Management  of NAWASCO. 
When we were interrogating those people,  they told the Committee that they are paying a loan of 
Kshs 1billion for a period of 20 years so this is a lot of money and I agree that something needs to 
be done in as far as this loan is concerned.  
There are high bills as raised by Hon orable  Duale  again, and  I want to agree with him and say that 
this is happening even where we are coming from. The Managing Director  assured us that they are 
working on it to see that they are going to bring down the rate of these bills. The shortage of water 
is another issue that was raised by Hon orable  Duale . If the Water Management  is going to keenly 
look into our recommendations then they will be able to curb the shortage of water and it will 
become a thing of the pa st.  
There was also a question that was raised by Hon. Rose from Gilgil about the delayed replacement 
of breakages. I want to agree with her that th e Management  of NAWASCO needs to go with speed 
because the longer they take the more the loss of water through leakages and of course this will 
contribute to losses. So  I agree with honourable Rose that so mething needs to be done to ensure 
that whenever there is a breakage , it should be sorted as soon as possible to avoid losing a lot of 
water.  
There were questions that were raised by Hon. Alex , Chair Budget Committee and I  want to correct 
myself  from the onset.  I did say that some of these mon ies that were given by the AfDB were  used 
to acquire some of the assets and these assets include 8 Boreholes and Water Treatment Plants . 
We have 3 Boreholes in Kabatini, 2 Boreholes and Wells  in Baharini , in Free Area  and Honorable 
Members from these areas can confirm these assets are within their Wards .  
Another thing that the loan was used for is the expansion of the  Sewer network within the  City and 
he highlighted some of the areas that is one near Woolmart, Kipanga Way , and Mwariki  Njoro 
Sewerage Treatment Plant . These are some of the assets that were acquired using the  Kshs 1 Billion 
so it is good for this Committee to highlight before the House so that the Members can confirm 
that this one exists .  
I was curious to ask if maybe they could tell us the price of all these and maybe the amount of 
money that was used to install the same but they were hesitant and they said that they cannot tell 
because it was way back when the Management  of NAWASCO was different. Something else that 
was raised by Hon. Kamau from Maai Mahiu is that these people are at 32% and I want to say this  
Mr. Speaker that , I can just confirm as the Chair of PAIC that this Committee is really trying. The 
Managing Director told the Comm ittee that they have moved all the way from 50%, they have 
closed that gap and the current situation is at 28% and the recommended percentage is 25% from 
the Water Se rvice Regulatory Board (WASREB); so we can confirm that they have not reached 
there yet but they are really trying. They are at 28% from 50% and w e believe as Hon orable  
Kajwang has said , as time goes by , maybe they are going to even surpas s Kericho County who are 
at 16%, if I got the Hon orable  Member right.  
The same Hon. Member from Maai Mahiu r aised the issue of a court case;  the fuel theft syndicate 
that was raised by the Office of the Auditor General , but this a matter that is in Court and I  want 
to request the Hon ourable  Members that we desist from commenting on something that is in Court . 
I asked the Managing Director if the case is active and the answer was yes and he told me the 
mention is supposed to happen in the Month of October. Let us wait for the outcome then we shall 
act from that point.  
I want to agree with Hon. Gathanwa that if there is a theft syndicate of fuel then the pipe s can even 
be worse and something  has to be done in as far as reviewing the Pipe Network is concerned. 
Honorable Anthony Kanyere raised an issue on the  Kshs. 3  million fuel theft syndicate but we 
have said that this is a matter that is active in  Court and maybe as of now we can desist from 
discussing about it until when it is going to be mentioned and maybe a ruling is going to be made 
by the  Cour t.  
Then, Non-digiti sed Meters  was again raised by Hon orable  Member from Nakuru Town East. I 
want to agree , and that is some of the intervention measures that the Managing Director 
NAWASCO is putting in place. I believe that one is going to happen and is going to change,  as 
we interrogate them  in the subsequent years.  So, Honorable  Kajwang  has spoken about the 
timelines and I want to agree that this is the first Report that  we are presenting before  the House 
as a Committee of Public Accounts but we did highlight some of the problems that we are going 
through and I believe the Hon orable  Speaker  is here and he has gotten and taken note of the same. 
If we are facilitated as the Hon orable  Member has said , then we are ready and we are equal to the 
task to bring even up to ten Report s and present them to the House , if we  are facilitated.  
Mr. Speaker, a gain, I do not want to take the role of the Speaker , it is the prerogative of the Speaker  
to know whether PAC and PIC is supposed to be split into two. We are going to leave that work 
to the Speaker  to know whether that is possible. I have no objection as the Chair  for Public 
Accounts and Investments  Committee ( PA&IC), if it is going to be in the interest of the House. If 
we are going to have proper service delivery to the House and to Wanjiku when PAIC is split into 
two then who am I as the Chair  of PIAC to object. Hon orable  Kajwang, we leave that to the 
Speaker . If the Committee will be well facilitated as Hon orable  Kajwang is saying , then I am sure 
we are the Committee who will be providing the business of the House often.  
Lastly  Mr. Speaker , I want to conquer with Hon ourable  Lang ’at the Majority Leader who has said 
that all these recommendations need  to have a timeline and as the Chair we are going to look into 
it to ensure that we put a time frame to each and every recommendation. There are some of the 
recommendations that w e have put a time frame and  said that by the 30th of this year we are 
supposed to have gotten a feedback from the Water Company. If you allow us we are going to 
insert timelines to other recommendations so as to set the ball rolling. After we have presented this 
Report  to the House, I  want to request the Hon orable  Member from Turi who is the Chair 
Implementation  Committee to take up the matter so that this Report  is implemented and with that  
Mr. Speaker , I beg the House to adopt the Report .  
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Chair. I am going to put it to question.  
(Question proposed that this House adopts the Report  of the Committee on County Public 
Accounts and Investments  on the Report  of the Auditor General  on the Financial Statements of 
the Nakuru Water and Sanitation Services Company Limited  of Nakuru  County for the year 
ended 30th June, 2021 that was laid before the table of the Assembly on Wednesday, 20th 
September, 2023 during the morning Plenary.)  
(Question put and agreed to)  
 Next order.  
 Hon. Michael Gathanwa : Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it the Hon. Member for Eburu Baruk?  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa : Mr. Speaker , I am rising on Standing Order 36 on Adjournment o n 
definite matter of Urgent County Importance.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Eburu, allow the Majority Leader…What 
is it the L eader of the Majority Party ? 
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Langat): Thank you Mr. Speaker , I am aware about the matter 
of the County Importance that the Hon orable  Member wants to raise. However, when I look at my 
watch I realis e that the normal sittings of this Assembly are supposed to end at 12:30 pm. In view 
of what the Hon orable  Member , and I do not want to pre-empt what he wants to raise,  my 
assumption is that the remaining few minutes will not be adequate for this Hon orable  House to 
listen and to debate on whatever matter the Hon orable  Member wants to raise.  
So Mr. Speaker, I wish to state that pursuant to our Standing Order 33  (3), and because the Standing 
Order s give us the ability to extend the hours, that this Hon orable  House extends its sitting time 
from the normal 12:30 pm to at least 1:30 pm so that we can have  adequate time to listen to this 
matter of County Importance. With that Mr. Speaker  I want to request someone to second and to 
allow us to extend the normal sittings so that we are in tandem with our Standing Orders. Allow 
me to request Hon orable  Hassan to second the extension of the sitting hours. Thank you.  
Hon. Ali Hassan : Thank you Mr. Speaker , I wish to second the matter that is before the House.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Leader of the Majority Party  and the Hon orable  
Member, Hassan who has seconded. I am going to put it to question.  
(Question proposed that pursuant to the Standing Orders 33 (3), that this House extends its 
sitting hours to 1:30pm. ) 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 The Hon. Member for Eburu Baruk.  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa : Thank you Mr. Speaker . On 19th of September that is Tuesday of last 
week in the eveni ng a young girl  by the name Jasmine  Njoki Wambugu was heading home from 
school  at around 4pm…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Eburu Baruk , is it a Motion? You earlier 
said that it is Standing Order No. ( 36) matter of County Importance . Do you have Members 
supporting that? You could …  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa : Yes Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Clerk confirm if the support threshold is sufficient.  
(The Clerk co unts the Members standing in support and affirms ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): It is sufficient. The Hon. Member for Eburu you can proceed 
with the matter.  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa : Thank you Mr. Speaker  and the Members. I was talking about J asmine 
Njoki Wambugu, a young 12-year-old girl Grade Six pupil , that on 19th of September that is 
Tuesday of last week as she was heading home from  school  she was kidnapped , raped , sodomi sed 
and assaulted . The assailant s then left her soa king in their semen and her own blood and ended up 
being killed  in cold blood. Mr. Speaker, I would wish that we take this opportunity to seek justice  
for Jasmine  and also to reassure the students  that I see we have in the plenary today that we are 
going seek for justice and at the same time push for security measures to be put in place for our 
students  to feel safe.  
Mr. Speaker, Jasmine was the first -born child of a young family of Mr. Francis Wambogo and his 
wife. They had really struggled to get a second born for the last 12 years and  were able to get a 
second born this year because she is just six months old and unfortunately in the same year, the 
life of the first born of their womb was ruthlessly taken by… I do not know what to call them Mr. 
Speaker.  I wish to take this opportunity to request that the security apparatus in Nakuru give us an 
assurance that they are going to do investigations to make sure t hat no stone is left unturned. Also  
make sure that the Family is accorded  justice for Jasmine and also probably a Report  on the same 
to be tabled.  
That was my request and also as we send her condolences we can get an assurance from the 
Security Agency and also from the school s that they are going to be ensuring that students  who 
leave home are well monitored and tracked until they get home.  
Also, at the same time, a call to parents to make sure tha t they monitor and track their c hildren on 
their way to and from school , and whenever  they are out with the public. It is a  touching story , it 
is quite disheartening and that is why we are considering it a matter o f County Importance. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker , 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the floor is open for comments; the Honorable 
Member for Elementaita Hon orable Nene . 
Hon. George Nene : Thank you Mr. Speaker  I am in support of my neighbour Hon. Gath anwa 
from the Eburu -Mbaruk Ward,  following a Motion that he has laid before this House of a young 
girl, who had plans and who had goals to achieve. However, her ambitions were cut short  by 
criminals Mr. Speaker . I want to condole with the family because of losing their firstborn and I 
want to support that as an Honorable Member of Nakuru County, we need to be on the first line to 
seek for justice for this young girl. Thank you Mr. Speaker , 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, The Hon. Dorcas Gathere  
Hon. Dorcas Gathere : Thank you Mr. Speaker  for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this 
unfortunate event that happened in Eburu -Mbaruk. It is very unfortunate that a young school -going 
girl can be raped and killed; and one week down the line, nobody has been arrested and we wonder 
if our children are safe, and w ill this girl get  justice? So, we condemn this act in the strongest terms  
possible and ask our Security Operators to move with speed to give this girl justice. Thank you  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Doreen . 
Hon. Doreen Korir : Thank you so much Mr. Speaker  for giving me this opportunity, I also rise 
to support the Honorable Member from Ebur u-Mbaruk Ward on the issue of the rape case that 
happened on the 19th. Mr. Speaker  sir this story is so disheartening and it is so sad, as a Mother  of 
a young girl, I also have a girl who is eight years old and I can try to imagine how sad , I cannot 
imagine  the pain the parent s of this girl are going through. We call for justice for Jasmine and call 
on the Security apparatus in this County, this has been the trend and this is not the first time that 
we are encountering such a rape issue. I just pray that these acts , I do not know even how to 
describe; it is disheartening. So, these crimi nals should be brought to book and also the Security 
apparatus in this Count y should come up with a  way that the  school -going kids are protected.  
 We are not sure of our kids’  safety when they leave home. So, I do support that we condemn this 
act and also come up with a way of solving this issue once and for all. We have had so many cases 
where we have lost young girls and in most of these sexual assault cases issues , it is estimated that 
91% are female while  the male victims are at 9 %. So Mr. Speaker  sir, as a woman, I call upon the 
Security  Apparatuses and also the Investigating  Agencies  to do a thorough investigation on this 
matter so that  justice for Jasmine is served. Thank you Mr . Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; on this note, we recogni se the presence of Hon orable  
Members from Kiambu Assembly and we want to invite the Hon orable  Member Kung’u Smart, if 
you would just make a comment on the matter at the floor of the House and then later we are going 
to excuse you.  
Hon. Kung’u Wanjiku  (Visiting Kiamwangi Ward MCA , Kiambu County ): Thank you very much 
Hon. Speaker ; for the records, my name is Kung’u Smart Wanjiku representing the great people 
of Kiamwangi Ward in Gatundu South, Kiambu County and a Member of Welfare Committee , 
which brought us here for Benchmarking .  
Mr. Speaker , I would not like to comment much but I will urge Members  of this Assembly to take 
that matter seriously, let us have a healthy debate and we pray that we will get justice because it is 
all on Social Media, we have seen and heard about that incident; thank you very much Hon orable  
Member for bringing up that issue.  
We would like to take this chance to thank you, the Hon orable  Members and the entire Leadership  
of this great County of Nakuru. We had come here for  Benchmarking and would like to say that 
we have learnt a lot from you and we believe that the insight that we have shared and the 
connections that we have made here today, will be of great benefit to our two  Counties and that it 
will bring benefit and positive impact.  
Mr. Speaker  once again, thank you so much for having us, we truly appreciate and we look forward 
to staying in touch with this great Assembly. We would like to excuse ourselves because of the 
business we have and so with your permission, when we step out, kindly allo w us. Thank you, 
very much honorable  Membe rs and Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Member for Kiamwangi, thank you for 
visiting us, we invite you again to the Nakuru County Assembly, thank you for visiting with us. 
The Hon. Member for Shabaab and the Hon Member Hassan from Rongai in that order.  
Hon. David Macharia : Thank you Mr Speaker , nashukuru kwa kupata hii nafasi. Kwa kweli hili 
janga ambalo lilifanyika pale Eburu -Mbaruk  limetia Kaunti yetu huzuni sana. Nikiongea kama 
mzazi, kweli nilipo kea hiyo Ripoti Bwana  Spika kwa huzuni sana, k wa sababu watoto wetu 
wanabebwa na hizi basi wanapelekwa nyumbani na sisi tukitoka kazini, tunataka kufika pale 
nyumbani tunakuta  pia wao wamefika nyumbani. Ni jambo la huzuni na mimi nitaomba jamii ya 
Eburu - Mbaruk  na watu wote wa huo mtaa, kama kanisa wakiwa pale kwa kijiji watakuja kujua 
kuna mtu aliyefanya hi cho kitendo na w achukue hi lo jukumu la kuchuku a huyo mshukiwa 
wamp atie kichapo kabla wamfikishe polisi wakuwe wamemfanyia justice  kabla apelekwe polisi 
Mr. Speaker , kwa sababu, huyu msichana alikuwa na maisha yake marefu sana na yalikatizwa 
mara moja. Na yeye si muumba Mbingu yule ali yekatiza maisha ya yule mtoto. Tunaomba  polisi 
waendelee kufanya kazi yao na tunaombea pia wasaidiane na wana kijiji ndio justice  ipatikane. 
Asante sana  Bwana Spika.  
Hon. Ali Hassan : Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker . Allow me to send my sincere condolences 
to the family of Jasmine and the people of Eburu Mbaruk for this heinous act that has been done 
to one Jasmine. As the Chair of Security in this Assembly and of course, we have no resources to 
work and set out our mandate clearly; but I want to send this message from this Assembly that we 
are not happy with Security Agencies for what they are doing in Nakuru. This is a very serious 
matter; this is not a small matter and also as a father of two girls, I am not even sure that the 
security of my girls is assured  when they go to school .  
Mr. Speaker , I want to ask the Security Apparatus that they should work with speed  and make sure 
that the perpetrators of this act are brought to book. This is because for other small girls that are 
going to school , their security is not guaranteed and we also want to ask the Security Agencies , 
please the surveillance of security of all school  going children , not only girls, but also  boys , their 
security should be guaranteed.  It is paramount , and it  is disheartening that this is happening in 
Nakuru. Nakuru is a City that is known to be safe but if this is happening to our girls, it tells you 
that it is no longer safe.  
Mr. Speaker , we ask the community of Eburu -Mbaruk , or areas around the school  to work with 
the Security Agencies to make sure these suspects are brought to book. Having said that, I also 
join my honorable  colleagues in asking for justice for Jasmine. We are not going to relent nor sit 
down until justice is served for  Jasmine. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the Hon. Member for Malewa -West  
Hon. Francis Kuria:   Thank you Mr. Speaker ; first of all, I would urge the Hon orable  Member 
for Eburu -Mbaruk to take our condolences to the family of Jasmine and it is very sad Honorable 
Speaker  losing a young beautiful girl at that tender age. Mr. Speaker, s ecurity needs to be enhanced 
in our society . And because today we happen to have school children  amongst us , we ask them to 
be vigilant and be weary of strangers.  
Therefore, as Security Committee together with and our  Chair , we are going to have meetings so 
that we can make sure that security is enhanced in our County  and that everything will run 
smoothly. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; this is a very emotive matter and eventually, we are 
going to allow every Member  to contribute. At this point , the Hon. Cynthia Mukami . 
Hon. Cynthia Mukami : Thank you Mr. Speaker  for giving me this opportunity to pass my 
condolences to the Hon. MCA Eburu -Mbaruk. It is very crucial for us  to speak up against child 
rape;  it is very sad that something like this can happen at 4 o’clock ; in broad daylight ! It is 
important that we speak up and let people know  how evil it is and that it is unacceptable and if 
possible, once these criminals are arrested, they should be brought to us and we should do whatever 
we want to do with them … 
(Laughter ) 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order ! 
Hon. Cynthia Mukami : …and do justice to the people. Thank you . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel K aruri): The Hon. Cynthia Mukami, when criminals are arrested , the 
most obvious place for them to call home  would be a Police Station.  
So now, h ow would that be?  
Hon. Cynthia Mukami : Mr. Speaker , once they are arrested we can find them there.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you kindly sum up; you are through: Thank you we had 
to cut you . It is very emotive but then there is a Justice System that is clarified that we may not be 
able to go  above  it. However, after this, the Member  for Eburu -Mbaruk and other Hon orable  
Members, you may want to agree, not  to proceed with that , and have the matter and your voices 
be most heard. Of course in ways that you know best. The Hon orable  Member for Lake View, 
then the Hon orable  Member for Maai Mahiu and then the Hon. Wamaitha in that order.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . It is such a sad afternoon when you imagine that 
someone’s daughter, maybe a future Queen, a future President has just been wiped out of this 
planet. It is very disheartening and more so I look at the Gallery and I  see young girls and young 
boys who are prone to such attacks. Mr. Speaker, i t is high time that our Security Agencies took 
note of such heinous crimes. Nakuru County has always been known to cater for young girls and 
to promote the girls within our community.  
Mr. Speaker, h ow come we have lost our values as a Count y? that we dismantle, we do such 
heinous acts to such young girls? We are speaking for all the ladies within the  Country ; we are 
also speaking for all the young boys and men within this  Country . It is time that this Country  came 
back to its senses, we are a God -fearing Country  and we must protect Children. In my Ward, three 
days ago, a young student  was attacked by a hippo on his way back home from school  and to this 
time the KWS has not addressed that and yet the young man lies in I ntensive Care Unit (ICU) .  
Mr. Speaker, w here are we headed if we cannot protect the sanctity of life? I support that  Motion 
and urge Members  who will be free tomorrow when the Member informs us to attend that funeral 
to castigate that heinous act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker  sir. 
Hon. Eliud Chege : Asante Bwana Spika  kwa kunipatia nafasi hii. Kwanza nitoe pole zangu kwa 
famili a hiyo kwa sababu ya kuachwa na mtoto wo.  Mheshjimiwa Spika , ni jambo la huzuni na la 
kusikitisha sana kuona ya kwamba mtoto mdogo wa umri huo aliye  na maono na ndoto kubwa 
anaweza zimwa na maisha yake yanaweza malizwa kwa njia ya kinyama k ama hiyo. Ni jambo la 
huzuni Kenya ambayo tuko leo , ya kwamba kuna watoto  wako hapa, nia yao kubwa na kesho yao 
kubwa ni kuona ya kwamba wamebadilisha taifa hili lakini kama njia hii itapitiwa, Bw ana Spika, 
naona ni jambo ambalo litaweka watoto wetu kwa huzuni.  
Mimi mwenyewe nikiwa baba mzazi wa wasichana, nasiki a moyo wangu unaumia ; siwezi kujua 
jambo  hilo niweze kutafakari jinsi familia hiyo inavyosikia. Hi ki ni kitendo kimefanyika sio tu 
kitendo ambacho nio kibaya kwa machio ya binadamu; pia hata machoni ya Mungu ni kitendo 
ambacho ni cha kishetani , kibaya . Nikisoma maandiko katika kitabu cha Matayo 6: 16 , inasema 
kuna mambo ambayo Mungiu anachukia; anasema ulimi una onena uwongo, macho ya kiburi, 
mikono inayo harakisha kumwaga damu isiyo na hatia; hili jambo hata Mungu mwenyewe ni 
jambo ambalo hata Kwake ni chukizo. Basi hatuna linguine isipokuwa kama Mwanasheria katika 
Bunge hili, ni tukeme a hili jambo na tuulize Wizar a yetu ya Ulinzi, laziuma waamke na kama 
Mwakilishi Wadi ya Maai Mahiu Bwana Spika , na pia Mwanasheria katika Nyumba hii, kwangu 
sijafurahishwa na jinsi ambavyo Idara  ya Usalama  yetu ya Nakuru  inavyoangaliwa.  
We must be assured  ya kwamba watoto wetu wako salama wanapoenda shule na watakaporudi. 
Kama leo nimetoka mapema m ida wa saa kumi na moja hivi na nimepata watoto wa shule 
wamejaa kwa barabara wanainua mikono kusimamisha malori waende shule. Bwana  Spika sijui 
ni mbinu itakayochukuliwa kutoka kwa  Wizara ya Elimu , Wizara ya Security ya kwamba tuangalie 
watoto wetu  na tuhakikishe wako salama wanapoenda shulen i na wanaporudi. Mheshimiwa  Spika 
nashukuru kwa nafasi hiyo.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon orable  Wamaitha, Hon orable  Okumu and then the 
Honorable Member for Waseges, the. Hon orable  Member for Dundori, the Hon orable  Gathuita, in 
that order . 
Hon. Ann Wamaitha:   Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir for giving me this opportunity. I take this 
opportunity to give my condolences to the family of Jasmine Njoki . I denounce the very sad 
situation that we are in right now because it said that it takes a  village to raise a child but Mr. 
Speaker  sir; this  village  has turned out to be an enemy of our children; How is it even possible for 
someone to see a child of whom they have been seeing  going home at that time, 4.00 pm, every 
single day decide  to sexually assault  this child and kill her .  
Mr. Speaker , we need justice for Jasmine Njoki , and  if within a month we do  not get justice done 
for this young girl, we are going to match to the Police Station .  We are going to do a Petition 
within this honorable  House so that justice for this young girl is served. It is not right Mr. Speaker  
that parents  of Nakuru County are living in fear for their own children  that when it is around school  
time we start worrying about our children . Mr. Speaker, this must stop.  Jasmine will be the last 
Child  to be defiled and killed in such a manner; we need justice for our child Jasmine Njoki , and 
all kids whether a boy or a girl . Every  child must  be protected in this Country . Thank you  Mr. 
Speaker.  
Hon. Keziah Okumu : Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir for giving me this opportunity . From that day I 
heard about Jasmine, I have been very sad and what has been plating  in my mind; how can a whole 
grownup man rape a child? Mr. Speaker , I request if we can get such a person, can Kenya have a 
law that such a person can be castrated ? Why  should  he live? Because ….  
(Applause ) 
I wish I could be one of the Investigating Agencies ; I could have  this man castrate d him. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker  sir. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon orable  Member for Waseges . 
Hon. Elijah Murage : Thank you Mr. Speaker  for giving me this chance to register my 
condolences  to the  family of Jasmine Njoki and to the culprit s, may they never find p eace; and I 
will call for thunder from Heaven to strike them because this is very bad. Mr. Speaker , they w ill 
not live because of what they did. Thank you  Mr. Speaker . 
Hon. James Mwangi:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker . First, I want to acknowledge the pupils who are 
here.  Mr. Speaker, I happen to be a parent in that School , Roots Academy . The heinous act 
happened at around 5  pm and it is very sad to have our  children’s lives  endangered  to that extent. 
From that da y, it has not been business as usual for parents  of that school  because we have to wake 
up at 5:00 a.m. and escort the kids to school .  
Having said that, I want us as an Assembly  and as a County , maybe we change the law s and have 
a more severe punishment for such perpetrator s.  
Mr. Speaker, e ven our Security  team needs to do their job because there is some  level of laxity.  It 
is one week down the line and no one has been arrested . Honorable  Geru and I come from that 
community and we  had a community meeting on the issue of insecurity. There was an issue of 
street boys around that area from Stem to Kasambara, roaming the area and I think though I am 
not a prophet they are the ones who committed that act.  
So, in matters of security, we want to check on that and also want to urge the Labour Committee 
to check on why these street children aged 9 to 15 years are loitering around that area so that we 
can have a way forward. The other measure we can take is the time on the Ministry of Education . 
Students  go to school  from around 5.00 a.m. and usually, it  is still dark and the time they leave 
school  is also alarming. On that note, I want the Ministry of Education to take note, and the 
Ministry of Internal Security  to have an agreement on how we can save  students  from such menace. 
Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon orable  Member for Dundori Ward. At this 
moment the Hon orable  Member for Kiptororo, Hon orable  Bor then the Hon orable  Member for 
Nakuru East and the last Member  would be the Hon. Loise Kagecha.  
Hon. Alex Bor : Asante sana Bwana  Spika kwa kunipa  nafasi hii. Kwanza kabisa nachukua nafasi 
hii kutoa pole zangu na rambi rambi zangu kwa jamii ya mwendazake , mtoto wetu mpendwa 
Jasmine . Na nataka niseme ya kwamba ni jambo la kusikitisha sana,  ya kwamba muda wa wiki 
moja sasa, hamna yeyote ambaye am etiwa mbaroni. K uonye sha ya kwamba watoto  wetu, ha wana 
security  ya kutosha kwa sababu kama jambo hi li limefanyika wiki moja ambayo imepita na hamna 
mtu yey ote ambaye ameweza kutiwa mbaro ni, inaonyesha ya kwamba, Wizara  ya Security,  Wizar a 
ambayo inashughulika na security  ya watoto wetu, lazi ma pia wawajibike.  
Nataka kusema ya kwamba katika Biblia inatuambia ya kwamba sisi tulio zaliwa na wanawake 
tuna miaka ya kuishi 70, wale wako na nguvu zaidi wakapewa miaka 80. Biblia hiyo ikatuambia 
ya kwamba wale watakao tenda mema watapewa miaka 120 . ninaashiria nini ? Kwamba wale 
ambao watakuwa na jukumu la kuchukua maisha ya watoto wetu kwamba hata na wao pia 
tunawalaani na wasiishi miaka mingi. Kwa hivyo naungana na Waheshimiwa  ambao wametoa 
laana yao kwamba hata ikiwezekana, sisi ni waafrika na hatuwezi tukasahau tamaduni zetu 
kwamba tunaweza  ita radi wakati bado security  wanazembe a iweze kuwapiga hao na kuwamaliza.  
Vile vile Mheshimiwa Spika , nataka kusema ya kwamba, ni kama unyama umetoka kwa wanyama 
ukaingia kwa binadamu.  Kwa sababu ninafikiria na kuangalia kwamba ni nini kinaweza kumfanya 
mwanaum e akamshika yule mtoto mdogo . Sisi kisaikologia huwa tunasema kile kinakufurahisha 
kwa macho ndicho unataka kukila. Lakini sasa mwanaume  kama huyu, ni nini kilimuingilia kama 
si unyama na shetani pepo mbaya ? Na hatuwezi pia laumu shetani kwamba alimuingilia kwa 
sababu shetani anamuingilia mtu wakati amekubali shetani amuingie ; ni kweli.  
Mheshimiwa Spika , nataka  kusema ya kwamba , jambo hili tunalikemea na tunataka Securit y yetu 
pamoja na Wizara  ya Elimu waweze kuingilia kati na waweze kufanya uchunguzi kwa haraka 
sana. Nashukuru Mheshimiw a wa sehemu ile kwa kazi ambayo ameifanya vizuri na tulipoongea 
na yeye asubuhi, akaniambia ya kwamba  familia inaendelea kufanya vijembe jembe amba vyo 
najua ya kwamba Mheshimiwa Spika , itakuwa ni garama kwa familia kwa sababu the DNA tests 
would  have to be done so that the perpetrators of the act can be taken liable. Otherwise Hon. 
Speaker , jambo hili tunalikemea na tunalaani wale ambao walihusika katika kitendo hicho. 
Asanteni sana.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Asante sana  Bwana Spika; wacha pia mimi ni ungane na wenzangu 
nichukuwe nafasi kwa niaba yangu  na ya familia nitume rambi rambi zangu kwa famili a ya 
mwenda zake Jasmine na pia nichukue nafasi hii nikemee kitendo hicho ambacho kilifanyika . 
Mimi  kama mzazi ambaye niko na mtoto wa k ike mwenye umri wa miaka tisa, n i jambo la 
kufedhehesha sana na kusikitisha kuona ya kwamba jambo hilo lilkiweza kufanyika na kama vile 
wenzangu wemesema, tuko na karibu wiki moja na hakuna jambo ambalo limetendeka. Kwa hivyo 
ningependa kuita pia vifaa vyote vya Usalam a katika Nchi  yetu tufanye kazi na itupatie ripoti 
ambayo at least tujue ya kwamba nani walifanya jambo hilo.  
Pia niungane na wenzangu kusema ya kwamba sisi kama viongozi wa jiji hili ambalo linaitwa 
Nakuru Girls,  kukemea kitendo hicho na kusema ya kwamba tunaunga mkono sana mambo na 
maslahi ya watoto wasichana na pia watoto wa kiume kwa sababu tumeitwa. Kama vile wenzangu 
wamenukuu Biblia, ni jukumu letu kama wazazi kuchunga watoto na pia tumepewa hilo jukumu 
na Mwanyezi Mungu tuweze kufanya vyovyote vile. Kwa hivyo sisi kama viongozi inatufaa tuje na 
pendekezo amba lo litakuwa ni la kuangalia maslahi ya watoto. Mi mi kama Kiongozi ningependa 
kupendekeza kama vile mwenzangu alikuwa ameeleza , Wizara ya Elimu  iweze kuangalia hata 
masaa ya watoto kwenda shule kwa sababu ukiangalia katika nchi zingine, watoto wanasoma 
katika mazingira amba yo kwa kimombo tunasema pressure.  Hii Wizar a yetu ya Elimu na mfumo 
wetu wa elimu, umeweka pressure  nyingi sana kwa watoto wetu. Kwa hivyo yatufaa tuangalie 
kama tunaweza badilishsa hata sh eria ya kuona ya kwamba watoto wetu wanasoma katika 
mazingira masafi ambaye yanaweza kulea mtoto. Niseme ya kwamba kitendo hichi ambacho 
kilifanywa kama mwenzangu alisema kwamba kuna watoto ambao wanarandaranda mitaani 
katika eneo la Barnabas  ambayo ni area yang u na tumepakana na mwenzangu pale, mimi ni jirani 
katikla Wadi ile ya Eburu -Mbaruk , tuingalie kama Idara ya Usalama, tuangalie maslahi ya wale 
watoto, k wa sababu that is a security threat and as Leaders of that area we are going to see how 
we are going to come with measures to address that issue. It has been addressed to the Committee 
on Labour  and Social Service s, I think we will take upon that but we stand guided.   
So, Bwana Spika maybe nikimalizia, nikusema ya kwamba tumeombwa kesho ni wakati ambao 
mwenda zake atapumzishwa, ni vizuri, ninaomba wenzangu tuweze kupatia support  ile familia 
hata kwenda tu pale kama Viongozi wa Kaunti  hii ili tuweze kukemea hata pale mbele ya wananchi 
na tupatiane rambi rambi zetu. Kwa hayo machache Bwana Spika, nashukuru kwa nafasi ambayo 
umenipatia. Nashukuru.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the Hon Loise Kagecha then the Hon. Jerop Olare.  
Hon. Loise Kagecha:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker , allow  me to pass my condolences to the Hon orable  
Gathanwa from the Eburu -Mbaruk Ward and also pass my condolences to the bereaved family and 
their neighbours. Indeed, it is so disheartening that one week down the line and tomorrow we are 
burying Jasmine , society has no clue who perpetrated that heinous act. In this era when we have 
so much intelligence out there, I am wondering what the relevant authorities are lacking . Is it the 
machinery?  Is it welfare or the wisdom to follow  up that matter and bring the culprits to book? 
You know as a parent, I can imagine what those parent s are going through; it is not just enough to 
lose their daughter, to know that they are burying their daughter tomorrow and it is even more 
painful to imagine how she died.  
That is so painful and therefore , I really want to urge the relevant authority, the Government, to 
do everything possible to ensure that as we bury Jas mine tomorrow, she gets justice.  But the story 
will not end with her burial tomorrow. We shall see the Media  out there following up and putting 
pressure on the Government so that at the end of the day, we are able to get justice for Jasmine.  
I also want to urge the NGOs, I want to believe that even in this County we have registered NGOs 
that fight against Gender -Based Violence . I am wondering where they are, and why they are so 
silent; they are the voice of  the people like Jasmine. She has gone, who is going to speak on her 
behalf, who will cry for Jasmine’s justice? So, I want to beseech, I want to pray, I want to beg and 
for lack of better words, that anybody who has the power, and wisdom to seek justice for t his child , 
do what is humanly abl e to do.  
Finally, I want to beg people out there, again I want to beseech if we have to kneel down, we can 
even do it to anyone with information, any slight information about those who perpet rated  this 
heinous act against Jasmine , please report  to the relevant Authority. I want to s ay if you do that, 
you will go to Heaven becau se you will have served Jasmine; you  will have spoken on behalf even 
of her parents. So, with that Mr. Speaker  Sir, thank you so much.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Hon orable  Jerop and then we have two other 
Members , the Hon orable  Member for Viwandani and Hon orable  Member for Kamara in that order.  
Hon. Irene Cheboi:  Asante sana Bw. Spika kwa nafasi hii. Ningependa kutoa risala za  rambi 
rambi kwa familia  ya Jasmine  pia Mheshimiwa  wa Eburu -Mbaruk Ward na jamii yote kwa jumla. 
Kwangu mimi, ni uchungu sana kumpoteza mtoto mmoja kama huyo. Nasema pole na wale 
wahusika naamini Mungu atatenda jambo na watapatikana. Kwa Idara  ya Usalama  pande hiyo, 
mimi naona wamelala sana. Bwana Spika mimi niko na machungu sana kwa kifo cha huyo mtoto; 
huyo ni malaika hajui c hochote na kitendo hicho ni kio vu sana.  
Nimesi mama hapa pia mimi nikiwa na machungu, my husband was killed there  na hatukupata 
haki lakini Mungu  alitutendea, waliotutendea wote  walikufa kwa hivyo hata huyu mtoto Jasmine 
haki isipotendeka, mimi kama mama naamini hata na wao hawatakuwa hai. Jambo lingine ambalo 
ningetaka kusema Waheshimiwa wenzangu , ni uchungu sana kumpoteza mtoto kama huyu  na 
tusipopata haki, tutafanya  maandamano ya amani ili haki ya huyo mtoto ipatikane . Bwana Spika 
nasema ni asante kwa nafasi hiyo.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Asante sana Bwana Spika kwa  naf asi hii; kwanza nitoe rambi rambi zangu 
kwa famili a ya Jasmine  na niseme ya kwamba ni kitendo ambacho ni ch a kinyama na nikemee 
wanaume wenye fikra kama hizo , na wenye walitenda hi cho kitenda; kwamba Mungu awanyime 
amani kama vile Jasmine aliaga bila amani. Awanyime amani kabisa. Tena Mheshimiwa Spika , 
ninataka kuungana na kutoa rambi rambi kwa mheshimiwa wa Eburu -Mbaruk kwa sababu ni sik u 
hiyo ambayo mimi nilikuwa nimekimbizwa mpaka hapa na Askari ambaye angekuwa anahitajika 
kuangalia usalama pande hiyo. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika  ni jambo la kusikitisha kwamba 
nilikuwa na Mheshimiwa Kaptembw a Police Station  wakati alipigiwa simu kwamba mtoto 
amenajisiwa na ameuawa.  
Mheshimiwa Spika , inaodhihirika  kwamba  Afisa wetu wa Usalama  badala ya kulinda maisha ya 
wananchi na watoto wetu, kazi yao ni kukimbizana na watu kutafuta hongo. Kwa hivyo tunakemea 
tendo hili na  ni kwamba the same day,  unaweeza angalia na ukaona kwamba kama huyu  Officer 
angekuwa eneo hilo, huyu mtoto hangepata kufanyiwa kitendo kama hi cho. Kwa hivyo tunalaani 
na kuwa ambia ya kwamba Walinda  Usalama wetu kwamba wapate kuwajibika kwa vyovtote vile 
na pia Wizara  ya Elimu , ipate kupatiana nafasi kwamba kama ni Walimu  wana uzembe wa kukaa 
katika madara sa ndio waambie watoto waamke mapema, wapewe Ratiba Mpya amba yo 
itawafanya watoto  wetu wawe na usalama wa kutosha kutoka nyumbani  na wanaporudi nyumbani.  
Nikiongezea vile Mheshimiwa alisema, jana hatu kukaa chini kwa sababu ya  mtoto mwingine 
aliyejeruhiwa na kiboko. Na jana  ilikuwa kama ni sisi na mheshimiwa tulinde wananchi wetu 
wanapo pitia mahali. Kwa sababu hao Maafisa  wa KWS  tunapowaita tunawauliza mnyama 
alikuja akiwa mmoja, since 2020  amezaa mpaka viboko  wamekuwa wanane na wamekuwa 
wakisema wanafanya Scientific Research  wanataka kuchukua ripoti vile watatoa  viboko .  
Kwa hivyo wana uzembe hao Walinda  Usalama wetu , na unafaa sisi kama Waheshimiwa , 
Wabunge wa Kaunti  ya Nakuru, tuwajibike katika kufanya haki kwa Jasmine na wengine.  
Pia sisi tuna mtu alijeruhiwa na kuuliwa na kiboko kwa hivyo ni kama maisha ya mwanadamu  
yamekuwa tu kama maisha ya mahind i; ukitaka kuchuna mahindi  unachuna jioni, ukitaka asubuhi 
unachuna. Ni jambo ambalo linatukera sana na tunaomba ya kwamba vile Jasmine  amelala , 
hajakuwa akilala kwa amani bali amelala kwa uchungu na ule uchungu ufuate hawa  watu 
waangamie kabisa. Na kama jinsi maandiko  yanavyosema kwamba mtu yetyote atakayefanya 
tendo la kinyama, anafaa kuuwawa, hilo tu ndilo mimi naweza uliza.  
Maandiko ni supreme , tunaweza badilisha Katiba  lakini maandiko  hatuwezi. Huyu mtu 
akipatikana, mimi naomba hata kama wakati wa Musa, jicho kwa jicho na upanga  kwa upanga 
kwa hivyo vile alivyofanya naya afanyiwe hivyo ili haki itendeke.  
Mwisho, kwa Wabunge wa Kaunti  ya Nakuru, nawaombeni nyote kesho kwa sababu ya solidarity 
ya Mheshimiwa Gathanwa  na familia ya Jasmine,  tutakapopata nafasi hata kama ni Kikao cha 
asubuhi kupitia kwa kiongozi wa Walio Wengi katika hii Bunge , atuombee nafasi ili tuende kufa ijii 
hii famili a na kwamba tupatiane muda wa hawa watu wawe wa mekamatwa kwa sababu 
Internationally , Kenya Investigation  iko ranked namba  2. Security Apparatus  sio kwamba hawajui 
ama hawana fununu ya kwamba ni nani walihusika katika hil o tendo.  
Ni hayo tu Bwana  Spika , na pia wanafunz i walio hapa tuko pamoja na nyinyi na tutahakikisha 
kwamba usalama wenu umelindwa. Asante sana Bwana Spika.   
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Hon. Member for Kamara . 
Hon. John Maritim : Thank you very much  Mr. Speaker . First, I want to send my sincere 
condolences to Jasmine’s family , the community  there , and to the school  that Jasmine was going ; 
“nasema pole kabis a”.  
Secondly, I believe it is high time now that  we let some m en be taught a lesson  because this shows 
that there are a lot of bad men out there and it is like some people have turned into animals. Stiff 
penalties should be taken . If that person is found, I think the best thing is to kill him because such 
people in society should not exist. When a person becomes an animal then they can be taken to the 
zoo or be killed.  
Mr. Speaker, Finally  I want to curse the culprit s, and  I believe each and every Honorable Member 
has cursed na itashika yeye vizuri sana.  Thank you very much.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Members , indeed it is a sad day for the family  
and also for our Count y, and you have raised very important and pertinent issues about the security 
of our kids, and I think that because we are the Leaders, we have an opportunity to raise the issues 
with the Security Organs so that we are properly briefed on to what extent they have done their 
work in as far as getting justice for Jasmine is concerned.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members, we have come to the end of that matter and I think we had already exhausted our 
Orders for the day; so be upstanding . 
This House is adjourned to 2.30 pm this afternoon.  
The House rose at 1.2 0PM 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 