COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 5 th April 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03:30 PM  
[Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR.  
KAMUKUNJI  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a small Communication. Honorable Members, take note 
that we will be having a brief Kamukunji after the session. Next order  
STATEMENTS  
FIREFIGHTING DEPARTMENT  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) : There is a Statement response ; the first  Statement will be 
responded to by Honorable Moses Koros the Chairperson  for the Committee on Disaster 
Management. He will issue  a Statemen t requested by honorable  Leah Wambui Nganga concerning 
the status of Firefighting Department at the County Government  of Nakuru.  
Hon. Moses Koros : Honorable Speaker , I rise to answer the question asked by the Honorable 
Member for Kabtini. On 1ST march, 2023 Honorable Leah Wanmbui Nganga MCA for Kabatini  
sought a Statement  from the Chairperson  for the Committee on Disaster Management and 
Emergency Services regarding the status of Firefighting Equipment’s and Personnel at the 
Department. In response to the  Statement the Committee wrote a letter to the County Executive 
Committee Member (CEC) for Public Service, Devolu tion, Citizen Engagement and Disaster 
Management  requesting …. 
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  [On a Point of Order] I have the Order Paper and the response of the 
Statement and it is incomplete and I am not getting what the Honorable Chairperson is replying. I 
do not have the answer to the question.  
Hon. Moses Koros : Honorable Speaker, the Member should wait a bit b because we are doing the 
introductory part of the answer. So be patient you will get the answer.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honorable Mwangi resume your seat. The Chairperson , they 
wait in anticipation that they will the paper or maybe they can follow you up as you  read the 
response.   
Hon. Moses Koros : For the Members who have not received  copies of the same, they can as well 
follow as I read but a n umber of copies have been supplied.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Proceed as the Sergeant A t Arm s make s arrangement s of 
responses  distributed to Hono urable Members.  
Hon. Moses Koros : Thank you Honorable Speaker, I response to the Statement, the Committee 
wrote a letter to the County Executive Committee Member (CEC) for Public Service, Devolution, 
Citizen Engagement and Disaster Management requesting for a response on the same. The 
Committee further sought more information on the following issues - 
1. The number of firefighting Engine s and other equipment’s  in the County, Their  
functionality  status and the distribution in the County.  
2. The Staff Establishment in the Department of firefighting and whether they have requisite 
skills and knowledge to handl e fire disaster in case of an eventuality.  
3. The status of the County Department in Disaster Preparedness and Mitigation  
The Department  acknowledges the concern of the County Assembly to enable the County 
Government improves its effectiveness in the prevention , mitigation and management of disaster. 
The County Government has taken the following measures - 
1. The process of developing a Disaster Mitigation and Management Bill is ongoing, the 
Department  has had foundational consultation with Disaster Manage ment Committee of 
the County Assembly . The Bill once tabled in the County Assembly once it is discussed 
and passed will provide the much -needed framework for Disaster Management.  
2. The Department has developed an operational framework to guide our disaster prevention, 
mitigation and response . This Framework was developed out of experience of the 
Department in the last three months of coordinating Disaster Management . The Framework  
has enabled the Department to co -ordinate with all other Departments within th e County 
Government and enabled a strategic linkage with our Sub County structures.  There still 
exist some challenges especially with regard to prevention and response but we are working 
steadily  towards resolving these challenges Hono urable Speaker.  
The Department wish es to respon d directly to the incident mentioned in the letter. The response to 
the fire that razed down Nakuru  Boys in Kabatini. On 21ST February 2023….  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Hono urable Chairperson is Nakuru Boys’ School in Kabatini? It 
was a Member  who raised some information about that school but the school is not based in 
Kabatini Ward.  
Hon. Moses Koros : Thank you Hono urable Speaker , I stand guided. This a response to the fire 
that razed Nakuru Boys’ School. On 21ST Februa ry 2023 the Departmen t… 
Hon. Grace Mwathi:  [On a Point of Information]  I think the Statement the Honorable Leah asked 
was about Bahati Boys but not Nakuru Boys.  
Hon. Moses Koros: Thank you Honorable Speaker . On 21 st February 2023 , the Department 
received a call that the school dormitory was on fire.  
1. At the exact time the Fire Engine was already enroute to Njoro to respon d to a similar call . 
The second Fire Engine was in Menengai on a different call . This meant that the 
Departmen t could not respond in a timely manner to the one in  Bahati because they were 
already engaged. Working with Kabatini Member of County Assembly, the Department 
has since visited the School with humanitarian support in form of blankets, bedsheets and 
boxes.  
2. Capability o f the Disaster Response . The Department acknowledges that the capability of 
the County  to respond to a disaster needs  to be improved. The  County  has a total of three 
functional Fire Engines . These are located in Naivasha, Nakuru City and also in Molo. This 
are three out of eleven Sub Counties , there is therefore need to mobili se resources to 
improve this capability. The  Department will work closely with the County Assembly 
Committee  on Disaster Management to resolve this challenge in the Financial Year 
2023 /2024.  
3. The Departments thank  the County Assembly for its strategic focus on the County’s  
capacity to prevent and mitigate disasters.  
Hono urable Speaker , I as conclude I hope that the honorable Member who requested for this 
Statement has been duly answered. This is the response we received from the Department  and we 
know the Department  is still undergoing serious challenges but with the cooperation of all the 
Members. We want to see that Departmen t being a vibrant one and one that is a ble to respond to 
any challenge on a timely basis. Otherwise I thank the Members  for their contribution towards the 
development of these Department  which is very important. Thank you, Honorable Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Hono urable Chairperson, you may resume your seat but you 
cannot leave the  House especially when you have just responded. The Hono urable Member for 
Kabatini you had requested for the  Statement and you may want to inform the House  whether you 
have been answered satisfa ctorily or there were some gaps.  
Hon. Leah Ng’ang’a : Thank you Hono urable Speaker , I have heard what the Disaster Committee 
deliberated and I have agreed with their response but on what they have given. My prayer is they 
will follow up on what they deliber ated and make sure that all the Fire Engines  in the County 
Government  are in good condition. Ndiposa hilo jambo lisijirudie tena katika haya maeneo yetu 
ya Nakuru.  Thank you, Hono urable Speaker, and thank the Chairperson for the Committee on 
Disaster and Emergency Services . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you. If there is a  Member or some Members, three or two 
who would want to make their input known on that issue of disaster. Honorable Mwangi from 
Viwandani and then Honorable Kanyere.  
Hon. Mwangi  Muraya : Thank you Hono urable Speaker, first of all I wish to commend my 
colleague for having done what you requested in this floor of the House. If I heard very well 
because I had no copy, the first thing he said is that they requested the number of Fire E ngines 
within Nakuru County . In the response to the House, the Chair person  has not given the number of 
Fire Engines that we have, their conditions they are in. that one, even if Hono urable Leah from 
Kabatini had asked. If a questioned is asked in the floor  of the House , it is deemed to have been 
asked all of us, so I am not satisfied with the answer and the Chairperson  ought to answer that 
well. On how many personnel …  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  What is it honorable Wathiai?  
Hon. David Wathiai : [On a Point of Information] the Chairperson for the  Committee on Disaster  
and Emergency Services when reading the Report, actually told the Hous e that we have only three 
Fire Engines . He in fact  said the County Government has three Fire Engines and I do not kno w 
where the honorable Member  from Naivasha is confusing from?  
Hon. Mwangi  Muraya : Hono urable Speaker , that is not what I heard ; maybe  we are not in the 
same Chamber with the honorable Chairperson for the Committee on Sports  because I am very 
certain that the only thing the Chairperson  said is that we have a Fire Engine in Naivasha, Nakuru 
City and in  Molo . He did not even elaborate the conditions of the Fire Engines so saying we have 
three and yet I remember last year in the  last regime the former Governor  aligned 11 Fire Engines 
here when we were  accorded the City status. It is…  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) : Some new information Honorable Wathiai ? 
Hon. David Wathiai : Hono urable Speaker maybe my brother is under the influence of something 
because…  
(Laughter)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) : Order! Order Mheshimiwa! W ithdraw that.  
Hon. David Wathiai : I withdraw Mr. Speaker. You know, he is acting very confused s o I am 
trying to get what he is saying because even in the Report it is written here that the County has a 
total of three functional fire engines. This is from the Report that was read by the Chair Disaster 
Management. So I would like to request my brother to go through the Report again and maybe 
deliberate more o n other issues . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  For clarity, y ou are saying the same thing . Maybe it is only that 
one is saying that there is a fire engine in Naivasha another one in Nakuru City and another one in 
Molo ; then the honorable Wathiai is saying  that we have three fire engines . It is the same thing 
because if we said Naivasha Sub County, Nakuru City, then Molo Sub County, those are three. So 
is there a difference? So I think the difference is the same.  
Hon.  Mwangi Muraya:  Mr. Speaker, if the Honorable Member will allow me finish what I was 
saying he would understand because I was just given the Statement or the answer while I was 
raising my concern. So I think the Honourable Member is more confused than anybody else can 
be. Now the second part  is how many personnel in the Disaster D epartment are  on permanent and 
pensionable employ ment.  
 Mr. Speaker, we have been out there and we have seen in several cases wh ere the fire has caught 
us up a nd Mr. Speaker, the y do not even have the  tools to handle  the gears to be used by this 
personnel . So Mr. Speaker this Statement is incomplete a nd we need a complete answer so that we 
can make recommendations to the Department and to the Executive on the way forward for us to 
mitigate these cases of fire. So Mr. Speaker, the two things are the only thing s that I want us to 
address ; the Chair to give us comprehensive detail s. 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  In the order that we had said there is honorable Kanyere from 
Nakuru East then honorable William Mutai from K eringet.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I rise to commend my Chair, Committee on 
Disaster and the work that they have done. But I just want to highlight some issues that I have 
gotten from the answer. First is to commend the Department becaus e going by the recent 
happenings, we have seen that our County we have been dealing  with a lot of issues to do with 
disaster and the response despite the minimal or less resources, t hey have tried as a Department.  
However, the  concern is the issue that was  being raised by my fellow Members about the number 
of fire engines, you find that we have 11 sub Counties in our County, but going by what has been 
tabled as an answer, we have only three functional fire engines. And in this incident, when the 
Chairman wa s trying to explain, he said during the incidents one was heading to  Njoro the other 
one was heading to Menengai. So you see if we could have had each and every Sub County having 
their own fire engine the response would be rapid and the damage will be mini mal. 
 So my recommendation to the Department  is let them factor in their Departmental Budgetary 
Allocation for th is year s o that we can consider as a House. Also Mr. Speaker, sir, I would like to 
say that Disaster Management is so not about fire s. There is an issue about ambulances and all that 
you find our Sub-Counties ar e adequately serviced by such ambulances . So even in matters to do 
with the ambulance and the response should be enhanced. So through the Chair Department of 
Disaster Management,  when we come to  the Budget Allocation of that D epartment, let them 
consider that in the next Financial Year. Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) : Thank you.  
Hon. William Maritim:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I also rise to commen d to the 
Chairman Disaster for articulating the information concerning the questions that were asked by 
honorable Leah. Now according to me, if Hon.  Leah is satisfied, I think there is not much that we 
can really mention but probably to only add on some in formation, Mr. Speaker, sir. I think just as 
honorable K anyere said, the Disaster Management should not only confine itself so much on fire 
outbreaks. There are more other disasters that are happening in our County, and they seem not to 
be addressed adequa tely. Mr. Speaker, just the other day, I made a visit to the Disaster Offices 
through the guidance of the Chair to Report on a certai n matter. But then I just realised that when 
I was there, there is some sense of hopelessness in the  Office. Hopelessness in the sense that they 
do not have the capacity to handle some of the disasters that are prevailing in our County. A very 
good example,  it rained last week ; a very heavy rainfall in my Ward which ended up destroying 
an ongoing potato co ld store worth Kshs 5.2 million that has not been handed over to the County. 
And then I wanted some indulgence from the County Disaster Management  but seemingly, they 
said that the re is nothing t hey could  do.  
Along with that , the same rainfall broke down a shade that was constructed with the Stimulus 
Money from the National Office and being owned now by the County Government , it went down. 
And what happened in this case is that we even wanted to salvage some of the iron sheets and 
some of the materials tha t remained, but they cannot even afford to give some Kshs 10,000 for the 
fundis  that c ould have  actually remove d those materials and kept them in safe custody. It is quite 
unfortunate and that is why I really feel for you Chairman  and I hope this Bill that  you are going 
to bring to the House is going to address some of the challenges that we have so that we can put in 
some money.  
It is a Department that is concern ed with emergencies and should be having money that can 
actually mitigate these kinds of emerg ing issues. So  Mr. Speaker, I want to support the 
recommendation but they ha ve to do more. To that effect, t hank you very much.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri)  Thank you, the Honorable member from Rhonda. And then the 
honorable from …  
Hon. John Gachiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker f or giving me this opportunity . I am John Macharia 
representing the people of Rhonda. I stand to protect my Chair concerning honorable Muraya from 
Viwandani who wants each and every question to be answered here. First of all Mr. Speak er, I 
want to say we inherited … 
Hon. Mwangi  Muraya:  Hono urable Speaker I know your work is to protect each and every 
Member here so  Hono urable Speaker this is another disaster now. He has just taken your powers 
and you r role in this House.  
The Speaker (Hon . Joel Karuri) : Noted Hon ourable  Member for Rhonda ; you felt that the Chair 
needed protection. Chair did you need any protection?  
Hon. Moses Koros:  Not at all Mr. Speaker.  
(Laughter)  
Hon. John Gachiri:  Okay let me continue with my contribution because I a m a Member of the 
Disaster Committee . I think the Chair has forgotten I am a Member of his Committee.  
What I wanted to say is that Mr. Speaker, according to what we have inherited as a County led by 
the Governor Susan Kihika , we have nothing and I want to repeat nothing concerning Disaster 
Management. And we believe because the Chair Budget is here, and we have a lot of 
recommendations that we have made to the Department concerning even the divers, you can see 
what happened i n Mbaruk Ward, where nobody can even save those who are dying. I believe as 
we continue, we need to set aside money for disaster and not only money. You ca n imagine where 
families where household items  have been burnt and everything  is destroyed yet  as a County, we 
cannot even provide  blanket s or a mattress es for the famil ies.  
I think we are tr eading on the wrong foot. We need to have at least  a warehouse where we can set 
these things because as you as we look forward, where will we start about being told about the 
procurement, we will buy Blankets I do not know when, I think is not right. So we need to do 
something as a County we need to do something as a House so that we can provide these things 
for us to be ready. We can have those divers who are ready.  
Like two months ago, there is a body that was founded in Lake Nakuru, we took a whole month to 
search for that body. You can imagine, Mr. Speaker, this is because we are not prepared. And we 
look forward to be prepared. The guys who found that body are gu ys from mtaani huko.  So I 
believe we need a great preparation for Disaster Management. So I pray and I prayed with this 
House through the Chairman Budget that we can finance the Disaster Management Director, all 
these guys so that we can be able to have fu nds which are ready, the properties that are ready, and 
even those machines that are not working so that we can make them work once again. Thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) : Thank you . The Hono urable Member from Lake View.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker. I have gone through the Statement 
that the Chairperson Disaster has given Mr. Speaker though the Statement seems so much of a 
defense to the Department, I will say we fall short of each and everything that is st ated here, Mr. 
Speaker . Mainly , this is a County that has been overwhelmed by disasters. Mr. Speaker.  
When I look at the back there, I look at M heshimiwa  from Kihingo  and this morning when I was 
coming from my home, I was listening to one of the vernacula r stations  and I heard him 
complaining of rains that caused  havoc to his people last night. Mr. Speaker you will find that the 
Statement that is given here does is  not just confined to things to do with the fire. Mr. Speaker. I 
think as a County, we are be yond that. And with the amount of money that this County is 
generating and even Nakuru County being elevated  to a city status Mr. Speaker, we ought to know 
the Disaster Department  and its capa city in dealing with disasters within Nakuru Cou nty. If it is 
for budgeting  Mr. Speaker, then the Disaster Department should come up with elaborate things. 
And even the Executive should tell us how the Department of Disaster is run Mr. Speaker.   
You find that Mr. Speaker we should be having more than one Fire Station Mr. Speaker . Our fire 
engine Mr. Speaker, you find that when you are doing the construction of this building for it to 
even be approved Mr. Speaker, there must be some monies that are paid for fire disasters. Each 
and every hotel within this County. Mr. Speaker, there are fire monies that are being generated, 
Mr. Speaker but we are only talking about three working engines with a population of around a 7 
million people . Mr. Speaker, I think it is a disgrace when we talk about this in this age and  we 
main ly blame the former regimes for not planning properly for this.  
 Mr. Speaker last week there was  an accident that happened in my Ward in Naivasha that involved 
a bus carrying some students  from Pwani University . So many lives were lost Mr. Speaker .  
Mr. Speaker, I visited the Naivasha Level 4 Hospital Mr. Speaker, and I saw fatigued doctors, 
fatigued nurses Mr. Speaker, with out even a stipend Mr. Speaker . We must come up as a County 
and know that disasters are real Mr. Speaker and how well prepared  we are.  
Mr. Speaker, someone has talked over booty resting in Lake Nakuru for some one month Mr. 
Speaker. When we came to power Mr. Speaker, I lost six members of my own village, Mr. Speaker 
in Lake Naivasha and at that time Mr. Speaker, it enforces the MCAS or other local leaders to get 
money from their own pocket to  fuel the engines, Mr. Speaker, so that they c ould retrieve the  
bodies. Mr. Speaker today, Mr. Speaker, I normally meet the CO Disaster getting to foot the bills 
under her own pocket. Mr. Speaker, I think something should be done and I ask the Chairperson 
disaster to give us a comprehensive  Statement on the disaster preparedness of Nakuru County, Mr. 
Speaker, without fav our of Department or even fear of victimi sation from any arm Mr. Speaker 
because disasters are inevitable.  
Mr. Speaker if today we are not  well prepared , disaster can claim even us here as Members of this 
County Assembly. Mr. Speaker  we had COVID -19, and it claimed even the Members who sat 
within this same Assembly. Mr. Speaker  that is a Disaster , whereby you find that even the County 
was no t well prep ared with oxygen and even other items  that were required Mr. Speaker , when we 
are talking about Disaster, we require a full Statement; an elaborate Statement that we shall defend. 
I propose that the CO Disaster be called and give this Statement to more than just the Committee 
on Disaster so that we know when we can help because even if we are talking of giving them 
budgets, we do not know what is straining them. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Honorable Member for Kamar a, you will be the 
last one to give your input on this matter.  
Hon. John Maritim : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I also rise to support what the Chairman has said 
and also give my contribution. We are talking more of fire. Some areas like where I come from in  
Kuresoi North, we have been having some harsh rains and many of our bridges have been swept 
away. I also believe that the best we can do as a County is that we can identify those regions. We 
need to add some funds in Disaster Management in that if these f unds are not being used, we shall 
still carry them forward to another Financial Year. If today, we be given like Kshs. 10 million and 
this Kshs. 10 million fails to be used, we just carry forward. Disaster is like death; it just comes 
like that and nobody is prepared for it. Finally, we can still introduce some insurance cover. This 
cover can cater for crops, human life, animals and much more. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Members for your input on the issue of the 
Report that t he Chair has read. What is coming from the discussions on the floor of this House is 
that the Member who requested for a Statement was more on fire because maybe that was the 
disaster that had struck but there is need for a comprehensive mapping and report ing on disaster 
preparedness in Nakuru County and the capacity to deal with the various disasters because the 
Report was based more on fire. Any other Member could rise up and request for a more 
comprehensive Statement on the issues that have been raised o n the floor of the House.  
The next response for a Statement is by Hon. Wathiai and he is responding to a Statement requested 
by Hon. Joseph Muraya concerning the impact of sports fund among the youth.  
 
 
IMPACT OF SPORTS FUND  
Hon. David Wathiai: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Before I respond to the Statement by Hon. 
Muraya, I would like to request for your protection from the same person who requested for this 
Statement because as I was seated next to him there, he was intimidating me and even threat ening 
me. He actually told me in Kiswahili, wacha nifike hapo utaniona . 
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Hon. Speaker, the Honorable Chair is completely out of order because he 
is responding to what I asked. Asking him whether he has a comprehensive Report is not 
intim idation. That was way before I knew he would come to the floor of the House to respond to 
the question. As I said earlier, we must all listen not to reply but to understand. This Hon. Chair 
for Sports was listening to me so that he can come there to reply,  not to understand what I was 
asking him.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honourable Member for Viwandani, have your seat. 
Mheshimiwa Chair kindly proceed with the response.  
Hon. David Wathiai: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I am here to respond to the St atement in regards 
to the impact of Sports fund on the youth and talent development. The fund is anchored on Public 
Finance Management Act of 2012 through Legislative Supplement No. 2 which allows the Sports 
Fund to be used to pay for services provided. Th e Sports Fund was established in 2015 to majorly 
cater for purchases of assorted sports equipment to be distributed to beneficiaries at the Ward 
levels and to cate for administration services in administering the fund. The personnel involved 
are the Chief Officer in charge of Sports, Finance Officer, Sports Officers, Sub -County 
Administrators and one Person Living With Disability.  
The impact of Sports F und on the youth in Nakuru County . 
I. The fund is mainly used to procure and purchase assorted sports equipm ent and distribute 
the same to the beneficiaries , right from the Ward level.  
II. The Kshs. 27.5 million is divided equally at sh. 500, 000 per Ward.  
III. Beneficiaries of the same are identified by the office of the Ward Administrator, MCAs 
and Sub County Sports Officers working with the various Federations and Associations 
with sports individuals.  
IV. Branding of sports kitties for men and women, boys and girls, within the County. The 
uniforms make them participate and compete without challenges.  
Sports kitty since in auguration has led to mushrooming of sports clubs’ tournaments within the 
County in disciplines like boxing, taekwondo, karate, athletics and participation of PWDs. Sports 
activities have increased both in numbers and participation. The indoor games such a s table tennis, 
pool table and darts have also improved in competition and participation as a result of equipment 
purchased through Sports Fund and placed at various Social Halls throughout the Country.  
In conclusion, the Sports Fund has enabled the sport s scouting in identification, nurturing and 
development of sports talent from the grass root leading to promotion of sports in the County. We 
are in the process of formulating sports policy and regulations where we propose the Sports Fund 
be divided into s upporting tournaments at the grassroots at Kshs. 250 000 and the purchase of 
sports equipment to take another Kshs. 250 000. The policy will enable the Directorate and the 
County to source for more funds through Private Public Partnerships.  
THE NUMBER OF YOUTHS WHO HAVE BENEFITED FROM THE SAID FUND IN THE 
FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/ 2023  
The past Financial Year has seen significant increase in the number of youths who have benefited 
from sporting fund.  
The number of youths who have benefited is 2 500 (clubs) wit h assorted sports equipment across 
the 55 Wards.  
THE NUMBER OF YOUTHS WHO HAVE REALIZED THEIR FULL POTENTIAL IN TERMS OF 
TALENTS  
The number of youths who have realised their full potential in terms of talent;  
I. 30 football women who are currently playing premier league.  
II. 90 football women who are currently playing division 1.  
III. 300 football men who are playing County and Regional  
IV. 20 players who have joined different clubs  
V. Godson Changema who was selected to participate in trials in Manchester United  
VI. The last KYISA games five players were scouted to join National Sports Academy.  
VII. Danson Sunguti selected to join AFC leopard.  
VIII. Taekwondo clubs 14 members have benefited.  
THE EFFORTS THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT IS EMPLOYING TO ENSURE THAT MORE 
TALENTED YOUTH ARE NURTURED  
I. Ensuring that sports talent is nurtured by proposing more training of sports technicians  
II. Proposal to enhance sports allocation from Kshs 250 000 to 1 million per Ward.  
III. Upgrading of sports infrastructure to be used in identification of more sports talents.  
IV. Align with the Governor’s manifesto to create a Sports Fund to support and sustain sports 
talents.  
V. Ensure functional stadium in each Sub -County.  
VI. Distribution of sports equipment.  
VII. Diversifying of sports disciplines.  
VIII. Registration of sports groups and clubs.  
CHALLENGES FOUND  
I. The allocation is not sufficient to cater for branding identification and distribution logistics.  
II. Part of the funds should be used to sponsor various tournaments from the Ward to the Sub 
County level.  
III. Delay in procurement process.  
IV. Transport challenges during sports distribution  
V. Lack of enough personnel to distribute the assorted sports equipment.  
Please note that it is not defined as Sports Fund but it is referred to as Ward Sports Allocation.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you Hon. Vice Chair of Sports and Culture for that 
response. We open it for some input, especially from the person who had requested on behalf of 
the House and then later, we are going to have Hon. Maritim.  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Thank you Mr. Speake r sir. I do not want to degrade this Committee 
because they have given us a bunch of photos here so I would commend them for these photos that 
they have gathered from various Wards and not as per what I expected from the question that I 
asked.  
The money t hat has been used from 2013 up to date; I have just heard of 30 football women who 
are currently playing premier league. These are totally self -sponsored women as per my 
knowledge. Unless I do not live in Nakuru County, we pay for even transport for these teams to 
go for tournaments. We pay for referees with our own money. The only thing that the Department 
has been doing is purchasing of uniforms from year to year which are now used by our young men 
and women kuenda nayo kwa mashamba.  I know you have been an MCA for the last ten good 
years. The gentleman who went to Manchester, I do not even understand whether he is in the 
Academy; whether he is playing in the Manchester team or whether he went for a visit as a shabiki 
sugu kama  Hon. Wathiai vile yeye ni sh abiki sugu wa  Rugby na ametuambia alikuwa  Dubai.  
We need a comprehensive Report from this kitty. We have sponsored a team that is currently under 
the County Government of Nakuru getting benefits, allowances and playing with other teams out 
there. I needed to hear that there are teams like a volleyball team that is from Nakuru County that 
is playing the Inter -Counties; a football team that is owned by the Nakuru County Government. 
Telling us that there are 90 or 300 football men who are playing County and Re gional, these are 
self-sponsored and I dare the Chair to clarify and show me where they get the transport, where 
they get the money to pay referees and everything.  
Hon. Fadhili Msuri: Point of order Mr. Speaker sir. Is the Member in order to dare the Chair  of 
the Committee?  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): He is not the one to dare. What he can do is only seeking more 
information but not to dare.  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Mr. Speaker sir, I told you that there are people who do not listen to 
understand. They just  listen to reply.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Hon. Vice Chair for Sports?  
Hon. David Wathiai: Mr. Speaker sir, as long as he is addressing me, I kindly request you to 
protect me because I believe when he was taking lunch at the cafeteria, he ate a very big fish and 
I decided to …  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order Hon. Wathiai. The things that did not happen on the floo r 
of this House, we s hould not get that information in this House.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Mr. Speaker, I did not even visit  the cafeteria.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! Proceed with your final submissions the Hon. Mwangi  
Hon Joseph Muraya : Mr. Speaker protect me so that I can finish...  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): You are now protected. No other Member will get an  
opportunity to rise before you sum up on your submissions.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Thank you Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, we wanted to get the information 
on the impact to our youth for the past 10 years. Out there they are ever crying to us, they are 
always  in our offices and our homes asking us what they can do with this fund. The Hon. Chair 
has told us that the proposal is for the money to be increased from Kshs 500 000 to 1 million but 
unfortunately during the last supplementary the money was scrapped fro m Kshs 500 0000 to Kshs 
250 000. I am now wondering what will this do, if the Kshs 500 000 has done nothing, what will 
Kshs 250 000 do to make sure that the lives of our young men and women are changed? I am not 
satisfied with the answer from the Sports Co mmittee. They should do more to make sure that this 
floor not only me but for other Members who also raised a concern here because we need to know, 
see, touch and not just hear what has been done. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri):Hon. John Maritim  then the Hon. Mike and then we proceed with 
another round.  
Hon. John Maritim : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I also rise to get more clarification. The first 
question I want to ask is about these stationaries. These papers, are we paying for them or are they  
free? It is like a full ream and what we are getting from it is obsolete information. Beneficiaries of 
Molo Ward team received sports equipment from Governor Lee Kinyanjui that I do not understand. 
I think we need to get the latest Report on what is happe ning rather than giving us the old school 
Report. We are in a different era. The Vice Chair should sit down with the Committee and try give 
us the latest things that are going on. That is what we want. Since we have talented footballers in 
Nakuru County, w e need to have some constant tournaments. In that, each and every Ward can 
have some competition either through Sub -Counties or we have a competition such that we can 
go there do some scouting and pick people who know how to play football well, those who can do 
well in rugby so that we can take them far and enable them to join these premier leagues. There 
was a gentleman who was very talented in aerobics. I found him in some town akiuza mayai ya  
kuku nikakumbuka kumbe bado kuku ni ndege.  He wanted to be a pilot so that is a wasted talent. 
On talent realisation we need to be keen on that. These young people cannot be left out just like 
that. Another thing about sport...  
Hon. William Mutai : Point of information  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri ): What is it Hon. William?  
Hon. William Mutai : Point of information Mr. Speaker sir to Hon. Maritim. He is actually 
misleading the House by talking of aerobics as being something to do with air piloting. Aerobics 
is something so different. It is a game. T hank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Are you talking about aviation or…  
Hon. John Maritim : Aviation. Thank you Hon.Member. You were once a teacher and I believe a 
teacher is always a teacher. I was also a student. In Nakuru County; we have 55 Wards. If we can 
identify like five major fields that are good and in these fields we hold some games. We can have 
a tournament say in Subukia Constituency verses Rongai Constituency with a certain amount of 
money to be won. We as MCAs should also be spectators s o that we can fill the field. We watch 
the game, reward them and make it a habit for those people because they know how to play very 
well. For us to make them do wonders, we should give them some incentives. Someone like the 
Vice Chair Sports can afford so me spike shoes. That will be great if we provide these things.  
Finally, I saw 30 women who are currently playing in the premier league. I wonder which premier 
league this is. Vice Chair if you are ready you can answer us which type of premier league this is 
because I have never seen any Women Football in Kenya. I only know of Vihiga Girls and I do 
not think that they come from Nakuru County. Thank you very much.  
Hon.Michael Njenga : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I rise to commend my Vice Chair Sports Hon. 
Wathiai for the good submission. From what everyone has said before me, we can all agree that 
the issue here is not the utilisation of the fund but the approach used by the fund. Everyone who 
has spoken before me, their major issue was how many people have benefit ed from this fund. You 
will note from what my friend Hon. Muraya has said, this Ward Fund tournaments that are held in 
our Wards probably over the weekend, we start a tournament on a Friday and finish it on a 
Wednesday, award the winner then after that the re is no follow up. The next thing that will happen 
is after the next Financial Year, we have another weekend of the same and that is what is hindering 
us from really getting the targeted impact of the sports fund.  
Another thing is that the Sports Fund sh ould be more of a talent fund rather than it being a sport 
fund because when you call it a talent fund and what you do is change the approach and not let it 
not only be about football and volley ball. There are so many things that we can do like swimming 
and all these things are here to help our County. We were discussing about disaster before this and 
there was an issue that was raised about a body that was stuck in the lake for a month and they 
were looking for it. If we had good swimmers who are nurtured  and talented in Nakuru County 
then some of these people would be joining these Departments and help us move the County 
forward. Also there is a need to have this sport or this talent as a continuous activity. Let it not be 
a one weekend activity but be co ntinuous such that if we attend a sport in one Ward and identify 
that Viwandani Ward is good in football and volley ball, we move to the next one and if they are 
good in swimming then let us know what avenues and what channels and sports can be nurtured 
in different Wards. Let us make the fund be more about impacting the people in that Ward and 
nurturing their talent as opposed to just giving them sports tournament for a weekend then after 
that they do not have a ball to play with next weekend or even a jer sey. They take those t -shirts 
they have been given as their Sunday best. The shoes they get probably he will sell it next week 
because he does not have food. If we nurture them and make this a continuous thing they will 
always know that next Friday there w ill be a game and some people will come to scout for good 
footballers, volley ballers, good basket ballers, good swimmers and that spirit will grow.  
I have heard the Vice Chair say that there are people who have joined the league. Let them also 
come back and help the ones who are there right now. I believe that they also started from 
somewhere because you find like the guy he has mentioned went to Manchester and he has never 
come back here to even give hope to one or two people he left behind. This needs t o be a continuous 
process and well -coordinated between the County, the people who benefit and the people who 
were left behind so that it can be a continuous process to help the youth of Nakuru County.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Kany ere from Nakuru East, then lastly there 
is Hon. Everlyn.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for giving me this chance. I just want to say 
that I am not going to support the Report since to me it looks more academic because we have just 
been given figures and this Report should be comprehensive. The Report says 90 footb all teams. 
We need to know which teams are there. We come from different Wards and I might want to know 
which teams from my Ward benefited from such a kitty. The question was so clear; the Member 
for Viwandani was so clear in that he wanted to know the imp act so I expected the Committee to 
highlight the monies that have been used since the inception of this kitty and what it has achieved.  
According to me I think the Committee needs to do more on this. Let us not take this House as a 
joyride. We are here to  deliberate on very serious issues and those are monies which are being 
used. I want to say that the way our able Vice Chair was saying they should be given to different 
Wards. If Nakuru East Ward has been given Kshs 25 000, then let me be given that money  so that 
I can know my Ward’s priorities.   
Hon. Wathiai said that one of the challenges was delay on the distribution of the kits due to some 
issues to do with procurement. The procurement aspect has been decentralised. They want to 
procure everything for  each and every Ward and when Hon. Wathiai was finishing his Statement, 
he said that the fund is referred as Ward Sports Allocation. Let that Ward Allocation be given to 
the Member of County Assembly so that we can decide on our priorities. Some people sit  
somewhere here in Nakuru and decide for my Ward and I know as you have just highlighted we 
have different disciplines of sports but from what you have highlighted here it is more of football. 
I want to urge the Committee to get back to work and give us a comprehensive Report. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Kirui then Hon. Alex. The Hon. William were you 
lifting your hand?  
Hon. William Mutai : I have been a teacher for that long and I have been encouraging students to 
lift their hands.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): So now you will be the last one. In the Assembly you now have 
a different game plan.  
Hon. William Mutai:  Mr. Speaker since you have got my attention why can I not continue.  
(Laughter ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon.  Member we already have a round. Kindly allow us to 
go in that order so that you be the last one to give your input.  
Hon. Everlyn Chepkirui : Thank you Mr. Speaker for the chance you have given me to comment 
on the Report that has been given by the Committe e on Sports. I am a bit concerned when I see 
the number of youth who have realised their full potential in terms of talent. We have been given 
the number of football women who are currently playing in premier league. I would really like the 
Committee on Sp orts to give us more details or a comprehensive Report about this number we 
have been given. They have given us ninety football women who are currently playing division 
one. I really would like to know these women who have benefited by their names and wher e they 
are playing.  
Secondly Mr. Speaker, I have seen that PWDs are also participating but from these pictures here I 
do not see any PWDs group. We have the sitting volley ball team for both women and men on the 
side of PWDs and I have not seen them. In m y Sub -County of Kuresoi South, I was there when all 
these uniforms were given but it is sad that there were no shoes given to all these players. How are 
we going to know that those people who were given uniform are players? When the uniforms were 
being giv en out in Kuresoi South, I just saw a group of men and women who were given. It was 
around 6:30 pm in the evening so I do not know how we are going to be sure that those people 
who were given uniforms are the real football players.  
When we talk of Sports and Culture, we also have these students who are singing traditional folk 
songs and all others. It seems like the kitty did not help them. In Keringet Ward we have Ndavibit 
who always perform to the National level through the singing of folks songs. That g roup is not a 
beneficiary of this kitty. I would really like to encourage or to propose to the Committee that when 
we talk of sport kitty it is not just about football. We have not been given how many athletes have 
benefited from this. Mr. Speaker it was j ust recently when I heard some of our Honorable Members 
talking about an athlete who wrote a message to our Governor saying that he needs sport shoes. If 
this kitty could have really benefited these people we would not have heard such embarrassment 
where s omeone has to write a message to our Governor to be given shoes. So, I really wish and 
really pray that we may use this kitty for those people who deserve and those who have talents. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon Kirui.  
Hon. Bernard Kirui:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I stand not to support this Report but ask my friend 
Vice Chair Sports Committee that at least do some amendments on this Report. I think this 
Honorable House is the one that facilitates this Department wit h funds but when you see personnel 
championing this thing, we do not have a representative from this House. Mr. Speaker we have 
Chief Officer in charge of Sports, Finance Officer, Sports Officers, Sub -County Administrators 
and one PWD. I think we should ha ve one of our own from the Sports Committee who represents 
this Honorable House in this Department. No two; we have this fund Kshs 500 000 per Ward. This 
money was fixed just to buy materials like jerseys, boots but there are some problems that our 
youth a re going through like transport or even lunches when they are visiting some areas to play 
with other teams. I think this Kshs 500 000 should be given to an MCA who represents that area 
to share among the teams that are in that particular Ward.  
So I think this amendment if this Committee goes through to include these proposed amendments, 
I think we are going to support them but we have a point where they decided to increase this money 
from Kshs 250 000 to Kshs 1million; I think it is good but the first amen dment that I have already 
talked about I think should be considered. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Alex and then the last person will be Hon. 
William  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Thank you Mr. Speaker. This Report as noted  here is a good Report but 
remains to be a good Report in paper because one person has indicated that this is just a Report 
that remains in paper and I just take it as that. When you look at the last 10 years since 2013, I 
think this fund has been there an d Kshs 27.5 million given to the County to the various Wards. Up 
to this date we are talking about Kshs 275 or Kshs 100 million we are almost hitting Kshs half a 
billion.  
With this and since then, all that we have been doing is purchasing kits some of the m when you 
are doing rounds within our Wards they are of very low quality. You cannot compare them with 
kits bought through NGCDF money at the Constituency level. We have found and seen games 
being well organised at the Constituency level from the money al located from the NGCDF level. 
All that Nakuru County has concentrated on is buying kits of which if you are told to purchase kits 
throughout for instance, I have seen some teams here which have been given kits. This year Mr. 
Speaker, we are still giving mo re kits; we are not even doing an engagement with these teams on 
the ground. We are not doing any favour to these people if this fund was to be increased, we would 
then request of what use to this youth, what is the purpose of this fund to these teams and I cannot 
stand here to defend the Chair or Vice Chairperson on Sports Committee in saying that this is a 
good Report. This is not as good Report; my youth and I can tell you Mr. Speaker that if we move 
on this mediocrity kind of working as a House, we are losing a whole generation. We must stand 
and say as it is; we have a young Government led by Hon. Susan Kihika our Governor and I know 
there are so many hopes enshrined and inclined in the hearts of the youth from this County. When 
you look at this Bunge , most of us are youth and I am very sure even from your own seat Mr. 
Speaker, you cannot spot a team that really progressed in your last term in Biashara Ward as the 
MCA for 10 years. You cannot actually say this where I found this team I brought it here an d these 
are the talents that I nurtured and that is where we are saying that mediocrity must stop in this 
Government and we must work for the people and hence we ask the Committee on Sports to go 
back on the drawing board and nurture the youth. If you do n ot do that, you are not going to heaven 
my friends. Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  
Hon. William Mutai : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker sir for this opportunity. I concur with 
my colleagues Hon. Alex. I stand here not to support the Report. This Report se emingly is very 
ambiguous and sincerely speaking, it has not given the real meaning that was intended even at the 
beginning when the Chair read the Report, I could not tell in this paper where he started is page 1 
or page 2 because of some points, he concl uded before going to the next page.  
(Laughter ) 
That means even the Chair himself is not aware of what is happening. To cite some few areas, look 
at no.4 (iv); under  the Impact of Sport Fund For The Youth In Nakuru County , whether you can 
make some meaning out of it; “that branding of sports kitty for men and women , boys and girls 
within the County with the uniforms makes them to participate and compete without challenges.” 
What is the real meaning of that Mr. Chair? Mr. Sp eaker sir, as I also scrutinise and look at 
photographs that have been presented which is actually consuming a lot of resources unnecessarily 
and without driving any much meaning apart from telling us there was something that was done. I 
referred to Kering et beneficiaries from my Ward and I keenly looked at the photograph and 
identified some of the political cronies who can never by the look of things, they can never 
participate in any of our sporting activities. I have even indicated one old mama who has b een 
given a T -shirt. I am very sure this was not sporting it was actually politics being played  
(Laughter ) 
Mr. Chair I want to beg that you go deep into the response; the Report again is so biased if the 
Chair cannot bring out athletics , which is actually one of the sporting activities that we export in 
this Country by even recognising some of the international athletes ; about 50 that I have in my 
Ward or by even giving them shoes, spikes or capturing them in a photograph like this , that means 
the Report is  shady and it was actually prepared in a house and these people never went out to do 
their research. Thank you very much Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. William, you come from a very rich area 
for the discipline of athle tics and so from what I am gathering from the Members and their input, 
it is like now the Hon. Member who had requested for a Statement was more on football than other 
disciplines. The Hon. Member for Viwandani you have 1 minute that this would be the thir d time 
that you talking about the same issue.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Mr. Speaker, the Committee now has put you into assumption what I was 
asking about. I asked a general question about the beneficiaries of this sports fund that has been 
revolving within our Wards. So, Mr. Speaker when I listened to Hon. Michael Gathanwa, a 
Member of this Committee challenging the Report, I was worried because it seems that this Report 
was just an in  house as Hon. Mutai has said. They thought that they will just come and answe r 
here and then we leave.  
Mr. Speaker we are not living the House until we are satisfied; we are not letting them leave until 
we are given a comprehensive Report about the beneficiaries of this kitty that has been going 
around for more than 10 years. So m y humble submission is that on part of the composition of the 
personnel that are involved, you see the Chief Officer in charge of Sports, the Finance Officer, 
Sports Officer, Sub -County Administrator. One PWD. Hon. Speaker these people that are here are 
do not even think of the importance of this fund. You see the formation is all about how they can 
benefit and how this money can benefit themselves not our youth. If you look in the photos, you 
cannot see clearly what was given. All these sports kits are in sacks; we needed them displayed so 
that we can see. We cannot even know whether there were sports kits that were distributed. Ni 
kama ma hindi ama mboga imewekwa mahali . So we need this Committee to go back, do their 
research, and do a comprehensive Report on this floor of the House. Mr. Speaker I beg that you 
send them back. I am now even more confused than I was before I asked this question  
(Laughter ) 
Thank you the Chair Sports; now what is clear from this House is that at times a Committee right 
now as we talk, we do not enjoy firsthand  experience because we rely so much on what is provided 
for from the mother Department and maybe this is what is neces sitating at the National Assembly, 
the CS would be appearing before the House or the Committee of the House so that now there 
could be such if the CEC and CO were seated in this House they could benefit from the aspirations 
of the Members of the County Ass embly.  
Maybe in the last two terms, those Members aspired to get more of the branded jerseys but behold 
time has come when changes are needed maybe you need money to achieve a different thing or 
objective. The Chair Sports you may need to sit with the CEC for Sports and CO the Directorate 
of that Department, so that now you can come up with a comprehensive Report and maybe have a 
different approach to how you want to enhance the sporting activities in this County.  
More to that Hon. Members, you may realise  that we do not have a substantive Sports Act in this 
County. That is work you need to come up with so that will take care of the various disciplines so 
that it does not become a Ministry of Football or a Department of Football. It needs to be a 
Department  of Sports and that needs to be seen to be working that way.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable Members this House stands adjourned until next week Tuesday at 9.30am. As earlier 
I had communicated, we are going to have a very brief Kamukunji  after this. So Members, k indly 
remain behind.  
The House rose at  5.00pm  
 
 
 
   
 
 