COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Thursday 18 th  July 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10 : 35  A M  
[The  Temporary  Speaker (Hon. William Mutai ) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
SPORTS PREPARATIONS  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon . William Mutai ):  We have a Communication  from the Chair. 
Hon ou rable Members I take this opportunity to welcome you after a very long leave. I have an 
important Communication  concerning Sports ;  as you are aware we have started our sporting season 
and I want to take this opportunity to congratulate all the disciplines that have star ted doing practice 
towards our competition that is due to come in  August . Therefore, Hono u rable  Members  I want to 
communicate to you to continue registering in the various disciplines. Make sure that you attend 
the practices and on top of that it is very i mportant to become more committed so that we can 
produce strong competitive teams that represent our County Assembly. Hono u rable Members take 
note of that, next order.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
HOUSE RESUMPTION FOR REGULAR SESSIONS  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  Hono u rable Members there is a N otice of 
Motion that  pursuant to the provisions of Standing Order 30 and 31 and further to the 
Communication ……so rry  for that ,  let me invite Hono u rable Fadhili Msuri to give a Notice  of 
Motion  on behalf of Hono u rable Alex Langat, the L eader of  Majority .  
Hon . Fadhili  Msuri:  Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker , I am here to give a N otice of  Motion 
on behalf the L eader of Majority  that pursuant to the provision s  of Standing O rder 30 and 31 and 
further to the C ommunication that was made earlier concerning the House Resumption for Regular 
Sessions , that this House  resolves to resume its Sittings  ( Regular Sessions ) for the year 2023 on 
the 25 th , July 2023 at 9:30 am and thereafter we proceed with the rest of the S ession s  as per the 
adopted Calendar  for this year 2023, thank you.   
 
 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon . William Mutai ):  Thank you, next order. This  House stands 
adjourned  until today at 2:30 pm .  
 
The House adjourned at 10:45 AM  
 
 