APRIL 12, 2 022                                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY 0OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 12th   April 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House Met At 10: 50a m 
[The Dep uty Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ): In the Chair]     
PRAYER  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ): Good Morning  Honorable Members . Clerk what is 
the next order?  
PAPER  
AGRICULTURE COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE NAKURU COUNTY ANIMAL DISEASE CONTROL BILL 
NO. 11 OF 2019  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ): We have some Paper s to be laid, first is the R eport 
of the  Committee on Agriculture  on the Nakuru County Animal Disease Control Bill no. 11 of 
2019 by Hon.  Wilson Mwangi.  
Hon. Wilson Mwangi: I beg to table the Report of the  Committee on Agriculture  on the Nakuru 
County Animal Disease Control Bill No . 11 of 2019 . I beg to table.  
                                                    (The Report was laid on the table)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui):  Thank you hono urable the Vice Chairperson for 
laying the Paper . We also have a Report of the Auditor General on the Nakuru County Emergency 
Fund for the year ending 30th June 2020. The Leader of Majority  will lay this but Honorable Philip 
Wanjohi will assist.  
PAPER  
AUDITOR GENERAL REPORT ON THE NAKURU COUNTY EMERGENCY FUND FOR  
THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 202. 
Hon. Philip Wanjohi : Thank you Honorable Speaker , on behalf of the Leader of Majority  I wish 
to lay the Report of the Auditor General on the Nakuru County Emergency Fund for the year ended 
30th June 2020. This is in pursuant to the provision of Section 47(1) of the Public Audit Act 2015. 
I lay the Paper.  
APRIL 12, 2 022                                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY 0OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
                                              (The Report was laid on the table)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ): That one stands committed  to the Committe e on 
Public Accounts and Investment  (PAIC ) and you can come up with a Report within a period 30 
day. Thank you.  Continue with the other R eport.  
 
 
 
PAPER  
AUDITOR GENERAL REPORT ON THE CENTRAL RIFT VALLEY WATER WORKS DEVELOPMENT 
AGENCY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2020  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi : Honorable Deputy Speaker I have a second Pape r to lay. This is a Report 
of the Auditor General  on the Central Rift Valley Water Works Development Agency for the year 
ended 30th June 2020. This is in pursuant to provisions of Section 47(1) of The Public Audit Act 
2015 . I beg to lay.   
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ): Thank you Honorable Wanjohi . This  stand s 
committed  to the Committee  on Public Accounts and Investment (PAIC). I think the  Chairperson 
for the  Committee on Health Services will inform the Chairperson  for the  Committee  of PAIC . 
They should come with a Report within a period of 30 days.  You now have a huge task to 
accomplish but you have to try your best as PAIC Committee. Next order.  
 
BILL  
THE NAKURU COUNTY ANIMAL DISEASE CONTRO L BILL NO. 11 OF 2019  
(SECOND READING ) 
(By leave o f the House)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ): Honorable Wilson Mwangi  
Hon. Wilson Mwangi: Thank you Honorable Deputy Speaker, hereby bring the Motion  that the 
Nakuru County Anima l Disease Control Bill No. 11 of 2019 be now read a second time.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui):  Someone to second.  
Hon. Wilson Mwangi: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. We need to have this Bill brought to 
our County so that we can have the issue of prevention and c ontrol of the notifiable diseases that 
usually occur I so many areas of our County. Having in mind that we have lost so many heads of 
APRIL 12, 2 022                                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY 0OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 animals do to notified diseases that usually affect our animals and mostly when these diseases have 
not been notified.  
This Bill will be able to have the regulations put down to make sure that any area that has been 
affected by any of the notifiable diseases, which usually spread very fast, to make sure that we 
have issues put in place so that we can be able to control the d isease. We have been having areas 
like Bahati and Solai. Last year we had foot and mouth disease that affected do many animals in 
those areas and at the end of the day most of our farmers lost so many animals of which the disease 
was not notified by the in spectors.  
This Bill will give the space to make sure that the inspectors who are veterinary officers and 
inspectors of animals will have notified the officers who are on the ground and also our inspectors 
to make sure that the animals have been injected t o stop the spread of the diseases. So, this Bill 
will go further to make sure that we regulate all the animals that are being brought in our abattoirs 
and in our livestock yards to make sure that any animal which has a disease cannot be able to be 
sold for  human consumption.  
This Bill will also make sure that we quarantine areas that have been affected to make sure that 
the disease does not spread to other areas. So, this Bill will help our farmers, and as we know 
Nakuru County is a county of Agriculture so that we can make sure that our farmers get their 
profits but not incur losses that are brought by the notifiable diseases. This Bill will make sure that 
all things are put in place to make sure that we contr ol all diseases that may affect our animals. I  
want to take this opportunity to welcome Hon. Njuguna from Elburgon to second this Bill. Thank 
you. 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Hon. Njuguna.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. Indeed, this Bill is timely. It is a 
Bill that  is coming to create a legal bridge because we have been having a vacuum in terms of legal 
instruments that can facilitate our livestock department officers to conduct their jobs. Recently, we 
had Corona and during Corona, the Public Health Department had laws that were allowing them 
to quarantine people in certain sections and also declare certain areas as a no -go zone because of 
the diseases.  
Equally, you realise that our animals have continuously been affected by the influx of animals 
from other Countie s. We do not have laws that could have been enforced to make sure that at least 
we have secured our borders as a County so that our animals will not be infested with diseases. 
Therefore, with such a Bill, I am sure that our farmers are going out to have a better way of survival 
with the animals in our areas.  
This Bill is also creating a framework whereby you find that the insurance companies; farmers can 
now be able to interact with them because of the inspection of the animals. In terms of animal 
identifi cation, that is tagging and using the computerised systems of identifying animals. Via the 
APRIL 12, 2 022                                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY 0OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Bill, I believe it would be possible. Therefore, allow me to say that this is the Bill that its effect 
will be applied. There will be sanity in the Livestock Departm ent in our County. Therefore, I beg 
to second.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you Hon. Chair for Health for seconding the 
Bill.  
(Question propose d that the Nakuru County Animal  Disease Control Bill number 11 of 2019 be 
now read a Second T ime). 
Debate is open for all.  
Hon. Cecilia Nyambura: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. I want to say that this Bill is the 
best because it has come at the right time. Farmers have been experiencing losses due to animals  
death and due to production and I think this Bill is good. What I can urge the Department is that 
the way the vaccinations are done, they are usually done halfway and so, no diseases are controlled 
because if you inject a number of 1000 animals and the nu mber in that area is 20, 000, then there 
is nothing the Department has done. Therefore, I would urge those concerned to make sure that 
every animal is vaccinated. Also in this Bill there is vaccination of dogs that is canine and it is 
very important becaus e the rabies disease is rheumatic and it usually affects human beings. 
Therefore if it is controlled well through vaccinations, then you would not experience rabies in 
human beings. Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you Hon. Cecilia I  know you are talking 
through  experience since you had served as a Veterinary Officer for many years and your advice 
cannot be taken for granted. I know what you are saying you understand it well and surely yo ur 
advice should be taken seriously. Hon. Wanjohi.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to congratulate the Committee on 
Agriculture for coming up with this Bill. This is not the only Bill they have done. Last week they 
came up with an other Bill on Urban Farming and they did not leave it there, this week they come 
up with another Bill on Animal Disease Control. Of course it would have been pointless for us to 
keep the animals in the urban centers and even the rural areas without knowing  how we will control 
the diseases. I think the person with the authority of the diseases has spoken, the Hon. Cecilia, and 
because she is an expert in this field, those of us who are not very qualified in the area of agriculture 
will agree with her that th is is a very nice Bill; it talks about the animals infected with diseases like 
what Hon. WA Jeff  said, last year we had an issue with animals throughout the County where we 
had anthrax.  
There was a big debate in this House where Members argued over its ou tbreak but now with the 
coming of this Bill, the Animal Inspector s, will be in a position to answer to say yes there is anthrax 
or there is that other notifiable disease which has to be treated. Therefore I arise to support this 
Bill. Thank you.  
APRIL 12, 2 022                                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY 0OF NAKURU DEBATES  
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you Hon. Wanjohi.  
Now I want to propose a q uestion  
(Question proposed that the Nakuru County Animal Disease Control Bil l No. 11 of 2019 be now 
read a Second T ime).  
(Question put and agreed to)  
(The Nakuru County Animal Disease Control Bill No. 11 of 29019 was accordingly read a 
Second T ime) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Now this House is adjourned until 2.30 in the afternoon.  
(The House rose at 11.05am ) 
 
 
 
 