MAY 17, 2022                               COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 17TH   May 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 11: 10am 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu ) in the Chair]  
PRAYER  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu ): Good morning Honorable Members , you are all heroes ; this is 
because despite all odds you always make time to com e here to work for this Nation of ours. I 
want to thank you and God bless you.  Let us continue work for the Government until the end . 
Let us encourage our colleagues to find time and come serve the people . Clerk next order.  
MOTION  
THE HOUSE TO ADOPT LANDS COMMITTEE REPORT ON NAKURU COUNTY SPATIAL PLAN 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu ): We have a Motion from the  Chairperson for the Committee  on 
Lands, Housing,  and Physical Planning Honorable Stephen  Ng’ethe. He is also vying on 
UBUNTU party ticket for Mai Mahiu Ward.  
Hon. Stephen Ng’ethe: Thank you so much, I want to move a Motion; - 
THAT  this Hous e adopts the Report of the Committe e on Lands, Housing , and Physical Planning 
on the Nakuru County Spatial Plan tabled in this  House on Wednesday 11th May, 2022 during 
the afternoon session . 
The importance of a Spatial Plan cannot be overstated because it addresses and gives a roadmap 
on serious primary issues touching on reframing of our priorit ies as a County. First, this House  
the other  day adopted the Valuation Role but it cannot be operationali sed without the passage or 
adoption of Spatial Plan. Secondly, we have the rating Bill with us and we cannot ignite a debate 
on the rating Bill having not passed the Spatial Plan and the valuation role. Lack of an approved 
Spatial Plan is a hindrance to service provision.  
For example, it seeks to address the issue of historical skewed land rates;  we have had several 
Petitions from Gilgil and a nother serious Petition from Shabaab  Ward whereby you find that 
plots that are adjacent or back -to-back , you will find one plot has a subscription of  Kshs 70,000 
while the other subscribes at Kshs  6000. The defunct Local Authorities informed these 
disparities  and after a course check on really what transpired we found that those who owned 
those plots decided that they should subscribe at a lower rate than others should , which has really 
hindered the issues of collections of rate because Members brou ght a Petition that we never 
worked on it.  
Now with the passage of this Spatial Plan , this will be history because it will deal with that 
Petition which is still with us. Secondly, there is zoning  and with the Spatial Plan seeks to 
address the issue of controlled development whereby the development will be guided  by zoning 
MAY 17, 2022                               COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
 
of some places like Agricultural, Industrial, Residential, and Commercial  to mitigate the urban 
sprawl.  
After the 2007/2008 Post E lections Violence , we had so many immigrants here in N akuru and 
because we did not have an elaborate Spatial Plan with us, you will find we have started realizing 
mushrooming of slums  and without this Spatial Plan, such bad practices will continue. The other 
one is that the last Spatial Plan was done in 2005 ; it is in the County Government Act,  and it 
provides  that Counties should undertake a Spatial Plan after every 10 years.  
We were supposed to have passed a Spatial Plan by 2015;  we are back  behind the schedule  now 
it is 2022 and it is only that Nakuru residents are peace loving and they ought to have gone to 
court and challenge this issue of lack of an approved Spatial Plan with us. We have the Report 
with us Members and I do not need to go through this Report,  you have the details with you .  
That was just a rider so that where Members are no w thorough with the information because we 
in land Committee are privy to this document and we are thorough so I do not need to embark on 
the Petition of the obvious and I r est my case.   
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu ):  How do you rest your case, you move or you rest your case?   
Hon. Stephen Ng’ethe: I now want to move and request Honorable Kabutu to second the 
Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu):   But Mheshimiwa for the purpose of record and Hansard,  you 
should have just told us a bit about. I can see some very good things here.  Social Infrastructure, I 
can see at least 3 stadia, Regional Sports Centers . These are good things to go into record. Just 
highlight  
Hon. Stephen Ng’ethe : Okay, I will quickly go through to page 7 on Committee observation on 
the Report.  
 One, the proposals in the County Special Plan; as a County and as an Assembly to consider 
budgetary allocations for implementation of the proposals of thi s Special Plan and the other one 
involvement of stakeholders because at the end of the day, the buck stops with them during 
implementation of this especial plan, maybe many will be affected adversely with 
implementation of this special plan on the urban sp rawl…  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu):  Maybe at that juncture would want to know, was it committed 
to public participation?  
Hon. Stephen Ng’ethe:  Yes, it is a thorough document Mr. Speaker by a renowned Learner. The 
other one is on the urban sprawl, you real ise that for service provision, and people should be 
advised accordingly. They need water, they need electricity, and they need gas and roads. But 
when people are sparsely located you find that it is very difficult to issue such essential services 
when peo ple are not gathered in a planned manner. The other one is on the many unexploited and 
underutilised resources; natural resources e.g. in the pyrethrum sector. Agriculture wise, we are 
not able to meet the County demand so you find economically we source o ur foods and other 
services from other Counties. Meaning that we should be advised to utilise properly these 
unexploited resources for business and their wellbeing.  
MAY 17, 2022                               COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
 
There are also some liberal migrants from other parts I have hinted we have so many migrant s in 
Nakuru. Some five years ago you find that Nakuru was the most growing city in Africa informed 
by the many migrants from other parts. Meaning that we have a lot of labour force with us. So, it 
is a matter of now investing so much on manufacturing and i ndustries because you have a lot of 
labor with us as a county.  
 Also, the fertility rate in Nakuru is higher than the National average. So, you find that Nakuru 
also people are fertile and that translates to a larger population and that is labour that can be 
utilised positively  
That other one is on issues of water. A nd we need dams so that we are able now has to do with 
that coping mechanism to deal with issues of lack of water, especially during the dry spells.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu):  Thank you, I think those highlights are good. This document 
will be uploaded  into our website because it is a very important document, it is a very well 
researched document. So, you make all your seconder.  
Hon. Stephen Ng’ethe:  Thank you, Mheshimiwa Mwangi kindly second this Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu):  Thank you Honorab le Mwangi  
Hon. S imon Mwangi:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thought the Chair had forgotten that he had 
actually asked honorable Kabutu to second the Motion. However, I am a Member of the Lands 
Committee and I must actually admit just as the Chair said, this do cument actually will assist the 
County in terms of planning. Most of the things are well elaborated and even in the Department 
of Finance also, it will be able to assist the Department in mapping out the entire County in terms 
of revenue collection. So it is a good document. And I want to urge the House to actually adopt it 
so that it can be put in place. Otherwise,  I rise to second. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu):  Thank you; I want to propose the question. And the question is:  
(Question proposed  that the House adopts a Report of the Committee of Lands, Housing and 
Physical Planning on a Nakuru County Spatial Plan, tabled on the House on Wednesday 11th 
May 2022, during the afternoon plenary session).  
Honourable Njuguna.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I like to commend the work the Committee 
has done. A County that does not invest in the research, or to such kind of planning, is the 
County that does not have a future. But this County with these kind of Reports, if they can be 
implemente d, I think we can go far.  
But Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we have been documenting things and they have not been 
implemented since the time we came into this House. We would wish that the House that will be 
coming to make sure that they will be oversig hting the County Government of Nakuru so that 
they can implement whatever has been documented here.  
Mr. Speaker that said, I have seen I do not know whether it is an oversight on what we did 
because some of the areas like Rongai, that is near… and is a hub  of industries, and very soon we 
will be seeing it as the Industrial Area for Nakuru, it has not been quoted here Mr. Speaker and 
we would wish that if there can be some amendments to this Report, so that Rongai and some 
MAY 17, 2022                               COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
 
parts of Molo can be captured Mr. S peaker, so that we can know when they are planning, our 
future will be bright. And the seconder of this Report, comes from Rongai and I wish the 
Committee saw that as an area that has a potential and an area that can be improved so that even 
in terms of pl anning, things can be done well.  
Mr. Speaker you find that some of the areas like where I come from in Molo, and specifically 
Kasarani, there are no social amenities that were left behind by the Municipal Council. And 
today people are committing suicide b ecause even having areas where they can go to rest like 
parks and such kind of things are not there. However, we do not blame the County Councils that 
were there. But today because we have time, let us have proper planning and let this Report be 
amended so  that it can include social amenities where people can go to rest and in Industrial 
Areas, let us have areas where people can at least after doing their work, they can have places 
where they can rest. I want to rest my case, thank you Mr. Speaker  
The Speak er (Hon. Joel Kairu):  Do you want to be informed of anything or you have already 
rested your case? Okay.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  On a point of information. Mr. Speaker, you know, that is why 
sometimes we advise Members first of all, to go through the Report,  digest and then … and then 
involve all parameters Mr. Speaker, so that you can understand the  Report , let me direct the 
Member, although I am not a Member of the Committee but I have gone through the Report. If 
you go to page 21, bulletin 8.6, about Spati al Development Framework. It is good sometimes to 
direct young Members; if you check that one …  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): Order! There is no young Member and old Member in this 
House. All Members are Honorable Members.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Mr. Speaker sir that is why I am saying if you check very well, we start 
with those who came earlier.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): If you go like that, even you are a young Member. The only 
Member I can say is an old Member is Hon. Ng’ethe.  
Hon. Stanley Kar anja: Mr. Speaker sir, bulletin number 8.6 Spatial Plan Development 
Framework; Nakuru and Naivasha. In bulletin 1, it says the County Government should promote 
high level urban functions. That is the terminology. There is Subukia and there is Molo. If you 
check there, you will see that what it means by that is putting all what he was talking about. The 
only thing I have seen is that even the Member who contributed in terms of seconding is Hon. 
Simon. He always seems to struggle.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu ): Okay. I do not see if your information is any useful because it 
has been proved that Rongai is not mentioned here.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I think the Member just because he is 
advanced in terms of age does not mean that he has a monopoly of interpretation of this report. I 
just gave a reference of poor planning in Elburgon and I was alluding to Elburgon because I 
know very soon, Sobea will be congested and I was saying Rongai ought to have been captured 
by this report because I have seen the kind of developments that are taking place there. However, 
I was not coming up with the issues of Elburgon because I already saw it here as part of the 
summary of the report.  
MAY 17, 2022                               COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): Noted. The mover will reply to that.  Hon. Kabutu.  
Hon. Timothy Kabutu: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I am a Member of Lands Committee and 
we were taken through this report. This is just the brief of the report. The whole Report is wide 
and very comprehensive and it has taken care of all those satellite towns like Molo, Rongai, 
Elburgon and Subukia. If the Honorable Members can be taken through that report, they will see 
that their areas have been taken care of. Therefore, this is a very important report because a 
County that does not plan, plan s to fail. Therefore, I am standing here to support this report 
because it will help us to develop very quickly. Therefore, I support this Report.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you. Hon. Karanja.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Fi rst of all, I want to congratulate the 
Committee for explaining whatever was in the large report and reducing it to summary form. 
You know why whole houses were beneficial is that we do call whoever came up with the spatial 
report so that we can be taken c are of as a House such that even when the report comes, we have 
already consumed the bigger report and we have asked the question whoever came up with the 
spatial plan so that now we be able to understand. If you check at this report, because …  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Hon. Karanja, you know it is also good to be on record that full 
houses were important. Do you want to imply they are no longer important?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: I am saying that they are important but currently, they are no longer 
there. That is why I am saying that such a report …  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): But as you say, because we have the one, we were to go this 
week. Probably, when we plan to go, you should inform the Chair that he should get the 
consultant to come and exp lain.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: It is important. Then if you clearly check and you go to bulletin 6.0 on 
the Committee’s observation from the Report, if you check that Report well because I have gone 
through the Report. Let me cite bulletin 5, that the Report  also depicts that Nakuru County is 
endowed with many unexploited, underutilized or poorly managed natural resources which if 
utilized well, will positively impact on the economic fortune of the population. That one is very 
important.  
Jump one bulletin th en go to that bulletin that says that most urban areas are characterized by 
urban sprouts, abject poverty, poorly structured human settlement, informal trade, and 
environmental destruction among other negative attributes. Go to the other one that follows. On 
the population pyramid, the Report indicates that the population of the age group of 65 and 
above is large. This means that the region has a huge population of ageing, thus increasing 
dependency ratio.  
It also indicates that most of the younger populati on has moved out of the region in search of 
greener pastures. This is a very important document and it informs the type of Government that 
should come in because if at all the County Government should have put such a consultancy 
when it was starting, we co uld have gone far. If you check at page 8, that the Report also gives 
the birth rate to be approximately 6,735 births in the County per year and death rate to be 
approximately 1,720 deaths per year. This is according to the 2009 population census.   
MAY 17, 2022                               COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
 
In the  other bulletin, the teenage pregnancy is still high in the County and that nearly a quarter of 
women aged 15 to 19 years have had children. That the total fertility rate is 6.4 and a woman 
who survives from age 15 to 49 is expected to give birth to 6 chil dren etc. but that population, 
what worries me is that you go to that place that the p er capita  line is estimated at Kshs 1 562 
and 2 913 per adult. Now Mr. Speaker if you go to the supermarket today with Kshs 1000, you 
cannot buy a packet of unga  and if y ou combine the two, packet of unga  and also a packed oil, 
Kshs 1000 cannot buy. That means we are living in very dangerous times. Take that one and 
population, then it means that in the near future, we will be a County of bandits, we will have 
insecurity a nd that is why I am saying the Report is very important although it has some several 
gaps that I was asking Hon. Ng’ethe and that one goes to the last page 17 on agriculture and 
livestock.  
That Pyrethrum should be rehabilitated by putting around Kshs 18mi llion seedlings in the 
nurseries in collaboration with Kenya Pyrethrum Board though I think the entity changed. So if 
you check some of the recommendations that have been given and the County is just moving 
now, you know we are in a transition period, and then you check page 13 on agriculture 
production, that huge population that we saw and then you contend with the fact that there is 
inadequate budgetary allocation for agriculture. I am seeing that this Report is very important 
and that is why we need to c all the County and the residents of this County to come up with a 
sober Government. We should not look at the National Government because what normally…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Honorable  Member please do not use the floor of the House to 
insinuate o r impeach or campaign, because it is this Government which has prepared this Report.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : In the wee hours!  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): No, no, no! This matter has been pending…  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  From this Report, Mr. Speaker liste n to this, you see what I am saying…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Yes point of information, inform the Member.  
Hon. S imon Mwangi : Mr. Speaker I just wanted to inform the Member that this document that 
we are having in this House, this Report that we are having in this House is just but a highlight 
from what the consultant has been doing. Remember this is process that has actually taken very 
long because…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): I was in the other Government and I remember this document 
started bein g prepared in the other former Government. Is it not Hon. Chair?  
Hon. S imon Mwangi : Yes. So Mr. Speaker for us why we want to pass this document is so that 
if need be, the next Government that is going to come in, should come up with plans to mitigate 
these issues that have been raised by this Report in this Assembly. So it is not about blaming the 
previous or whichever Government but it is about setting a step forward in terms of what we 
need to do to sort out the problems that we are facing as a County Mr . Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you for the information. You have been informed my 
friend.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Thematic! and that is what I am saying that the County ought to be…  
MAY 17, 2022                               COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Yes Hon. Kabutu  
Hon. Timothy  Kabutu : I arise on a point of information to Hon. Karanja  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Yes  
Hon. Timothy Kabutu:  Because Hon. Karanja is also a Member of this House and he is also 
part of the Government.  
(Applause)  
The failing the Government that he is t alking about because he needs to come up with a solution 
so that our people can live a better life. Instead of blaming others and he is a honorable Member 
of this House. Therefore…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you Hon. Kabutu for informing the memb er that he is 
part of that government. Hon.  Karanja you have been informed properly if you had forgotten that 
you are part of that government.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Speaker members are getting me of guard in terms of information I 
want to give. I am sa ying now from this report that has highlighted all those good things, I am 
saying we need a serious Executive. I am not blaming anything, I am saying we require now 
truth because we are residents of Nakuru, we are residents of this County and because now w e 
have this Report, we need a serious Executive to implement this Report to the latter such that 
from now whatever we are talking about here, Mr. Speaker,  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Hon. Karanja I am trying to tell you to desist from that debate 
becaus e you also need a serious Assembly to oversight actually what is more important is a 
serious Assembly to oversight and make sure this is implemented. Remember this House has an 
Implementation Committee. Okay!  
Hon Stanley Karanja : Which has been sleeping an d now that is where the issue is. So just 
deviate from that issue because I was supporting the debate but now there are so many 
interruptions. You know Mr. Speaker, as I leave I am saying we require a serious Government 
with a serious Assembly and if someb ody did not fail you cannot fail Mr. Speaker to be 
regurgitated in the name of an Ubuntu; this one requires serious Executive and a serious 
Assembly and that is what I stand for because this Report, I am telling you this is a very 
important Report and that  is why I was asking the Chair who has also been consumed in the 
Ubuntu life, to tell us the consultant so that we can ask several questions. He was also not serious 
when presenting.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Okay.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : If he was telling you do this other than giving the Report…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): You have a point of order. The Chair has a point of order.  
Hon. Stephen Ng’ethe:  Mr. Speaker, Hon. Member is digressing and going political. Stick to 
the debate.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Okay Hon. Karanja may be you should summarise so that we 
can conclude.  
MAY 17, 2022                               COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
 
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  I was saying the obvious that it requires a serious Government to 
implement this special Report and a serious Chairman, the way he is, but he is a good man  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Okay; thank you  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : He is a g ood man in a wrong Party.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Chair reply to the issue of the consultant taking through 
Members because it is a serious document. Reply to the issue of Rongai.  
Hon. Stephen Ng’ethe : Mr. Speaker on the issue of Rongai, simply this is a compressed 
document, that is ov ersight but on its bulletin no.2, you will find that the County Government 
should develop the Sub -County headquarters which could provide jobs and services for their 
surrounding rural hinterlands. Rongai is also one of Sub -County headquarters and so it is 
captured under that bulletin Hon. Karanja.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): The consultant taking the Members through the document.  
Hon. Stephen Ng’ethe : What we need, I am reacting to Hon. Karanja’s concern is that we need 
to be proactive retrospective for  purposes of future and greater good of the greatest majority but 
we cannot keep on the funds are not with us now that we have gotten priorities right, being part 
and parcel of this Government, it is good that now we have gotten priorities right for purpos es of 
the Government that is coming later. Thank you Members for having favorably considered this 
Motion. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): The issue about the consultant taking Members through the 
major Report?  
Hon. Stephen Ng’ethe : I think I will liaise with your Office Mr. Speaker  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you. Members, I want to propose the question.  
(Question proposed that this House adopts the Report of the Committee on Lands, Housing and 
Physical Planning on the Nakuru County Spatial Plan tabled on this House on Wednesday 11th 
May 2022 during the afternoon session).  
(Question put and agreed to)  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honorable Members, this House stands adjourned to 2.30 pm today.  
(The House rose at 11.50am ) 
 
 
 