COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 2 0th September 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3:35 PM  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYER  
STATEMENT (S) 
EL NINO PREPAREDNESS  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There are requests for Statement s. The first request for Statement  
is by Hon. Anthony Kanyere, who is requesting for a Statement  from the Chairperson  of the 
Committee on Disaster Management and Emergency Services concerning the County 
preparedness for the expected El Nino  rains.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I stand to request for a Statement  that 
Pursuant to Standing Order 47 (2) C, I rise to request for a Statement  from the Chairperson 
Committee on Disaster Management and Emergency Services concerning County preparedness 
for the expected El Nino rains.  
The Department of Metrological Services issued a warning that there is a likelihood of the Country 
experiencing El Nino  rains between October and December of 2023 and early Months  of 2024. 
This will affect most parts of the Country  since the rains are expected to be above normal.  
It is worth noting that th e Country was worse hit by E l Niño  rains in 1997 and 2006, which  resulted 
in significant loss of life, food and property due to  flooding and landslide s. Nakuru is particularly 
vulnerable to the  climate crisis due to poor soil, inadequate infrastructure and limited access to 
clean water and sanitation, increasing the risk of health  challenges during and after floods.  
While Nakuru County has not suffered such deaths, losses and injuries as other Counties, it is no 
excuse to relax in the face of E l Niño . The most vulnerable to effects of Climate Change are in 
urban areas and villages , especially in flood and landslide prone areas.  
Nakuru County should therefore be recruiting and training Emergency Response Teams now as 
they stock pile essential supplies and establishing evacuation plans for food prone areas.  
In view of this, I request the Chairperson for the Committee on Energy, Environment, Water and 
Natural Resources to respond on the following;  
1. The County Government preparedness for th e upcoming E l Niño  rains projected in October 
to December  2023.  
2. The Mitigation  measures that the County Department has put in place to decrease the 
menace that could be poised by the upcoming rains.  
With that, I submit my request. Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you  honourable Member  for Nakuru East . The Chairman 
for Committee on Disaster Management and Emergency Services ? Vice Chair person ? Any 
Member of the Committee ?  
Yes, honourable Hezzy take note that you report this to the Chairperson that you need to table a 
Report in this Honorable House 14 days from now.  
Hon. Hezy Kariuki : Yes Mr. Speaker Sir,  I will do so . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you.   
There is a request for a Statement  by the Honorable George Nene who is requesting for a Statement  
from the Chairperson Committee on Roads, Transport and Public Works concerning the poor 
workmanship on the Ti Gashuma and Muthait a roads in Elementaita Ward.  
STATUS OF ROADS  
Hon Bernard  Gatuso : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I am standing on behalf of Hon. George Nene 
who happens to be on some other duties of this Assembly.  
Pursuant to Standing Order 47(2) (c) , I rise to request for a Statement  from the Chairperson of the 
Committee on Roads, Transport and Public Works concerning the status of Ti Gashuma  and 
Muthait a roads in Elementaita Ward.  
Mr. Speaker, i n the Financial Year 2022 -2023, a total of Kshs . 5 million was allocated for 
murraming and grading of Ti Gashuma  access road in Elementaita Ward . The project was 
completed and handed over as expected. However, it should be noted that there were savin gs from 
the project that was re -channeled towards finali sing of grading and fixing of culverts along 
Muthaita in the same Ward. Mr. Speaker, The roads in question are now in dilapidated and terrible 
state due to poor workmanship and use of substandard material s.  
This House should seriously be worries about the trend of Contractor s shoddily carrying out road 
maintenance work in full glare of the County Engineers who are charged with the responsibility 
of supervising such works.  
I therefore request the Chairperson Committee on Roads and Public Works to issue on whether 
the Department of Roads and Public Works is aware of the poor workmanship on the two roads 
and what measures the County Government is putting in place to ensure roa ds are constructed in 
accordance with the laid down standards before handing over and payments. Thank you  Mr. 
Speaker . 
Thank you Hon. Member for London Ward for standing in for the Hon. Member for Elementaita 
Ward.  
There is another Statement . I presume that you will still be standing in for the Member for 
Elementaita Ward.  
Hon. Bernard  Gatuso : Thank you Mr . Speaker sir for according me this chance also to represent 
my able colleague, MCA Elementaita. Hon. Speaker pursuant to Standing Order 47 (2) (c) I rise 
to request for a Statement from the Chairperson of the Committee on Lands, Housing and Physical 
Plann ing concerning purchase of land in Mbombo area Elementaita Ward for construction of Early 
Childhood Education class room. The Assembly appropriated financial resources for purchase of 
five acres of land to construct ECD classroom in Mbombo.  
The construction has since stalled due to disagreement between the land owner and the County 
Government. If this continues the kids are likely to be deprived of the right to basic education. It 
must also bother the House why the County Government will hand  over the land to the contractor 
despite existence of payment and in the absence of legal documents showing ownership. Mr. 
Speaker, I request the Chairperson for the Committee on Lands, Housing and Physical Planning 
to respond on the following:  
1. Why the County Government handed over the site for construction of ECD classroom despite 
lack of requisite legal document due to disagreement over payment.  
2. What measures is the County Government putting in place to resolve the stalemate?  
Thank you Mr. Speaker and I hand in the Statement.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The second request for Statement was made to the 
Chairperson Committee on Transport and Public Works. The Chair, you have twenty one days to 
bring a Report to this Hon. House and you respond to the issues that have raised by  the Hon. 
Member for Elementaita. Chairman take note.  
Hon. Francis Kuria : Noted Hon. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The third request for Statement which was also done 
by the Hon. Member for Elementatita has been made to the Chairperson Lands, Housing and 
Physical Planning. Is the Chair in the House? The Vice Chairperson? Yeah, you got th ree weeks; 
that is 21 days to bring a Report to this honourable House, to respond to what the Hon. Member 
for Elementaita has requested to be informed; thank you.  
There is a response for a Statement that was requested earlier concerning bursary disbursement for 
the Financial Year 2022 -2023 in Turi Ward, Molo Sub County. The Hon. Chair for Education, 
Hon. Peter Njoroge.  
Hon. Peter Njoroge : Mr. Speaker this is my response concerning the bursary disbursed balances 
in Turi Ward. Mr. Speaker, Aware that the 2010 Constitution of Kenya recognises that every 
person has the right to education according to Article 43 1 f, and stipulates that every child has a 
right to free and compulsory education according to Article 53 1 b, and that it serves a critical 
responsibility of making children well prepared for their future education.  
Mr. Speaker, on 30th of August 2023, Hon. John Mwangi MCA for Turi sort a Statement from the 
Chair Person of the Sectoral Committee on Early Childhood Education and Vocational Training 
concerning the status of the bursary disbursement for the Financial Year 2022 -2023 in Turi Ward. 
In specific the Hon. Member requested to be informed on the following:  
1. The status of Turi Ward  bursary cheques which were launched by her Excellency the 
Governor,  on 4th April 2023 , at Molo Sub County  
2. Why a Ward  Bursary balance amounting to Kshs 120 000 allocated in the Financial Year 
2022 - 2023 had not yet been disbursed.  
3. The plans the County Government  is undertaking to avert such delays in bursary 
disbursement in future.    
Mr. Speaker, i n Department re sponse, they observed that they  are aware of Turi issue since Tur i 
Ward had appropriated Kshs 2 million  toward s bursary F/Y 2022/23.  Kshs 50 000 went to 
Administration charges h ence the amount to be allocated  Kshs.1 . 950 million  
Mr. Speaker, c oncerning t he status of Turi Ward bursary c heques which w ere launched on 4th April 
2023 , at Molo . 
The Department has stated  that disbursement was done  as follows:  
Cheque payments………Kshs. 1 .2 million  
EFT P ayments ………Kshs. 644  000. 
Total……………………Kshs.1.8 million  
The balance of Kshs. 69 000 was disbursed between 12th June and 3rd August 2023 therefore 
completing the entire allocation for Turi Ward . Mr. Speaker, c oncerning the plans the County 
Government  is undertaking to avert such delays in bursary disbursement in future.  
The D epartment stated that;  
I. There shall be constant consultation s among all Stakeholders, i ncluding the County 
Assembly, Ward Administrators and the County Bursary Committee  to ensure  smooth 
running of the process.  
II. There will be thorough  verification of Ward  Lists before printing of cheques.  
III. T hey have some plans to strictly follow the proposed Nakuru County Bursary Schedule and 
that all stakeholders shou ld adhere to the deadlines.  
IV. Institutional payments for Ward Bursaries would be done  per Ward  for all the 55 Ward s.  
V. That all payment shall be done by cheques and they have already done away with Electronic 
Fund Transfer (EFT) method . And last but not least Mr. Speaker;  
VI. That each Ward  shall receive its own cheques and that there shall be no matching of cheques 
going for ward . Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, the Department has stated that Monitoring and 
Evaluation shall be enhanced to avoid cases of non -disclosure  by beneficiary institutions.  Mr. 
Speaker, I hope that the honorable Member who had requested for Statement has been duly 
answered.  
Mr. Speaker, before I wind up, I would like to confirm to this honorable House that we already 
have a detailed copy of all allocations that were done in Turi and this copy shall be made available 
for the Hon. Member for Turi. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the Hon. Chairperson for Education, for that 
response. The Hon. Members for Turi Ward.  
Hon. John Mwangi:  Mr. Speaker I am satisfied; thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Next order; what is it the Hon. Members for 
Elburgon?  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Thank you Mr. Speaker; I arise because the Hon. Member sought  the 
Statement on behalf of the House and that is why it was responded directly through the House and 
I believe the Statement response that has been issued by the Hon. Member for Murindat is no t 
conclusive. Mr. Speaker, we also have the Ward Committees; those individuals who usually sit 
down for weeks without being paid and I believe that there were resources that was set aside which 
I believe it is 25 percent for each and ev ery Ward that is supposed to be catering fort their welfare 
as allowances.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Members for Elburgon, you are introducing us to a 
new item because the request specifically was for the bursary disbursement for the FY2022/23 in 
Turi Ward. So now, there is issue now for the welfare or allowances for the Ward Bursary 
Committee. N ow that needs to come as a substantive agenda or substantive request for Statement 
or any other form in this House so that it can be substantiated fully.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Thank you Mr. Speaker; as Consolidated Fund, the one that goes to the 
students, goes to the students; but that allocation that he said of Kshs 2 million constitutes also the 
funds for the Committee, and that is why however you have given your ruling, als o your wisdom 
in it, I believe that the Members ought to have also touched about those funds and the monies that 
were supposed to go to those individuals because it was part and parcel of the said Bursary Fund 
that the Hon. Member had ra ised in that question.  
Mr. Speaker not only were they supposed to actually remit the funds to the school but also to pay 
the Bursary Committee so that we can say the whole process has been concluded. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker; however, I am obliged to a abide by your ruling and perh aps by next week I will be 
seeking a Statement from him on the same but it would have been thorough, if we would have 
come up with a conclusive document that would be touching on all those issues because you realise 
that we were to contribute on the same.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Members for Elburgon… what is it Chair?  
Hon. Peter Maina:  Mr. Speaker, I have already tabled a thorough response with regard to the 
Statement that had been raised by the MCA for Turi and he is satisfied. I would like the MCA for 
Elburgon to confirm to this House whether he is the Deputy MCA for Turi.  
(Laughter ) 
That is one. Secondly Mr. Speaker, it is important if the MCA for Elburgon is interested in this 
matter, he needs to go through this Report so that he does not prematurely question it. So it is only 
fair that he gets a copy fort it because it is a huge doc ument that we could not go through it. We 
do not have the luxury of time to peruse this document. It has more than 200 pages and it is only 
logical that he goes through it first and then he can question it later. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  The Honourable Member for Turi.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Mr. Speaker because the Members has mentioned me Mr. Speaker; it 
seems the Members even did not look at the particulars of the document because he has responded 
to something that he has not read. That is what he has confirmed sand that one actually opened  a 
Pandora box. However, I would wish to be supplied with a copy because even the chairperson did 
not read; he has actually summarised having gone through the whole report. However, I will a bind 
to that I will read the document.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): So that we put that to a close, the Hon. Chair for Education there 
is a serious allegation that you did not read that you just responded without taking so much 
attention or details to that. Did you read or what was that you were doing?  
Hon. Peter Maina : Mr. Speaker I can confirm that I had gone through the whole Report and not 
just read but the entire Committee and we only did a summary of it. Whatever I read here as 
response was a summary of it and that is why I am suggesting we are generous enough to share 
copy with the Deputy MCA for Turi so that he can also have a chance to go through it.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The honourable Chair for Education, there is no Deputy Member 
for County Assembly of Turi. Kindly withdraw that.  
Hon. Peter Maina : Withdrawn Mr. Speaker  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; next order.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members this House stands adjourned to 9.30 am on Tuesday next week.  
The House rose at 4.05pm  
 
 
 