APRIL 6, 2022                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday, 6th April  2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met a t 10: 55a m 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi) i n the Chair ] 
PRAYER  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ):  Good Morning Honorable Members. Clerk Next 
Order.  
PAPER  
REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON COUNTY ASSEMBLY CAR LOAN AND MORTGAGE FUND 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2017  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ):  We have some Paper s to be laid, the R eport of the 
Committee  on Health Services on the Nakuru County Maternal Newborn and Childcare Bill No . 
10 of 2021. Honorable Njuguna ? As we wait,  we go to the next Report, which is the Report of the 
Auditor General on County Assembly Car Loan, and Mortgage Fund for the year ended 30th June 
2017 to  be laid by honorable Philip Wanjohi on behalf of the Majority Leader . 
Hon. Philip Wanjohi : Thank you Honorable Deputy Speaker , on behalf of the L eader of  Majority 
l Honorable Moses Ndung ’u, I wish to table a Report of the Auditor General on the County 
Assembly of Nakuru Car Loan and Mortgage Fund for the Year Ended 30th June 2017 .  I beg to 
table . 
                                                  (The Report was laid on the table)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ):  Thank you Honorable Wanjohi . The Paper  stands 
committed to the Committe e on Public Accounts and Investment  (PAIC) led by the Chairperson  
of the Committee . The Vice Chairperson is around . You should come up with a Report within a 
period of 30 days.  
The next P aper to be laid is the Report of the Auditor General on Naivasha Water and sanitation 
Services Company Limited for the year ended 30th June 2020 to be table by Honorable Philip 
Wanjohi on behalf of the Leader of  Majority . 
PAPER  
APRIL 6, 2022                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON NAIVASHA WATER AND SANITATION COMPANY 
LIMITED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2020  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi : Thank you Honorable Deputy Speaker , on behalf of the L eader of  Majority 
who is committed  elsewhere, I wish to table a Report of the Audi tor General on Naivasha Water 
and Sanitation Company Limited for the year ended 30th June 2020. I table.  
                                                        (The report was laid on the table)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ):  Thank you honorable Wanjohi, the Report  stands  
committed  to the  Committee on Public Account and Investment (PAIC). Honorable vice 
Chairperson  honorable Samuel Mugi this Paper is committed  to your  Committee and you has to 
come up with a Report within a period of 30 days.  Next order.  
MOTION  
BUDGET COMMITTEE REPORT ON BUDGET IMPLEMENTATION FOR THE FINANCIAL  
YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2021  
(Resumption of Debate  interrupted on 2.3.2022, Morning Session ) 
Hon. Joel Karur i: Honorable Deputy Speaker , thank you for according us a time to resume the 
debate on the Budge t Implementation  for the year ended 30TH June 2021. It should be noted that it 
was for the  Financial Year 2020/2021. We moved the Motio n to move the debate; we had given a 
notice and laid  the Paper prior to that,  and this show s that compliance in accordance to Standing 
Order s of this House  was followed. It is good to refresh on the Paper, the Paper  explains how the 
budget of a certain Financial Year was carried out and implemented.  
Without taking the Members  back to the Report, the issues that we raised was about the 
recommendations and there were some other recommendations that when the Committee  looked 
into, that we have given other recommendations on the areas of where the Budget  or 
Implementation of the  Budget needs to  be relooked into. We know as an Assembly  should there 
be an issue that we feel had issues we know how the Committe e or the Committee Systems works. 
As much as the Committee on Public Account and Investment usually w aits for the R eport from 
the Auditor General .  
We have been asking ourselves as a  House whether the Committee  should... see, or is notified or 
happens to get across some information that there are issues surrounding the implementation of 
budget, whether the  Committee on PA IC should just wait until the Report for the Auditor General 
is out.  
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is something that going forward, we may need to make very clear, 
because after th e Committee on Budget gives its  Report and recommendations, should there be 
other issues surrounding that need to be explained further, not forgetting that the implementation 
APRIL 6, 2022                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 of budget l ays that point or that portion l ays squarely on the budget implementation, or rather the 
Budget and Appropriation s Committee.  
But should there be issues , enormous issues that seek to be addressed on the areas of whether there 
is misappropriation of funds, or whether there are reasons to believe that monies, or the budget 
was not implemented as it was, then the Committee on PA IC may need to have preliminary look 
on such matters, so that we do not wait for misappropriation or other things, even as we wait for 
the Report o f the Auditor General.  
Basically, that i s our highlight, a nd Members, I want us to go back to page 32. And the key 
observations that the Committee made was that  there was low absorption of Development Funds 
as indicated by the expenditure of Kshs 4.8 billion in the Financial Year 2021 from the annual 
development budget allocated, that was Kshs 10.1 billion development expenditure presented 
14.3% of the annual development budget. That is important to note, that during the closure is out 
of the year for the day that ended on 30th June 2021 only 14.3% of the annual development budget 
was able to be  absorbed and implemented into service delivery and development project.  
Of importance is also to note about the highway Bill, which accounted for 45.2% of the total 
expenditure in the Financial Year 2021. That is constraining the funding of other program s. There 
come s a time where we need to look at ourselve s and tell ourselves the truth.  The residents of this 
County do not and cannot expect that they  are going to be employed in other Counties. And there 
is a historical injustice if we want to call i t that way that happened after D evolution Nakuru County 
was the Headquarter s of Rift Valley. It is good to note that at the onset of the Devolution all those 
workforces and those personnel who used to work in the Headquarters in the devolved functions, 
if a per son had come from Turkana County, they were not deployed to Turkana County, and they 
were not transferred. If a person came from Kajiado in South Rift, they were not transferred to 
Kajiado and so you find that in Nakuru County, we bear the burden of the la rger previous Rift 
Valley. If you want more evidence, you can loo k at the Department of Health and  the Chairman 
for Health is here. The 39.8% of the t otal budget that goes to Health, m uch of that money goes to 
the PGH.  
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is good t o say that we take pride in that facility, the PGH. But it is 
good to note that PGH is not funded by Baringo County, it is not funded by Nyandarua County, It 
is not funded by Elgeyo and the surrounding Kericho and Bomet Counties and all those other 
Countie s. Much of the money that goes to health goes to funding programs, whether payments, 
whether medicine of PGH that is a classic example of the considerations that were made at the 
onset of devolution regarding the workforce and personnel.  
It is good to look  at other Departments like Agriculture. If someone was employed and had come 
from, say from other Counties, they were not transferred, they were not taken to their Counties. 
And so they were left here, if  you want to look at the PSM, these C ounties got 11 Sub-Counties 
and all these Sub-Counties . They had Municipalities and Town Councils and all those people a t 
APRIL 6, 2022                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 the onset of devolution, they were taken to  the payroll of Nakuru County. Y ou cannot compare 
Nakuru County to Nyandarua County or Samburu or other Counties or even Tana River or Lamu, 
you would want to look at what they receive from the National G overnment, per capita per person . 
A person in Lamu County  ends up getting much money  if you compare to a person in Nakuru 
County.  
These are the historical injustices in terms of economic and the planning that Nakuru County is 
facing. So, whenever we talk about the high wage bill, the question begs the high wage bill is not 
necessitated by the creation of the devolved function, name it Nakuru County these are inherited 
structures. And so whenever we want to employ people and you want to employ the nurses, if you 
want to employ healthcare providers , if you want to in other cadres, if you want to employ ECD 
teachers, if you want to employ Agricultural Service Pro viders, we are told that we cannot continue 
employing because the ceiling for recurrent and personnel has been reached. So these are 
conversation s that as a County we must have going forward  and evidence is there that Nakuru as 
much as we are told we recei ved so much; it is also important to say that this is a vast County. We 
inherited so much in terms of personnel and so this inheritance is really inhibiting our economic 
planning in terms of whether we can employ more people. The result is that we have edu cated 
youth who cannot be employed because we have a bloated wage bill. We have youth who would 
want to do things but they cannot do because the economic and monetary space is squeezed. It is 
good to belabour that point.  
The other observation that the Com mittee found was the high expenditure on non -critical recurrent 
expenditure. It is good to say that Governments, including the County Government of Nakuru, 
there is so much appetite on the area of recurrent. If you want to compare recurrent and absorption 
of recurrent vis a vis development, recurrent would always lead because that is where use of goods 
and services, things to do with allowances lies. As a Committee, these are our recommendations;  
1. That the County should implement the following in order to im prove the budget execution;  
i. The County should identify and address issues causing delays in the 
implementation of development projects.  
ii. The County Public Service needs to establish an optimal staffing structure to ensure 
expenditure on personnel emolument s complies with the regulation of 25(1) a of 
the PFM Act. That governs the County Governments  
iii. The County fastrack the forensic audit of the County debts and pending Bills.  
iv. The County should address own source of revenue performance so as to ensure a 
balanced budget.  
Those are the recommendations to the Report and we do not want to go back to the implementation 
phases because the issues that were raised is why the Report was referred back to the Committee 
for recommendations. I want to beg that the Member s support this Report so we adopt it. This is 
one of the critical Reports that must be there in the budget process. Right now, we know that the 
Treasury went around seeking opinions and observations of the public in the matter of public 
APRIL 6, 2022                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 participation. They  were able to get feedback and they were able to get projects from wananchi. 
Those projects now need to come into this House as budget estimates. There is no way that we can 
look at the detailed budget estimates without looking and adopting this Paper abou t how the budget 
for 2020/2021 was carried out. I beg that the Members consider adopting this Report from the 
onset and proper planning of the budget process. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you Hon. Karuri. That was a continuation  of 
a Debate which was debated last time and today you have just taken us through a lot of the 
awareness on the same, especially when we talk of the wage Bill which has been a problem to this 
County but we understand that we inherited from the previous Pro vincial Headquarters and there 
was no way we could send the workers who are with us to their respective Counties. Thank you 
for enlightening us. That one has to be dealt with. The CRA should also consider when we talk of 
Counties per capita; that is money per person.  
(Question put that the House adapts the Report of the Committee on Budget and Appropriation s 
on the budget implementation for the year ending 30th June, 2021 tabled in this House on 
Wednesday 2nd March, 2022 during the morning plenary ). 
(Question put and agreed to ). 
PAPER  
HEALTH COMMITTEE REPORT ON NAKURU MATERNITY , NEWBORN CHILD CARE 
 BILL NO. 10 OF 2021  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. I rise to table the Report of the 
Committee on Health Services on the Nakuru Maternity New Born and Child Care Bill No. 10 of 
2021. I beg to lay.  
                                  (The Bill was laid on the table)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you.  
MOTION  
THE NAKURU COUNTY MATERNAL NEWBORN AND CHILD CARE BILL NO. 10 OF 2021  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Before I propose a question, Chairperson Health 
Committee Hon. Njuguna.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker, I arise to move  a Motion ; 
THAT  the Nakuru County Maternal, Newborn and Childcare Bill No.10 of 2021 be now read for 
a Second Time.  
APRIL 6, 2022                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 This Bill is one that we felt need to be there in this County so that children but allow me to start 
from the mother because giving birth in Nakuru, it ha s been a punishment to women in this County. 
We find that sometimes when the women go to the hospitals, they are subjected to traumatic 
conditions and situations. Therefore we felt that if we come up with a law that will bridge the non -
existent of laws tha t regulate maternity services in our Country, it will be prudent. That said, you 
realize that some of our mothers going to our facilities are beaten and some of them are called 
names while others are subjected to some conditions that are not good and there fore at the end, 
they become traumatized and some of them end up committing suicide or killing their kids. 
Therefore we felt that as an Ass embly which is a legislation body  of this County, it was good for 
us to come up with a Bill that will address such ki nd of a situation and condition.  
Therefore in this Bill we have identified referral mechanisms, for instance if a mother finds herself 
in labour pains, she just needs to call and then an ambulance picks them. The conditions and even 
the time that this mot her should stay in the facilities, it has been outlined in the Bill. For instance 
we know that the mothers go through prolonged labour pains and others are subjected to caesarian 
deliveries. There are conditions and times that they are supposed to be in th e facilities; in this Bill 
it has been outlined. The newborns sometimes their mothers could not be having enough monies 
to provide food supplements and in this Bill there is welfare issues that has been outlined and thus 
this Bill is one of the best that w ill take care of the newborn and also childcare issues such as 
immunization and also provision of food supplements.  
Also on the issue of the youth such as teenage pregnancy because some of them have no access to 
counselling from grownups. In this Bill we have youth friendly centers in all our facilities. Each 
facility ought to have a youth friendly center where we are going to have psychologists and 
professionals counselling our youth so that we can minimize issues of drug abuse, the issue of 
teenage pregn ancy among other vices that can be very detrimental to the welfare of our youth. You 
realize the rate of suicide cases is very high particularly in the Sub -County where I come from 
which is Molo. The rate of suicide is alarming and reason being we do not h ave structures to 
address th e challenges facing these youth. With the provision of youth friendly center s, we believe 
that psychiatrists  will be employed by our County to advise our youth. You also realize our facilities 
including the Assembly, I do not kno w whether they have considered that. Our Members and also 
the staff, we do not have lactation parlor and you find that children are left at home where they are 
subjected to challenges and in the future, the issue bring some psychological issues to the chil dren.  
Therefore we felt that it was prudent for lactation parlors to be provided in each facility, social 
amenities that we have including this Assembly so that our mothers can store their breast milk as 
they nurse their children. This children will feel entitled to normal growth like children being taken 
care of or nursed by their mothers throughout. Therefore I beg to move that this Bill be read for a 
Second Time. I request Hon. Palang’a to second.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thi nk as it has been highlighted by the 
able Chair, we appreciate his effort and that of the entire Committee for the work they have done 
APRIL 6, 2022                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 especially within this term. They have come with a number of Bills which are very crucial to the 
operations of the Depart ment. I wish to stand and support that this is a timely Bill that we really 
require to address such issues. I believe Members have gone through; I looked at different articles 
and really addresses a number of concerns that are prevalent within our County. Therefore in the 
adoption of this particular Bill, I have noted it will go a long way in addressing a lot of challenges 
that are facing the Department the Youth and the mothers at large. Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you, I think you remember this is the third 
time that this Bill has been brought to this House and being deferred to pave way for its 
amendments. I think now you can agree that it has been properly amended and it is working well 
and most of the Membe rs are in agreement. I n ow want to propose question  
(Question proposed tha t the Nakuru County Maternal,  Newborn and Childcare Bill No. 10 of 
2021 be now read a Second Time).  
Now the Motion is open for debate. Welcome … Everybody is satisfied . I will now pu t question  
(Question put and agreed to)  
(The Nakuru County Maternal Newborn and Childcare Bill  No. 10 of 2021 was accordingly read 
a Second Time).  
ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned until 2.30 in the afternoon today.  
(The House rose at 11.25am ) 
 
 
 