SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday , 21ST September 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10: 00 am 
[The Clerk of The Assembly (Mr. Joseph Malinda)  in the Chair]  
PRAYER  
Third Assembly -First Session  
(Convened by Notification vide Gazette Not ice No. 10987 of 2022)  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CLERK OF THE ASSEMBLY  
         WELCOME TO HON. MEMBERS OF COUNTY ASSEMBLY AND NOTIFICATION OF PLACE AND 
TIME OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
The Clerk of The Assembly (Mr. Joseph Malinda):  Good morning,  Members . Once  again,  we 
wish to welcome you to the Assembly . We also wish to congratulate you for your election  as a 
Member of this Assembly , and also your nomination as a Member of this Assembly . We are 
delighted from where I seat, the entire  Assembly fraternity to associate with you from today going 
forward.  
Having said that , today’s sitting is governed by S tanding Orders;  it is also governed by the 
provision of the County Government Act , in particular ly Section 7(a), which  triggers the sitting of 
any Assembly . You are aware  this sitting is as a result of  Gazette  Notice No. 10987 by Her 
Excellency  the Governor , which  I wish to  read- Pursuant to the provision of the Standing Order 
No. 3 of the County Assembly of Nakuru Standing Orders, it is notified to the Members  of the 
County Assembly and the general public  that the  First Sitting of the Third County Assembly of 
Nakuru shall be held on Wednesday 21st September , 2022 at 9:00am in the County Assembly 
Chambers at Nakuru . I wish to confirm th is sitting is properly gazette d. Honourable Members , the 
Gazette  Notice dated 12th September  is signed by Her Excellency  the Governo r.  
Hono urable Members Standing Order  3 (2) (b) further require s that on the First Sitting of the New 
Assembly  after the  General Election , The Clerk who pursuant  to the provision of Standing Order 
3(5), has the powers of the Speaker  shall lay , list of person s elected and nominated as Members , 
on the table of the Assembly.  I now proceed pursuant to this provision to lay on the Table of the 
Assembly a list of the persons elected and nominated as Members of the County Assembly.  
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 PAPER LAID  
LIST OF NAMES OF GAZETTED MEMBERS OF COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
The Clerk to the Assembly (Mr. Jos eph Malinda):  Thank you . You are aware the two Gazette 
Notice s done by the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission (IEBC ). That is the basis 
of your being here.  
(The Clerk of the  Assembly ( Mr. Joseph  Malinda) laid the list of Member s of County Assembly 
on the Table)  
ADMINISTRATION OF OATH  
OATH OF AFFIRMATION OF OFFICE  
Honorable Members , I wish now to communicate the process of your swearing as  Members of the 
Assembly . Standing  Order  3(3) requires the  Clerk to administer the Oath of  the Affirmation  of 
Office to Members  of the  Assembly in alphabetical order using the following order of precedent - 
a. Memb ers with the longest cumulative period of service in the Assembly  
b. Members with longest cumulative period of service in the  Assembly and any Local 
Authority existing prior to the final announcement of all the results of the Assembly  as 
contemplated under Section 2 of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution.  
c. Members with the longest cumulative period service in any  Local Authority existing prior 
to the final announcement of all the results of Parliament or Assembl y and as contemplated 
under Section 2 of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution.  
d. All other Members.  
Honorable Member s, it is important to observe  the Standing Order 3(4) which provides that , 
pursuant to Article 74 of the Constitution , no person shall assume or perform any function s of the 
Office of a Member before taking and subscribing to the Oath o r Affirmation of Office. I stated 
earlier under Standing Order 3(5), when the Clerk  is administering the Oath or Affirmation of 
Office to Members , and before the Clerk has administered the Oath or Affirmatio n of Office to the  
Speaker , any question arising  in the Assembly  should  be determined by the Clerk  who shall during 
that period execute the powers of the Speaker . So, I am here, duly exercising those powers 
Honorable Members , so any query shall be responded to.  
Hono urable  Members pursuant to Standing Order  3(3), I shall now proceed  to administer the Oath 
or Affirmation of Office to Membe rs here present . In this process, t he name of each Membe r shall 
be called out. When calle d out, the Member  shall proceed to the podium in my right here and 
thereupon shall have the option to take Oath or Affirmation of Office as they cho ose in accordance 
to the re spective religious persuasions.   
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 After taking Oath or Affirmation of Office,  the Members shall proceed to subscribe the Oath or 
Affirmation to the table on my left in front of me, sign the Oath or Affirmation Bo ok and the  
Leadership and Integrity Code of Conduct  for State Officers . There are two Officers from Ethics 
and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC ) seated  there, you shall sign the Code of Oath there as 
well.  
I wish now to st art the process as outline d above ; yes, Honorable Stanley Karanja.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker , reading Standing Order 112 and also Standing 
Order 3( 5), and maybe Article 40 of the  Constitution of Kenya 2010, it is my plea from the l ist 
that you have provided here in Honorable Clerk acting as the Speaker , that we do place Person 
Living with Disability first . That is my plea basing that when we are dealing with People Living 
with Disabilit ies, they first take the oath and then the others follow.  
The Clerk to the Assembly (Mr. Joseph Malinda):  That is quite in order Honorable Karanja and 
if there is any Member  with Disability,  we shall start with him or her, any person in our midst? 
Okay Madam , we shall proceed with you, hono urable Chepkurui. Thank so much for reminding 
us. Clerk you may now  prepare to administer the Oath starting with Chepkurui.  
(The MCA  With Disability  Hon. Everlyn Chepkurui proceed ed forward to take the Oath of 
Office)  
(Members of County Assembly proceeded forward in order of precedence to take the Oath Offic e 
and Affirmation ) 
(The Oath of Office and Affirmation was administered to the following Members  of County 
Assembly including signing the code of Ethics  for State Officers)  
 
Hon. Samuel  Tonui  
Hon. Peter Wanjala M. Palang’a  
Hon. Peter Mwamba Kajwang  
Hon. Virginia Wamaitha Gichanga  
Hon. Hezy  Ezekiah Kung’u Kariuki  
Hon. Doreen Korir Jebiwot  
Hon. Grace Wambui Mwathi  
Hon. Isabella Kerubo Makori  
Hon. John Macharia Gachiri  
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. John Mwangi Macharia  
Hon. Joseph Ngware Ng ’ang’a 
Hon. Leah Jepkoech Serem  
Hon. Mwaura Njuguna  
Hon. Peter Njoroge Maina  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi Nderitu  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech  
Hon. Rose Gathoni Njoroge  
Hon. Samuel Mwangi Kamau Ngarama  
Hon. Stanley Karanja  
Hon. Wajeff Wilson Mwangi Wachira  
Hon. Alex Bor  
Hon. Alex Kipkoech Arap Lang’at  
Hon. Alex Ndung ’u Mbugua  
Hon. Ali Hassan Abdi  
Hon. Ann Muthoni Gite  
Hon. Ann Wamaitha  
Hon. Anthony Charles Kamau Kanyere  
Hon. Ben Kiprotich Kirui  
Hon. Bernard Kipng’etich Langat  
Hon. Bernard Maina Kariuki Gatuso  
Hon. Bethsheba Kerubo Onkoba  
Hon. Catherine Wanjeri Mwangi  
Hon. Cynthia Mukami  
Hon. Cyrus Dida Ndegwa  
Hon. David Kihumba Muraya  
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. David Wathiai Macharia  
Hon. Degaulle Elibas Naburuki  
Hon. Dorcas Wangu i Gathere  
Hon. Elijah Mwangi Murage  
Hon. Elijah Mwaura Macharia  
Hon. Eliud Kamau Chege  
Hon. Emmanuel Langat  
Hon. Everlyn Chepkurui  
Hon. Francis Mungai Kuria  
Hon. George Cheruiyot Tallam  
Hon. George Kanure  
Hon. George Wang’ang’a Nene  
Hon. Hamisi Msuri Fadhili  
Hon. Hellen Chemutai Megek  
Hon. Hellen Chepkorir  
Hon. Irene Cherop Cheboi  
Hon. Isaac  Kiptisya Rottok  
Hon. James Gathuita Mwangi  
Hon. Jane Wanjiru Gituku  
Hon. John Kipng’etich  Maritime  
Hon. Joseph Mwangi Muraya  
Hon. Kezia Akinyi Okumu  
Hon. Leah Wambui Ng’ang’a  
Hon. Leah Wambui Ng’ang’a  
Hon. Loise Njeri Kagecha  
Hon. Mary Wanjiku Njoroge  
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Mercy Chepkirui Kilel  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa Ngigi  
Hon. Michael Njenga Nding’uri  
Hon. Moses Ngeny Koros  
Hon. Neto Sakwa Alukutsa  
Hon. Nixon Kiprotich Mo rogo 
Hon. Paul Kipkorir Langat  
Hon. Paul Waweru Warege  
Hon. Robert Kiplangat Rutto  
Hon. Robert Kipyegon Langat  
Hon. Simon Kamau Karanja  
Hon. Wesley Kipkurui Langat  
Hon. William Mutai  
Hon. Zipporah Wambui  
Hon. Peter Njoroge Maina.  
The Clerk to the Assembly (Mr. Joseph Malinda):  Congratulations  all Members for taking Oath 
of Office; now you become Members of this House ; House of rules, House governed by the 
Standing Orders and with that we expect full compliance to the Standing Orders as we proc eed to 
the next business of the day . 
ELECTION OF THE SPEAKER  
Hono urable Members wakati umewadia . It is now time for the election  of the honourable S peaker, 
who shall be your Speaker  from this moment  for the next five years. B ut before that , I wish to 
bring to you r … order hon ourable  Karanja ! We appreciate the rules of this House ; you may attract 
the wrath or the eye of the Speaker. I wish to bring to your attention the provisions of elections of 
the Speaker as contained in the Standing Orders.  
Standing Orders 4 and 5 of the County Assembly of Nakuru details the process of electing the 
Speaker . The process of electing the Speaker of inviting applicants to apply for the position of the 
Speake r. Remember you are the voters and we expect decency an d decorum during the exercise.   
And with that Members, I wish to bring to you Standing Order No. 4 (1). A Speaker shall be elected 
when the Assembly first meets  like today;  after a General Election before the Assembly proceed s 
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 to dispatch  of any business except the A dministration of Oath or Affirmation of Office to Members 
present which we have just concluded; I think everybody is on board.  
Honourable Members, pursuant to Standing Orders, the number of activities that are required for 
the election of the Speaker before disbursing  
Honourable Members Standing Order N o. 5 (1)  provides u pon the Governor notifying the place 
and date for the first sitting of a new Assembly pursuant to Standing order 3 (proceedings of a new 
Assembly), the Clerk s hall by N otice in the Gazette notify that fact and invite interested persons 
to submit their nomination papers for election to Office of Speaker.  
Members, t he Clerk of the Assembly via the P rint Media on 16th September  2022 and also Gazette 
Notice invited candidates to submit nomination Papers for election to the Office of the Speaker.  
Standing Order, no 5 (4)  further requires t he Clerk to maintain a register in which we shall be 
shown the date and time when each candidate’s nomination papers were received and shall 
ascertain that every such candidate for election to the Office of the Speaker is qualified to be 
elected as such under Article 193 of the Constitution.  I hereby confirm that the register has been 
maintained in accordance with the Standing Orders.  
Further I wish to confirm the Clerk was able to scrutini ze all the application s to confirm they met 
the requirements of our Constitution, County Governments Act and our S tanding Orders.  
Standing Order No. 5 (5) requires that i mmediatel y upon the close of the nomination period 
provided for in paragraph (2) the Clerk shall ; 
(a)Publici ze and make available to all Members, a list showing all qualified candidates and  
(b)Make availabl e to all Members copies of the C urriculum Vitae of the qua lified candidates.  
I hereby confirm that a list of all the qualified Members was publici zed and made available to all 
Members.  I further confirm that  I made available to all Members,  copies of Curriculu m Vitae of 
qualified candidates.  
Honourable Members, t he position of the Speaker as advertised attracted the following candidates 
who were declared as qualified  
1. Ngaro Kevin Ngware  
2. Joseph Njoroge Ngige  
3. Chrispus Antony Wathiba  
4. Andrew Yatich  
5. Jane Kigotho  
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 6. Joel Karuri Maina 
7. Martin Mwangi Kagai  
8. Mugo Jane Wanjira  
9. Richard Wanyira Kiboi 
10. Daniel Moronge 
11. Koskei James Cheruiyot  
Those are the eleven applicants that appear in the ballot papers.  
As provided in Standing Orders 6 (1), the election of the S peaker shall be by secret ballot. We 
shall now procee d to elect the Speaker. Yes Hon. Karanja.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Thank you Mr. Speaker,  as we commence this very important exercise 
and because we have been around and we know you have been through an election where…. what 
I would like to confirm is that be cause we are in a House of rules , is that t he issue of phones  in the 
booth should be barred. Secondly, I am afraid…  
There ha ve been fears that if you vote this way and that way you may be known, so Mr. Speaker, 
for confirmation I want  that what you meant by secret is what the English dictionary says….  
The Clerk  to the Assembly  (Mr. Joseph Malinda):  Thank you Hon. Karanja…  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Speaker , I am concluding . I would want the assurance of all these  
Members that nobody wil l ever know who they voted other than you , God and maybe…. Can our 
consc ience  lead us in electing the best S peaker, and I think Members , the Speaker will assure  you 
that you are safe in this House…  
The Clerk  to the Assembly  (Mr. Joseph Malinda):  That is fo r the Speaker to tell M embers  
Honourable  Karanja, thank you so much.  
Sergeant -At-Arms ensure that e very Member who wish es to vote is here, communicate that outside 
there so that  we do not want to lock out anybody.  
Honorable  Members like the Clerk or the Presiding Officer of the day must all the time be above 
suspicion and this is more important when you see the kind of people you associate with, when 
you associate with big people like yourselves the Presiding Officer must be  all the time be above 
suspicion. Secret means secret ; that is  my cardinal duty to protect the process to ensure nobody in 
this House  of rules, nobody will be  intimidated thereafter.  
I want to assure Members , your conduct here is privileged; nobody will ev er use what you say here 
against you. No one will ever accuse you for exercising you right as a Member of the Assembly. 
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Remember  you have taken the O ath of Office right here and signed the code of conduct before the 
EACC Officers .  That tells you the serio usness of the matter at hand.  
With that I  wish to direct as follows pursuant to powers granted by Standing Orders 3 (5):  
1. Sergeant -At -Arms you must ensure no Member proceeds to the booth with a phone. With 
that we urge Members to leave their phones where they are seated ; if you are not sure about 
that, you hand over to Sergeant -At -Arms on either side of the booth  
2. I am also directing for purposes  of instilling confidence in the process the cameras be 
switched off  to ensure Members are free to exercise their will in electing their speaker  of 
the next five yea rs. Remember the position of a speaker  is not a joke , you must do what 
your heart tells you, in a secure and a discreet manner. With that Hon. Karanja I think it is 
enough  assurance from the Chair and I will not hesitate to disqualify a ny person flaunting 
the rules and declaring such a cast as spoilt, should we find out any of the directions have 
been flaunted.  
Shall we proceed with the process. Can I have the ballot papers  here with me.  
 
Hon. Alex Langat:  Mr. Clerk can you allow Members to have a last-minute  lobbying?  
 
The Clerk to the Assembly (Hon. Joseph Malinda):  No, I do not think it would be in order 
now as everybody is waiting to see a new Speaker. We had more than enough time, months 
and week s. Since we met here on Monday, we had more than 48 hours to canvass , convince 
and of course be treated well.  
 
I wish to con firm that th is ballot papers have no marks, it has a stamp from the Clerk and 
the eleven names. You can take it round for Member to see.  
 
(The Sergeant -At -Arms took the ballot paper round for Members to see)  
 
(The empty and unlocked ballot box displayed)  
 
Clerks prepare the list in alphabetical order. We shall go alphabetically.  
 
Hon. Members, further wish to communicate that when all the Members have voted , the 
clerk shall unlock the ballot boxes, examine the ballot papers and having rejected t hose 
unmarked or spoilt, report the results of the ballot.  
A person shall not be elected as speaker unless supported in a ballot by the votes of two -
thirds of all members.  
 
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 If no candidate is supported by the votes of two -thirds of all the members a fresh election 
shall be held and the candidate s shall be the candidate s who received the highest number 
of votes in the ballot referred to paragraph (1) and the candidate or candidates who received 
the next highest number of votes. If more than one candidate rec eives the highest number 
of votes paragraph 2 (b) shall not apply and the only candidate the fresh election will be 
those  in paragraph 2 (a) 
 
The candidate who receives the highest number of votes will be declared as the speaker.  
If in the further ballot ref erred to in c above more than one candidate receives the highest 
number of votes the ballot shall be again be taken and if there is equality in votes a further 
ballot shall be taken until one candidate gets more votes than the rest. So, the process goes 
on and on, it does not matter how long it takes.  
In this case our two-thirds  is 50  members  
 
(The ballot box was locked)  
And now the process may begin  
(Hon . Members proceeded to vote)  
(The Cl erks-At-The -Table unlocked the ballot box and proceeded to count the votes)  
The Cl erk announced the results of the first ballots as follows  
NAME         VOTES  
1. Ngaro Kevin Ngware       0 
2. Joseph Njoroge Ngige       3 
3. Chrispus Antony Wathiba      0     
4. Andrew Yatich         0 
5. Jane Kigotho         0 
6. Joel Karuri Maina       36 
7. Martin Mwangi Kagai       33 
8. Mugo Jane Wanjira        0 
9. Richard Wanyira Kiboi       0 
10. Daniel Morogo        0 
11. Koskei James Cheruiyot      0 
12. Spoil vote        3 
 
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Pursuant to Standing Order No. 7 
A person shall not be elected as Speaker unless supported in a ballot by the votes of two -thirds of 
all Members.  
If no candidate is supported by the votes of two -thirds of all the Members a fresh election shall be 
held and only candidate shall be the candi date who received the highest number of votes in the 
ballot referred to paragraph (1) and the candidate or candidates who received the next highest 
number of votes shall alone stand for election in a further ballot and the candidate who receives 
the highes t number of votes in further ballot shall be elected Speaker.  
In simple language this election goes to next round where the top candidate that is Joel Maina 
Karuri and Martin Kagai goes back to the ballot for failing to garner two-thirds of the total votes . 
I direct the process begins immediately and members do not walk out during the process, those are 
the rules of the chamber  
Sergeant -At-Arms close the door. I have given two minutes to call any Member outside. Can 
Members resume their positions now. Mhesh imiwa PM,  I know you know the rules here and you 
should lead by example.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a : Hon Chair thank you; I like the way we are progressing and I appreciate 
the new members on board but I wish to bring to your attention that the Sergeant -At -Arms needs 
to participate in this …  
The Clerk to the Assembly (Joseph Malinda):  noted Hon. Palang’a  
Let us proceed, we only have two Members and ensure you tick within the box provided to avoid 
spoiling the votes.  
Order Members! No phone calls allowed since the voting is on.  
Clerk call out the names alphabetically  
 
Hon. Alex Bor  
Hon. Alex Kipkoech Arap Langat  
Hon. Alex Ndu ng’u Mbu gua 
Hon. Ali Hassan Abdi  
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Ann Muthoni Gite  
Hon. Ann Wamaitha  
Hon. Ann Wanjiru Njaguara  
Hon. Antony  Charles  Kamau  Kanyere  
Hon. Bernard  Kipng’etich  Langat  
Hon. Bernard  Kiprotich Kirui  
Hon. Bernard  Maina Kariuki Gatuso  
Hon. Bethsheba Kerubo Onkoba  
Hon. Catherine Wanjeri Mwangi  
Hon. Cynthia Mukami  
Hon. Cyrus Dida Ndegwa  
Hon. David Kihumba Muraya  
Hon. David Wathiai Macharia  
Hon. Degaulle Elibas Naburuki  
Hon. Dorcas Wangui Gathere  
Hon. Doreen Jebiwot  
Hon. Elijah Mwangi Murage  
Hon. Elijah Mwaura Macharia  
Hon. Eliud Kamau Chege  
Hon. Emmanuel Langat  
Hon. Evalyne Chepkirui  
Hon. Francis Mungai Kuria  
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. George Cheruiyot Tallam  
Hon. George Kanure  
Hon. George Wang ’ang’a Nene  
Hon. Grace Wambui Mwathi  
Hon. Hamisi  Msuri  Fadhili  
Hon. Hellen Chemutai Megek  
Hon. Hellen Chepkorir  
Hon. Hezekiah  Kung’u  Kariuki  
Hon. Irene Jerop Cheboi  
Hon. Isaac Kiptisya Rottok  
Hon. Isabella Kerubo Makori  
Hon. James Gathuita Mwangi  
Hon. James Gathuita Mwangi  
Hon. Jane Wanjiru Gituku  
Hon. John Kipng’etich  Maritim  
Hon. John Macharia Gachiri  
Hon. John Mwangi Macharia  
Hon. Joseph Mwangi Muraya  
Hon. Joseph Ngware Ng’ang’a  
Hon. Keziah Akinyi Okumu  
Hon. Leah Chepkoech Serem  
Hon. Leah Wambui Ng ’ang’a 
Hon. Loise Njeri Kagecha  
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
  
(The ballot papers were issued to the Hon. MCAs)  
(Hon. MCAs proceeded to vote)  
The Clerk to the Assembly (Mr. Joseph Malinda):  We can now proceed to confirm the ballot 
papers are validly cast.  
(The Clerks -at-the-Table unlocked the ballot box and proceeded to count the votes)  
The Clerk announced the results of the second ballot as follows;  
Hon. Joel Karuri Maina          50 votes  
Hon. Martin Kagai Mwangi    25 votes  
(The Clerk accordingly declared Hon. Joel Karuri Maina elected Speaker of the County 
Assembly and directed the Serjeant -At-Arms to search for the said Hon. Joel Karuri Maina and 
bring him to the Chamber)  
(Applause)  
(On arrival of Hon. Joel Karuri Maina in the Chamber, he was escorted to the Chair by Hon. 
Members)  
(On arrival at the Cha ir, the Clerk thereupon administered the O ath of Allegiance to the 
Speaker -elect, Hon. Joel Karuri Maina)  
(The Speaker, Hon. Joel Karuri Maina, then took the Chair and the Mace which before lay under 
the Table, was placed upon the Table)  
(Applause)  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
SUBMISSION OF THE SPEAKER TO THE WILL OF THE HOUSE  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri  ): Hon. Members, distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen, I 
am extremely humbled and overwhelmed by the honour, privilege and belief that you have 
bestowed upon me by electing me as the Third Speaker of the County Assembly of Nakuru. This 
without doubt is a gesture that demonstrates confidence and trust in my ability to steer the 
leadership in this respectable House.  
Allow me to congratulate all the elected and nominated Members for making it to the Third 
Assembly. As expected, your journey to the House  has been faced with fierce competition from 
other worthy competitors in your respective Wards and Political Parties. Allow me to sincerely 
appreciate and applaud my worthy opponents in the just concluded elections for the position of the 
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Speaker. It has i ndeed been a healthy and mature competition as expected in any democracy. Our 
Constitution and other frameworks allow a free and fair competition on any elective position in 
the political sphere. I am impressed that you have lived up to these provisions.  
As we open a new chapter, I invite you to join hands with me as I seek to steer this House in the 
way forward. The Third Assembly is sitting in a very interesting time. Devolution is now getting 
entrenched in our Governance Structure. Having been ushered i n 2013, the system has now come 
of age. As an Assembly, you are the most critical in the wheels of Devolution. You have the 
Constitutional duty of ensuring that the object and the principle of Devolution provided in our 
Constitution are fully realised. I h ave no doubt that the caliber of leaders in this House will live to 
the spirit of this very provisions. Allow me to pay a special tribute to my predecessor, Hon. Joel 
Kairu Maina. As the Speaker of the Second Assembly, his reign was characterized by intere sting 
and applaudable developments.  
To begin with, it is during his time that this House where we are seated was developed and 
approved key policy and legislative documents which eventually culminated to Nakuru 
Municipality being conferred with City Statu s. This is an achievement that cannot go unnoticed. I 
congratulate you once again. In the same breath, I wish to recognise the role played by the 
Members of the Second Assembly in ensuring that the necessary documents were scrutinised at 
Committees and Ple nary levels. Having been guided by the desire to create and enabling 
environment for Members to comfortably discharge their Constitutional duties, the second 
Assembly appropriated enough resources for the Construction of modern -day debating Chambers 
in lin e with County Assembly of Nakuru strategic plan. This act of selflessness can only be 
demonstrated by progressive leaders as witnessed in the Second Assembly. As we assemble here 
today, I want to recognise you for the well thought out decision.  
Lastly, I wish to appreciate the Office of the Clerk for putting together his technical team and 
making the appropriate preparations for this momentous occasion. As an Assembly, we know that 
there is going to be political leadership in the House. As I take over the political leadership in the 
Assembly, my responsibilities are well cut out. My cardinal duty and responsibility will be to 
ensure that the Assembly discharge its Constitutional mandate in more sensitive and robust 
manner. The electorate and other key stake holders are looking up to this House to put up in place 
appropriate legislation and policies that will have meaningful impact on citizens of this County.  
It is worth noting that the Constitution gives powers to the public to actively engage in all the 
decisions laid before the floor of this House. As such, we must at all times appreciate that our 
biggest stakeholders are the residents of Nakuru County. This should always remain in our guiding 
principles in deeds and actions. My door shall remain open to al l leaders, irrespective of their 
political affiliation. As the Speaker, I undertake to serve everyone with dignity, respect and 
fairness. Our political difference should not be viewed as a weakness but as an avenue of providing 
competing ideas to strengthe n our democracy and to make the House more vibrant. I want to thank 
the almighty God so much for the ability and grace to bring us this far and also to grant me victory 
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 on this day. I want to reiterate that I will be your servant and servant leadership is what is going to 
lead my leadership term. Thank you.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED WHEN ELECTING THE DEPUTY SPEAKER  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon orable  Members, in the spirit of continuous deliberations 
and consensus building, do we agree that we continue with the election of the Deputy Speaker?  
Hon. Peter Palang’a: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I wish to congratulate you for having been 
elected the Speake r of this House. I do not know how Members will look at it but this is my 
personal opinion, I am suggesting that if we may be given some 10 minutes to caucus because of 
the change of expectation so that we may realign ourselves and get to vote wisely.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Rose Chepkoech.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I wanted to say the same, that you give us 
some few minutes then we come back.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Mheshimiwa Karanja?  
Hon. Stanley K aranja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I thought that after one has gone and has 
given acceptance speech that Members are given at least two minutes to congratulate you.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang’: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I beg your indulgence.  
The Speaker (Hon.  Joel Karuri): Order! Hon. Kajwang’. Have your seat. What is it?  
Hon. Peter Kajwang’: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. The point I want  to raise is that unlike the 
contenders that were there in the Speaker’s position whom we were given their CVs to scrutinize, 
we had to make informed choices. We have not seen any for those who want to contend for the 
Deputy Speaker position. As we are here, we do not know these contenders.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Wanjohi from Lare Ward.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Before I give my remarks, I want to 
congratulate you now that you have become our speaker . This is a House of rules, procedures and 
order. I wish to draw your attention to Standing Order number 14, part 1 says, as soon as 
practicabl e after the election of the Speaker, the Assembly shall elect a Deputy Speaker amongst 
its Members. It does not say anywhere that they are supposed to apply or not. If there is anyone 
who is interested in the position of the Deputy Speaker, the Standing Or der is clear that 
immediately we are done with election of the Speaker, we proceed to election of the Deputy 
Speaker. That is the rule of this Assembly.  
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): After listening to the Members who have just talked, in the spirit 
of consensus because as much as we know that we have just concluded the election of the Speaker, 
it is important to allow Members a maximum of 10 minutes to deliberate after which we are going 
to hold the election of the Deputy Speaker. Thank you.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang’: Mr. Speaker sir, just before we conclude, there is a point that I raised and 
I think it is important. We are going to a break where we do not even know the candidates. Could 
the Clerk through you, make this House aware of these people who want th is position.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Yes Hon. Macharia.  
Hon. John Gachiri: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to second Hon. Kajwang’ that we may be 
given the names so that we are able to know.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): I will make that reque st known to the Honorable Members. We 
are in receipt of the following candidates who have expressed their interest to contest for the seat 
of the Deputy Speaker of Nakuru County Assembly;  
1. Hon. Joseph Ngware Ng’ang’a  
2. Hon. Alex Kipkoech Arap Lang’at.  
3. Hon. Ro bert Kipyegon Lang’at.  
4. Hon. William Mutai.  
5. Hon. Tonui Samuel Kipkemoi.  
That should be able to address the concern raised by Hon. Kajwang’ from Kaptembwa Ward.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Mheshimiwa Palang’a.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a: Thank you Mr . Speaker sir. We have just met and after elections, some of 
us when we are reading the se names, I cannot conceptualise the name against the person. I wish to 
request that as you read the names, we get to know who these are so that we can also know much. 
Previously, this House has put some Members who have no capacity in leadership. We would not 
want to make any further mistake. Thank you.  
Hon. Mwangi Mwangi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to raise this concern that these 
Members need to meet with the aspirants out there.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Tallam  from Kabazi Ward, what is it?  
Hon. George Tallam : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. First, I want to congratulate you for making it. 
I second what Hon. Palang’a has said that you give Members time for them to know these aspi rants 
then we caucus for 10 minutes.  
(Names of Aspirants read out  once again ) 
(Members took a ten -minute break ) 
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 (After the ten -minute break)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Yes Hon. Rose.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I wish to move a Mo tion that election of the 
Deputy Speaker to be adjourned to a later date  to allow  Members further consultation. Also, 
Members are exhausted. We shall have a lot of time to talk. Again, we have not seen the CVs of 
the Honorable Members. I request we move it to another date.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Rose, is that a Motion th at you are moving? Do you have 
a specific person who is going to second that Motion?  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I request Hon. Rottok  to second.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir , I second that we defer to another day. Thank  you. 
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to draw to your attention to Standing 
Order number 34 (2) of this House. It is against the Standing Order of this House for any person 
just to wake up on such important and cardinal business when it is before this House. I wish to 
request the Hon. Members who have some hidden agendas or want to frustrate the business of this 
House to desist from such. Order number 34 (2) states that ; if the Speaker is of such opinion that 
such Motion of adjournment of the House is frivolous or an abuse of the proceeding of the House, 
the Speaker may forthwith put the question thereon to decline to propose it.  There are persons 
whose aim is to frustrate others. If you look keenly at the election of the Deputy Speaker,  it is 
stated that if the position of the Deputy Speaker falls vacant, the Speaker should request the 
Members on the floor. If you look keenly at order number 14, it states so.  
Therefore, I would wish that you negate from falling to that trap because it w ill lead us into a ditch. 
If you look critically at the words that are being used, that Standing O rder had foreseen such a 
scenario and if you are not going to follow these orders critically, this House is going to be taken 
like a kangaroo thing of which w e cannot allow as Members. As senior Members, we move that 
such an order should not be invoked at a time like this. You had done a ruling and your ruling 
cannot be negated at this time. You just allowed us to break for 10 minutes and then we come back 
and that is what we were following. We ought to have been notified earlier that there were such 
kind of intentions. I beseech you to look at order number 34(2) so that you can make a Solomonic 
Ruling as far as that r equest  is concerned. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Before Mheshimiwa Njuguna rose on a point of order. There 
was a substantive Motion that was being moved. If a Motion is moved and we move to a point of 
order, we are not able to measure the extent of frivolous if there was such. If it is right, we will 
proceed with the Motion because we would still be voting for the Motion on whether we can move 
the election date of the Deputy Speaker to another day. We can agree that now we can have a 
chance to debate on the merits and demerits of such  a step so that we move on the way a Motion 
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 is supposed to be done because we should be able to allow for brief debate and then we proceed to 
calling the question.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok:  Seconds.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Motion is now open for deba te. 
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. In my preamble, you realized that today was 
a gazette d day for us to elect the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. Until and unless we can be 
served with a new gazette notice, negating that gazette will be a rubble to that order. I want to draw 
attention of all the legal minds in this House and when we amended th is Standing Order, we knew 
that this House was headed to a ditch that is why we decided to come up with this Order. I would 
wish to re -read it. As soon as shall be …after the election of the Speaker, the Assembly shall elect 
a Deputy Speaker among its Membe rs who shall preside over the sitting of the Assembly in the 
absence of the Speaker as contemplated. We are not given a room. There is no time that is given 
unless you want us to first of all amend this Standing Order.  
I therefore request that the Honorab le Members in this House to discharge their mandate as per the 
Standing Orders. Unless you want us to assume an attitude of lethargy and indecisive Assembly, 
that is when we can take that route. All I wish to request you is to stand firm and defend this 
Standing Order as  you swore when you  took oath of Office. I wish to request that we continue with 
the business of the day because even the ballot boxes are here. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Kajwang’  
Hon. Peter Kajwang’: Thank you Mr . Speaker sir. He did not even say if he is supporting or 
opposing the Motion.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I am opposing the Motion and that is why I 
am reading the Standing Order. Hon. Kajwang’ is a senior Member. He should read betwe en the 
lines.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Francis Kuria.  
Hon. Francis Kuria: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I am opposing the Motion. These Members are 
eagerly waiting for this election. They are not exhausted unless she has other issues. We ar e very 
energetic to vote. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Virginia.  
Hon. Virginia Gicanga: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to oppose the Motion. All the Members 
of this House were ready for the work ahead of them when they went fo r elections. There are days 
when you will leave the Assembly at night. There are days you would even call for extension of 
time because of the business at hand. Consider the election of the Deputy Speaker a serious 
business.  
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) : Mheshimiwa Doreen.  
Hon. Doreen Korir: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support that we give each other time. 
We need to go through the CVs of the aspirants who are vying for the seat of the Deputy Speaker 
to know well who we are voting for. Thank yo u.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Mwangi.  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to oppose. We have been waiting for 
this day for a long time. The Gazette Notice was issued and the business of the day is to elect the 
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker for us to move forward. When we were here for orientati on, the 
Clerk informed us that next week, we might be starting our session. If we adjourn this because of 
a group that is not coming into consensus and we have the business of the day, what if they come 
tomorrow and they have not consulted well? Until when  shall we wait for them to agree on 
something? There is nothing that can hinder us from continuing with the business.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): For the benefit of debating in the House, it is good to be 
upstanding so that the Speaker’s eye can catch  you. 
(Question proposed that the election of the Deputy Speaker be adjourned to a later date ). 
(Question put and negatived ) 
We now proceed with the election of the Deputy Speaker  and the Clerks -At -Table to confirm 
that the ballot boxes are empty. The other elements of the election are the ballot papers, the 
boxes and the booths. The Clerk will call the names and the Members will pick the ballot and 
proceed to vote in the booth.  
(Voting for the Deputy Speaker starts)  
                                 (The Clerk -At-the Table called the out names)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): All the Members have voted?  
The Clerk -At-the Table:  Mr. Speaker sir, I confirm that I have read all the names  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Members the Standing Order that guides the election 
of the Deputy Speaker is Standing Order no. 14 (3)  
Honorable Members we now proceed to tallying the votes and we confirm that the total number 
of votes cast is 73. Clerk you can now move to tally for each candidate. Agents for the candidates 
to move forward. Clerk you can now proceed to county for each candidate.  
                                                    VOTING RESULTS  
                         Hon. Joseph Ngware Ng’ang’a - 47 votes  
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
                         Hon. Alex Kipkoech Langat -1 
                        Hon. Robert Kipyegon Langat -8 
                        Hon. William Mutai -3 
                        Hon. Samuel Tonui Kipkemoi -13 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): So, the tallying an d counting has been done. Honorable Members  
it is very clear that according to our Standing Orders 7  (2) if no candidate is supported by the votes 
of two -thirds of all Members the candidate or candidates who in that ballot receive the next highest 
number o f votes shall alone stand for election in a further ballot shall be elected Deputy Speaker. 
In our case Honorable Members , the two -thirds of all Members is 50 votes. Therefore,  we proceed 
to another ballot.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang : Mr. Speaker point of order , we know that two Members did not vote so we 
are talking about two -thirds who voted so we are referring to 73 number. Further Mr. Speaker we 
see the margin is quite big .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! Hon. Kajwang  
Hon. Peter Kajwang : Could you kindl y just make a ruling on this , when we talk about two -thirds 
we are talking about 48.8 when we round it off it is 49. We can agree in unison that this thing is a 
wrap.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon Kajwang that is well received. Hon Palang’a  
kindly have the mic, the floor is yours  
Hon.  Peter Palang’a : I can see you have taken charge of the House. Congratulations Mr. Speaker. 
I was just making a quick rejoinder that for those who mathematicians like myself the two thirds 
of 73 is actually 48 o r thereabout. I want to request the immediate challenger to Hon Ngware to 
make a remark. He can also save us this agony of wasting time here . He can at the same time make 
a withdrawal just as Hon.  Marende did and that was wisdom. Thank you  
Hon Samuel Tonui : Mr. Speaker Sir , I want to second and say thank you for those who voted for 
me. I withdraw , there is no repeat of the voting. Thank you and I want to congratulate Hon Ngware. 
Thank you  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri) : Honorable members if you want to have a word you can be 
upstanding.  
Hon Jane Githuku : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for this opportunity and members for the 
Assembly for the good work that you have done. At least you have shown that you are not fatigued. 
There were  some few things that were not going right but at least we congratulate Hon. Ngware 
and you rself Mr. Speaker for having the opportunity now to take us forward and we look forward 
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 for effective and unique debate in this County Assembly. Thank you. I want to congratulate the 
Deputy Speaker -elect Hon. Ngware.   
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable Members you may  be s eated. Democracy is 
expensive. Mr. Speaker sir, sorry, Hon . Members . 
(Laughter ) 
 You know initially I was a Member of County Assembly for Biashara ward and so the thing about 
Mr. Speaker really had sunk. Hon orable Members in this c ase the candidate with the highest votes 
was Joseph Ngware Ng’ang’a who garnered 47 votes and then the second highest was honorable 
Samuel Tonui who withdrew in favor of honorable Joseph Ngware  and so the next candidate with 
the highest vote is honorable William Mutai. In this case honorable William Mutai who withdrew 
in favor of honorable joseph Ngware  and so the next candidate with the highest votes it is Hon. 
William Mutai. Therefore,  in this  case, Hon. Mutai and Hon. Joseph Ngware goes back to the 
ballot unless now Hon. William Mutai maybe we want to hear from him. Sorry for that mix up but 
honorable members we passed the Standing Orders ourselves and so as much as it might take time, 
democra cy is expensive, so bear with us as we fast truck to resolve this. Honorable members sorry 
I read wrong things. The results were as follows; Honorable Joseph Ngware  47 votes, Honorable 
Alex Lang’at 1 vote, Honorable Robert Kipyegon  Langat 8 votes, Honorab le William Mutai 3 
votes, Honorable Samuel Tonui  13 votes. In that order, order Mheshimiwa Karanja! Honorable 
Samuel Tonui has withdrawn so the next member with the highest vote in that order then its 
Honorable Robert Kipyegon Lang’at. So Mheshimiwa Robert  Kipyegon Lang ’at, do you want to 
follow suit and maybe withdraw? Mheshimniwa Karanja what order? It’s important that ..  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Mr. Speaker it follows that immediately after the counting of the votes 
and then they are announced by the honora ble Speaker now the sequence is that Chonjo was the 
immediate  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order Hon.  Karanja who is Chonjo?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  sorry I am referring to Hon. Tonui, now because, Mr. Speaker you had 
announced number one and number two, and they were both for the second round now and Hon . 
Tonui while reading the mood of the House decided that it is good to do the obvious and that is 
exactly what he has done and I congratulate him. We can not move in retrogressive that because 
Hon. Tonui has moved to withdraw what about the other candidate. We will go until we go to the 
candidate with one vote. The one that voted for herself . 
(Laughter ) 
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Mr. Speaker I rise on a point of order and wis h to draw your attention 
to Order no. 7 election threshold. We know that this Country has been in that tendency and a 
culture of Picky punky  and we do not want to go to that level because th is House can be sued. If 
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 we suspend the election at t hat stage, the Deputy Speaker -elect can be challenged in Court of law 
because the Standing Orders continuously states that the next election to proceed until there be no 
other person who is interested in this position. Therefore Mr. Speaker I would wish that this House 
not to falls into that trouble because we will be trivializing  the procedures and process that we had 
undertaken. Therefore,  if you look at Order No. 7 (2) if no candidate is not supported by the votes 
of two third of all Members, the candidate or candidates who receive the highest number of votes 
referred to in paragraph 1 and the candidate or candidates who in the ballot receive the next highest 
number of votes shall alone stand for election in further ballot and the candidate who receive the 
highest number of votes in the further ballot shall be elected as Deputy Speaker. Therefor e Mr. 
Speaker I want to presume that this is election threshold and this one  is the only guiding compass 
for this House and therefore we do have options but going back to elections until all the members 
who are vying will be satisfied that we do not want t o compete anymore. Therefore Mr. Speaker 
allow me to draw your attention to that and you be cognizant of that because that one is critical.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon orable  member we said that we gave unto ourselves the 
Standing Orders that we use  today and this is a House of procedures and rules and we said that we 
are very energetic than ever before and so there are no shortcuts that maybe for convenience the 
law or the Standing Orders ha ve to be followed to the later. Now we proceed to Hon . Robe rt 
Kipyegon Lang’at who after the withdrawal of Hon. Tonui now becomes the second candidate 
with most votes. Therefore,  is Hon Robert Lang’at in in the House ? 
Hon. Fadhili Mzuri : Mr. Speaker sir , I wish to offer a solution in the absence of Hon. Robert 
Lang’at, h e has a chief agent who represented him and we do not know where he is. In his absence, 
he gave all the powers he had to the Chief Agent. So, the chief agent can speak on his behalf and 
concede defeat and save this House the time and the e nergy so that we can dispense off other 
matters.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon . Fadhili Msuri, thank you for that but then we do not want 
to go the shorter way to resolving this issue. The agent was not a candidate so we got to hear from 
the candidat e and if the candidate is not available then we are going to proceed to the next ballot.  
Hon. Nj uguna  Mwaura : Mr. Speaker allow me to also request your indulgence because Mr. 
Speaker it is presumed that the election was still on until the moment we are sti ll doing election 
but the door is open which is bringing some misconduct among the members and I would wish 
Mr. Speaker that you pronounce yourself that whoever is inside let them remain  inside and those 
who are outside to go outside, they walk in  protes t like in the Senate. We will still continue with 
the business.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Honorable members we can proceed with the second 
ballot until such a time we have achieved what the Standing Order and our law says. Now for this 
one it is very clear that the candidate with the highest number of votes now becomes the Deputy 
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Speaker. So, I am going to call upon the clerks to check that the elements of elections are right 
then we proceed to the second ballot.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech : Mr.  Speaker sir, why don’t we send the Sergeant -At-Arms to look for 
Robert Lang ’at so he can tell us  he wants  before we go for the next election?  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): now  because the S tanding Orders do not anticipate that the 
candidates will not be in the House, because voting takes place in the House we proceed with the 
ballot and we are going to have maybe according to what Hon. Fadhili was proposing now we can 
have his agent. Members let us p roceed because if we delay, now we are going to interfere with 
preparation of the ballot. So kindly allow the voting to continue then later we are going to have 
opportunity for two or three Members to comment.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi : Mr. Speaker sir Hon . Robe rt Langat is within.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Welcome Hon. Robert Langat. Maybe I am going to ask the 
Sergeant -At-Arms to identify whether Hon Robert Kipyegon Langat is in the House. Members we 
proceed with the ballot for the second ballot because we have to pronounce the law as it. If a certain 
number say ten, fifty percent of ten is always five, it cannot be 4.8. For that reason, in that election 
for the Deputy Speaker, no candidate garnered two -thirds of all Members, not Members who voted 
but all  Members of this County  Assembly as fully constituted. So, we proceed to the next ballot.  
(Hon. Members proceeded to vote through secret ballot in their alphabetical order ) 
 (The Sargent -at-arms instructed to close the door s to restrict movement of Members during voting 
process. )  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Now the voting process is through, we now proceed to tallying 
and counting. So, we can now have the agents of Hon. Jo seph Ngware Ng’ang’a and the agents of 
Hon. Robert Kipyegon Lang’at.  
 Clerk -At- the Table counted and tallied the votes as follows: - 
                         Hon. Joseph Ngware  Ng’ang ’a- 51 votes  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): We proceed to count the votes of Hon Robert  Kipyegon Lang’at  
Clerk -At-the Table : Hon. Robert Kipyegon Lang’at - 16 votes  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank  you, we may be seated; as the presiding officer for the 
Deputy Speaker, I want to give the results for that second ballot.  
                                  DEPUTY SPEAKER ELECTION RESULTS  
The total votes cast was 67 votes.  Commented [SSS1]: R speak  
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Robert Kipyegon Lang’at garne red 16 votes while Hon. Joseph Ngware Ng’ang’a garnered 
51 votes. Therefore Hon. Joseph Ngware Ng’ang’a has won with the majority of the votes. Hon. 
Joseph Ngware Ng’ang’a having been elected as the Deputy Speaker, the County Assembly of 
Nakuru now proceed s to take the oath  of office  
 ( The Oath of office was administered to Hon. Joseph Ngware Ng’ang’a by  the Speaker Hon. Joel 
Karuri ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon Ngware.  
COMMUNICATION  FROM THE CHAIR  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon orable  Members our Standing Order no . 13(1) immediately 
after taking and subscribing to the oath or affirmation of office. Under  Standing Order no.12 
(swearing in of the Speaker ) the Speaker shall notify the Members of the place, da te and time of 
the opening of the Assembly.  
 Following the notification by the Speaker under paragraph (1) the sitting of the Assembly shall 
stand adjourned until the date and time of the opening of the Assembly.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Therefore,  Honorable  Members, this House stands adjourned until a date that the Hon . Speaker 
will communicate to Members. Thank you.  
(The House rose at 1.30p m) 
 
 