FEBRUARY 22, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 22nd February, 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at  10.35  am 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu) in the Chair].  
PRAYERS  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
1. RESIGNATION OF MEMBERS FROM POLITICAL PARTIES  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): As regards to resignation of members from a political party, I 
wish to make a clarification on members who wish to resign from their current political parties. 
Article 1 94 (1) of the Constitution provides that the Office of Membe r of County Assembly 
becomes vacant if among other conditions  if as a member of a political party, the member resigns 
from a party or is deemed to have resigned from the party as determined in accordance with 
political parties’  Act 2011.  
Honourable  member s, I further wish to bring to your attention the provisions of Section 14 of the 
political parties’  Act 2011, which states ; a member of a political party who intends to resign from 
a political party shall give 30 days  written notice prior to his resignatio n to 
(a) Political party  
(b)  The clerk of the relevant House of Parliament. If the member is a member of 
parliament  
(c)  The clerk to the County Assembly, if the member is a member of county assembly .  
Section 14 (2) provides the resignation of the member of the polit ical party shall take effect upon 
receipt of such notice by the political party or clerk of the relevant House or County Assembly.  
Section 14 (3) states the political party of which the person is a member, the member or the clerk 
of the relevant House of Parliament, or a county assembly of which the person is a member shall 
notify the Registrar of political part ies of such resignation.  
Now there are four honourable  members who wish to resign from the ir political parties and are 
advised to take no te of the provisions of Section 14 of the political parties Act 2011. And address 
their resignation letters to of course the relevant person here is the clerk  as clarified in the Act. 
Thank you very much. I wish you all the best speaker Hon. Joel Kairu.  
 
FEBRUARY 22, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 2. FEMALE MEMBERS OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY TO ASSIST FILL A PHD QUESTIONNAIRE FOR  
                                           MR. JAMES NJOROGE WAWERU  
I also wish to make another communication ; honourable  members  will give you an opportunity to 
vent on  that communication. There is a person by the name James Njoroge Waweru  Who is a 
person living  with visual disability and he is undertaking a research for his PhD in Community 
Development and he wishes to interview the female Members of County Assembly. Ki ndly fill for 
him this questionnaire. The Sergeant -At-Arms will give you this questionnaire we assist this 
person to finish his PhD. I can see Hon. Anthony Rotich has got something to add.  
Hon. Anthony Rotich: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Sijaelewa hio  provision . Hio ni kumaanisha 
tunafunga kazi?  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): Kwa Kiswahili, sharia inasema ukitoka Jubilee uende UDA 
unaandikia barua Clerk na katiba inasema unakosa kuwa MCA wakati umeresign  from your 
political party. Ukishapatiana hio barua tutarudi hapa tutangaze hio kiketi ya Keringet as vacant. 
Sasa hio ni IEBC itaamua. Yes Hon. Wanjohi.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. If you look at the mood of the House and some 
of the M embers will shift to other political parties. It is important that at least we get a legal 
interpreter on that so that we are satisfied and we are sure of what we are doing before we proceed.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): Hon. Karuri.  
Hon. Joel Karuri: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Political parties are houses that govern this nation 
way back when multi -partism was reintroduced in the year 1992 when they repealed the infamous 
section 2  A. That is a weighty matter. There is a very popular luhya proverb that s ays vindu 
vichenjanga.  That means that things will keep o n moving and things are dynamic, including 
politics. My input is that immediately after this sitting, we have a Kamukunji because the matters 
that have been addressed by the Chair and the Communicati on is a weighty matter. That is my 
request.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you. I agree. I will call our legal experts who will interpret 
that but it is my responsibility to inform you and to warn you in advance of any consequences but 
the interpret ation shall be done. I think the Clerk is a Lawyer, we have Ann Kahunga who is a 
lawyer. Watakuja hapa tukae chini  because we do not want to surprise you by declaring your seat 
vacant then you come here and find the Sergeant -At-Arms telling you that you ar e no longer a 
Member of the House. Yes Hon. Kamau.  
Hon. Kamau Githengi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. In the last County Assembly, we also had our 
Speaker Hon. Susan Kihika who was with us in this House until the last minute and when they 
went to court, at th e end of the day, she became a winner. We need to have an adviso r who will 
assist the honorable members because there is another, we had the national Assembly Speaker who 
advised the  MPs and was also calling on the MCA’s to resign, forgetting that he himse lf is a State 
FEBRUARY 22, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 officer, he is vying for presidency and yet he has not resigned. Therefore,  Mr Speaker Sir, with a 
lot of humility, let us as honorable members be advised because the Constitution still states that 
we require to be Members of County Assembly until that time when our term lapses on 9th August 
2022 at midnight. So we require clarification on the same.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Yah, we have said we are going to have a Kamukunji on that but 
remember here is a matter of resignation and therefore you will be advised but as I said as your 
Speaker, I do not want to surprise you in some of these matters. So, let the conversation start and 
I think after this we will organize for someone to come and take you through and we will also look 
for if there are any court cases in that regard, their determination and many other issues. So, let me 
put the matter to rest at that point until we meet for that Kamukunji for further deliberations. Sawa 
sawa Hon. Members!  
Hon. Members :  in the affirmative  
PAPER  
THE NAKURU COUNTY GOVERNMENT MEDIUM TERM DEBT STATEMENT  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Paper by the Leader of Majority? Hon. Moses Kamau.  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Moses Kamau): Thank you Mr Speaker, before me, there is a 
Paper to be laid. The Nakuru County Government Medium Term Debt Statement. I beg to lay  
                                                     (The Paper was laid on the table)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you Hon orable  Member. I hereby direct that the Paper be 
committed to the Committee on Budget and Appropriation.  
PAPER  
       THE BUDGET COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY BUDGET 1 OF 2021/2022  
Hon. Joel Karuri : Thank you Mr Speaker. I beg to lay the Report of the Supplementary Budget 
1 for the Financial Year 2021/2022 . I beg to lay  
                                             (The Report was laid on the table)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Right the Paper is recommitted back to your committee. It’s a 
report? Okay it is the same one that you are going to give a Notice of Motion? Okay the paper is 
properly laid. Before the House.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
HOUSE ADOPTS BUDGET COMMITTEE REPORT ON SUPPLEMENTARY 1 OF 2021/2022 HOUSE                           
Alright Hon. Karuri  
Hon. Joel Karuri : Thank you Mr Speaker; I wish to give a Notice of Motion ; 
FEBRUARY 22, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
  THAT  this House adopts the Report of the Budget and Appropriation Committee on the 
Supplementary Budget for the financ ial year 2021/22. And Mr Speaker this is the first 
supplementary budget  for this financial year . I beg to give this Notice of Motion.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you very much; notice well received.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Alright Hon orable  Members this House stands adjourned to 2.30pm today.  
(The House rose 10.50am ) 
 
 
 