COUNTY ASSEMBLY  OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly  (Second Session)  
Wednesday 9th August 2023 
Assembly  Building  
The House met at 03:10 PM  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
VISIT BY KARANDA GIRLS PRIMARY SCHOOL FROM MIGORI COUNTY  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Communicatio n from the  Chair , this is to recogni se 
visitors  from Karanda Girls Primary School from Migori County . They are seated at the public 
Gallery  and in our usual  tradition of receiving and welcoming visitors  to our County Assembly  of 
Nakuru, I extend a warm welcome to them and on behalf of the Nakuru County Assembly , I wish 
you a fruitful visit. In connection to that I now invite the Honorable Kezia Akinyi Okumu who is 
our Deputy Minority Leader  to welcome them officially to our Assembly  welcome.  
Hon. Keziah Okumu: Thank you Honourable Speake r for this opportunity to welcome our Girls 
from Migori County . The School is called Karanda  Girls Primary School ; it is in Migori County 
in former Nyanza Province . I just want to urge our fellow Member s that if you have a girl child, 
Karanda is the best place to place your daughter, it is one of the best schools in Nyanza  and almost 
going to be the best school in Kenya. We invite you to bring our girls to Karanda Girls Primary 
School,  they are here with their Deputy Head Teacher Madam Celine and other Teachers who 
joined them.  
Let me take this time to welcome Karanda Primary School to Nakuru Cou nty Assembly , feel most 
welcome in Nakuru Count y and the County Assembly  of Nakuru where we articulate issues in a 
well-mannered way. When here you should learn more about Assemblies because we are the best 
in Kenya. Feel welcome as you enjoy your stay in Nakuru . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you Honorable Member , next order.  
PAPER (S) 
AUDITOR GENERAL REPORT  ON NAKURU WATER AND SANITATION SERVICES 
(NAWASCOAL) COMPANY LIMITED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2022.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): We have several  Paper s to be laid, the first Paper  is the Report  
of the Auditor General on Nakuru Water and Sanitation Serves (NAWASCO AL) Company 
Limited for the year ended 30 th June 2022. It will be laid by the Leader  of Majority Party 
Honorable Alex Langat.  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang ’at): Thank you Honorable Speaker, I rise to lay the Report  
of the Auditor General on Nakuru Water and Sanitation Services Company (NAWASCOAL) 
Limited  for the year which ended 30 th June 2022. I wish to lay the Report  before the honorable 
House, thank you Honorable Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you the Leader  of Majority Party , the Report  is committed  
to the Committee  on Public Accounts and Investment. The Chairperso n should take note and do 
the needful . There is the second Paper  to be laid by the Leader  of Majority Party.  
PAPER (S) 
AUDITOR GENERAL REPORT  ON NAKURU WATER AND SANITATION COMPANY LIMITED 
(NAWASCO) FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE , 2022  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang ’at): Thank you Honorable Speaker, I rise again on the 
Report  of the Auditor General on Nakuru Water and Sanitation Company Limited (NAWASCO) 
for the year ended 30TH June, 2022 . I wish to lay the Report  before the Honorable House, thank 
you Honorable Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank the Leader  of Majority Party , the Report  is properly laid 
and I commit it to the  Committee  on Public Accounts and Investment  for onward processing. There 
is a third Paper  to be laid the Leader  of Majority Party.  
PAPER (S) 
AUDITOR GENERAL REPORT  ON THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF NAKURU (STAFF) CAR 
LOANS SCHEME FUND FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2022  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang ’at): Thank you Honorable Speaker , I wish to lay the third 
Paper ; it is the Report  of the Auditor General on The County Government of Nakuru (Staff) Car 
Loans Scheme Fund for the year ended 30 th June 2022. I wish to lay the said Report  before the 
honorable House . Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you the Leader  of Majority Party , the Paper  is committed 
to the Committee  on Public Accounts and Investment , kindly take note for we have noted 
numerous Report s committed  to the Committee , Chairperson we know you are equal to the task, 
expedite on the processes, next order.  
STATEMENT (S) 
STATUS OF SIRIKWA HEALTH CENT RE IN SIRIKWA WARD  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a request for Statements, the first Statement  will be 
requested by the Honorable Emmanuel Lang ’at, the Member  for Sirikwa, welcome.  
Hon. Emmanuel Lang ’at:  Thank you honorable Speaker, I am honorable Emmanuel Lang ’at, 
Member  of County Assembly  for Sirikwa Ward in Kuresoi North Sub County . Honorable Speaker , 
pursuant to Standing Order Number 47(2) ( c) I rise to request for a Statement  from  the Chairperson 
of the  Committee  on Health Services concerning  the status of Sirikwa Health Cent re in Sirikwa 
Ward. Honorable Speaker, Health  is a critical County function under the Fourth Schedule of the 
Constituti on.  
The Health Cent re under the reference is located in Sirikwa Cent re and thus serves as the only 
Public Health Institution in the densely populated area . As such , the facility should be well 
equipped with drugs, equipment and Medical staff that commensurate with the surrounding 
population. Honorable Speaker , the Health Cent re is in a very bad state. At the moment, it lacks 
Medical Equipment , suffers from acute shortage of drugs and Medical staff which  has caused 
untold suffering to the resid ents of  Sirikwa and by extension  denying them their Constitutional 
right to Health Care . Honorable Speaker, I wish to request the Chairperson  for the Committee  on 
Health Services to issue a comprehensive Statement  on what the County Government is doing to 
address the following - 
1. Shortage of Medical  staff in Sirikwa Health Centre  
2. Inadequate medical equipment  and drugs in Sirikwa Health Center  
Thank you very much Honorable Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you, the Chairperson for the Committee  on Health 
Services  and Vice Chairperson or any Member  for the  Committee  on Health Services take note 
that you are required to submit a response to that Statement in 14 days.  There is another request 
for a Statement  from the Member  for Turi Ward Honorable John Mwangi . 
STATEMENT(S)  
BURSARY DISBURSED BALANCES TO TURI WARD ON 4TH APRIL, 2023  
Hon. John Mwangi:  Thank you Honorable Speaker , I rise to request for Statement that pursuant 
to Standing Order 47(2) (C), I hereby  request f or a Statement from the Chairperson  of the Sectorial 
Committee  on Early Childhood Education and Vocational Training concerning the Bursary 
Disbursed Balances to Turi Ward on 4th April, 2023.  
Honorable Speaker, aware that Early Childhood Education and Vocational Training is a devolved 
Function  pursuant to the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution, Early Childhood and Vocational 
Training serves as a critical responsibility of making Children  well prepared for their future 
educ ation, Honorable Speaker , it must be noted that Education  is a Constitutional right such as no  
Child should be deprived of the right to attain Education .  
I am deeply concerned about the casual manner in which the County Governmen t is handling the 
matter c oncerning Bursary Cheques which was made on 4 th April,  2023 by her Excellency  the 
Governor  of Nakuru  County and the Ward Balances amounting to  Kshs  120,000 which was not 
utilised in the total of Kshs 2 Million Bursary Balances for the Financial Year 2022/2023 which 
has not yet been disbursed to the beneficiary of Turi Ward to date.  
Honorable Speaker, Article 185(3) of the  Constitution of Kenya provides that a County Assembly  
while respecting the  Principle of Separation of Powers, may exercise Oversight  over the County 
Executive Committee  and any other Government Organs. It is on this premise that I seek to request 
for a Statement from the  Chairperson for the Committee  on Early Childhood and Vocatio nal 
Training seeking the following - 
1. The status of Turi Ward Bursary Cheques which were launched by her Excellency the 
Governor on 4th April, 2023 at Molo Sub County.  
2. Why the bursary allocation amounting to Kshs 120,000 for Turi Ward allocated in the 
Financial Year 2022/2023 has not yet been disbursed to date . 
3. The plans the County Government is undertaking to avoid such  incidences in future. I beg 
to request for the Statement, thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you Honora ble Member  for Turi, the Chairperson  for the  
Committee  on Early Childhood and Vocational Training take note of that and we are expecting a 
Report  from your Committee  in 21 working days. There is another request for Statements  from 
Honorable John Mwangi who is the Member  for Turi.  
STATEMENT(S)  
COLD STORE (NARIG) PROJECT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/20223 IN TURI WARD  - 
MUCHORWE  
Hon. John Mwangi: Thank you Honorable Speaker , I rise again to request for Statement . 
Honorable Speaker , pursuant to Standing Order Number 47(2) (C), I rise to request for a Statement 
from the Chairperson  for the  Committee  on Agriculture  concerning the status of Cold Store 
(NARIG) project for the Financial Year 2022/20223 in Turi Ward  - Muchorwe . The Cold Store 
Project for the Financial Year 2022/2023 was funded with the County Government in collaboration 
with NARIG  which had a total of Kshs 117 Million . The County Government allocated 17 million 
while NARIG  funded the same with Kshs. 100 Million. The project was to be implemented in four 
faces and was to include fencing which is the Perimeter Wall, Land scaping  and equipping the 
facility with machinery for use . The current  status of the project is that only fencing has been done 
which has an entrance and exit to the facility which is equivalent to a total cost of Nine Million .  
No further works is ongoing at the proj ect, this is despite the fact that the Financ ial Year 2022/2023 
has come to an end. I therefore wish to request the  Chairperson for the Committee  on Agricultur e 
to issue a comprehensive Statement  concerning the status of the project indicating the time lines 
in which the same will be finali sed and the project degree of completion  to date, I beg to request 
for the  Statement , thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you Honorable Member  for Turi Ward. The Chairperson  
for the Committee  on Agriculture or the Vice Chairperson you are required to answer to that 
Statement  in 21 days, next order.  
MOTION  
NOMINEE S TO NAKURU CITY BOARD , GILGIL  MUNICIPAL BOARD  AND MOLO MUNICIPAL 
BOARD  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Motion  from Honorable Peter Palang ’a who is the 
Chairperson  for the  Committee  on Lands, Housing and Physical Planning.  
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: Thank you Honorable Speaker  for allowing me to move a  Motion  in regards 
or as a follow up to the Notice of Motion  that I had given during the Morning Session and I move ; 
Honorable Speaker , I move that pursuant to the provision of Section 11(1) (2) and (3) of the Urban 
Areas and Cities Act, 2011 , Section 9 of the Public Appointments County Approval Act 2017 and 
Standing Order 48(4) , this House  adopts the Report  of the Committee  on Lands, Housing and 
Physical Planning on the vetting of the Nominee s for the appointment of Nakuru City Board , 
Naivasha Municipal Board , Gilgil  Municipal Board  and Molo Municipal Board .  
Mr. Speaker,  these names  were appointed and forwarded to this particular House  and you 
commit ted the names to the Committee  having been forwarded by Her Excellency the Governor  
in constituting  the Board  for the City of Nakuru, Naivasha Municipal Board , Molo  and the Gilgil  
Municipal Board . Through your advice and indulge nt, you committed some names to the  
Committee  and therefore the Report  is bulky , I want to request for you r permission and that of 
Honorable Member s that I may not be reading page by page but kindly let us move together  so 
that we appreciate what this Report  contains.  
The Committee  proceedings and I will not read that but the  Committee  held some s ittings  and 
reviewed the Nominee ’s Certificates and Testimonial s to vet them. The  Committee  is comprised 
of 21 Member s and I do not want to read the Member ship of the Report  but in adhering to the time 
frames we divided ourselves into two and we had a comprehensi ve Report  where we scrutini sed 
the Testimonials and Documents of the Nominee s who had been proposed by her Excellenc y the 
Governor .  
I take this opportunity to thank Member s of the  Committee  for their input and valuable 
contributions during the vetting process. The  Committee  also wishes to thank the  Offices of the 
Speaker and the Clerk of the  Assembly  for the logistical support accorded to it during the vetting 
exercise. Further, the Committee  is also thankful to the Media  for its coverage of the  proceedings 
thus enhancing transparency and accountability during the verting process. On behalf of the 
Sectorial Committee  of Lands, Housing and Physical Planning Pursuant to Section 11(1) (2) and 
(3) of the Urban  and Cities Amendment Act 2019 , we hereby present Report  as follows.  
I wish to request the Member s that we move together, we look at some of the areas that we had 
looked at in terms of the background and I just want to highlight that there are some criteria’s set 
in the Urban  and Citie s Act as to how and when we need to have the Municipal Board s.  
Considering all those factors, and that is why the Cities and Towns that I have mentioned ha ve 
qualified and there is need to have the Board s in place. Allow me to say and I will share with 
Member s the need to have these Board s in place . As a County we are in receipt of a letter from the 
Council  of Governors  expressing dissatisfaction as to why we are have delayed to have these 
Board s in place. It is worth noting that we ought to have had th ese Board s in place by 30 th of last 
Month.   
As I move on, there are some areas that I will also want to revisit after your discussions . Honorable 
Speaker, I am moving very quickly, the spirit of the Public Appointments and County Assemblies 
Approval Act, 2017 provides that the criteria for the guidelines of the Committee  briefly for we 
had to check on the Education, Employment Records, Honors and Awards, Professional 
Associations, Member ships, Published Writings , Public Offices , Political Activities and 
Affiliations. Differed Income into future or future benefits, sources of Income  and Tax and 
Statements  of Net Worth. This is what we were looking at. I want to mention something as I move 
to the gist of the Report , there was a request for memorandum and notification to the public that 
was raised and I want to read it as follows - In accordance to the provision of Section 7(10) of the 
Public Appointment County Assemblies Act 2017 , the Clerk  of the Assembly  placed an 
Advertisement  in the Print Media on 21st  July 2023 inviting the Public  to submit Memorandum 
by a way of written statements  or on Oaths Affidavits in support of the Nominee s.  
I want to mention that the advert was put in 21 st and by the time we were retreating for  Vetting 
there were no objections raised to most of the  Member s apart from a few who I will mention. That 
time frame was given to allow any Petition  or any Memorandum  to any Nominee  if one had an 
issue. It should be noted that out of the 26  Member s that had been forwarded, 25 Member s turned 
up, one  Member  from Molo by name Bernard Gitau did not show  up and therefore despite the fact 
that we received 26 names we ended up vetting 25 names because of failure of turning up by that 
particular Member . 
With your permission Honorable Speaker , I move to Nakuru City Board  where there were a 
number of Nominee s who had been forwarded to us . I want to start with the first-person  Mrs. 
Johara Saidi Ali. In his Professional Experience , the Nominee  is currently a Tutor at the Technical 
University of Kenya, previously the Nominee  held the following positions, Assistant Production 
Manager - Victoria Jews Company Limited, Assistant Quality Assurance Manager - Mills Fruits 
Professional, Shift Supervisor Beverages . Honorable Speaker, allow me to just make the 
Observations  by the Member s because the Nominee s are many and before that I want to say and 
reiterate here that the Committee  never received any Petition  against or for this particular Nominee . 
I will be taking you on where we received Petition s and where we did not receive the Petition s. It 
is wort noting that for this particular Nominee  nothing was given in form a Petition  either for or 
against and therefor the Committee  observed the Nominee  and gave recommendation that after 
vetting and lookin g into all the relevant academic qualifications the Committee  finds the Nominee  
to fit to be a Member  to City Board  of Nakuru. Therefore, the  Committee  seeks the approval of 
the House  to have the Nominee  as one of the Board  Member s to the City Board  of Nakuru.  
The second Nominee  was Crispus Anthony Wathimba, a Member  of the City Board  as a Nominee  
and I want to move to his Professional Experience . The Nominee  is currently the Managing 
Director of Ominett Enterprise Limited , previously the Nominee  was the  Regional Operations 
Director at the TKM  Maestro Kenya Limited . I want to request Member s that we move together 
up to all the other issues in terms of measuring on how to improve the Drainages, maximis ing Own 
Source Revenue  because we were also keen to understand whether the Nominee s are able to 
improve the Own Source Revenue .  
I want to move to the Recommendations  and after all the interrogations we as a Committee  wishes 
to seek that the House  considers the Academic Qualifi cations, Work Experience  and sufficient 
vetting by the  Committee ; Mr. Crispus Wathimba is hereby proposed by the House  to be a Member  
to the City Board  of Nakuru.  
I want to move to  Nominee  number three Mr. George Njenga Mwaniki as a Member  proposed by 
Her Excellency the Governor . We did the vetting  in going through all the aspects of professional 
qualification, education  background and issues of integrity.   It is worth noting  the Committee  again 
never received any Petition  against or for the Nominee . Therefore, the Committee  equally finds 
that having considered the academic and professional qualification, work experience and all the 
submission s during the vetting of the Nominee , the Committee  finds Mr. George Njenga Mwaniki  
suitable to serve as a Member  of the City Board  of Nakuru.  
Hono urable Speaker, on Mr. Stephen Mwaniki Muli as the fourth Nominee , it is worth noting that 
this is the only person who had a lot of Petition s for; they were about 15 in number and those 
Petition s were all Memorandum  in support of his Nomination . They were 16 in number but one 
did not have the Affidavit  and goes to records that he received  more than 15 Memorandum  in 
support of being a Member  to the City Board . Looking at all the qualification including academic 
I want to mention that the  Committee  finds or recommends that Stephen Mwaniki Muli be a 
Member  to the Nakuru City Board .  
Honorable Speaker, the last Member  to Nakuru City Board  is Mr. James Kamau Njau . Member s 
note that the law requires that for you to be a  Member  to any  Board  especially the City, you must 
be a graduate and I want to mention here that all the Nominee s mentioned above and there below 
meet the criteria and qualificati ons by having the professional qualification of a University Degree  
from  recogni sed Institutions. Therefore,  Mr. Njenga as well we never received any Petition  against 
or for his nomination. Considering all the  Academic and Professional Qualification and Work 
Experience together with the oral submission during the Vetting  process the Committee  finds Mr. 
James Kamau Njau suitable to serve in the City Board  of Nak uru as a Member  to the Board . 
I now move to Molo Municipal Board ; this is a new Board  that is being constituted depending on 
the population and having met the criteria of the population, the area coverage and other things we 
go to Molo. We had quite a number of people who had been proposed . It is worth noting that this 
particular Board  had been proposed to have  six or seven Member s but as I had indicated before , 
only six turned up and this is what I am going to read in regards to the presence of the Nom inees 
and the vetting process as they appeared before us.  
The first Nominee  was Ms. Florence Wairimu Kabii, all the issues raised in term s of knowledge  
and decision making , Measure s to improve drainage, role of the Municipal Board , ways of how to 
address political interference and roles of the County Assembly  in managing the Municipality ; 
Development Partners to be brought on Board  on how to develop  Molo. Honorable Speaker, I want 
to say and confirm that this lady was very good in ar ticulating the issues and we did not receive 
any Petition  against or for her and therefore the Committee  hereby recommends that having 
considered the academic  and professional qualifications, work experience and oral submission 
during the Committee  Vetting , the Committee  finds Ms. Florence Wairimu Kabii suitable to serve 
on the Molo Municipal Board . 
The second Nominee  was Mr. Wesley Kipkemoi Ruto,  as well we checked on the professional 
experience . The Nominee  is currently engaged in family business  and previously the Nominee  
worked in the following positions Principal Administrator in the Office  of the  Governor in Nakuru 
County , Project Manager Smart City , Project Manager Site TKT  Organi sation, Rehabilitation 
Officer - Kenya Society of the Blind and his experience in  Soil and Water Conservation by 
considering the issues of drainage , we felt and convinced as a Committee  that this particular person 
is worth being approved as a Member  of the Molo Municipal Board  and Mr. Wesley Kipkemoi 
Ruto is hereby approved by the Committee  and seek the  Member s to support us.  Madam Jemima 
Njeri Kuria , a Member  to the Molo Municipal Board ; equally we looked at so many issues in terms 
of how do they want to ra ise the issues of revenue, how they want to have personal experience and 
we did not have any Petition  either against or for this particular Nominee  and therefore the 
Committee  on Lands, Housing and Physical Planning recommends that this person be a Nominee  
to the Board .  
Mr. Kakai Thiongo , a Member  to the Molo Municipal Board ; equally we looked through his 
professional experience . The Nominee  is currently a Principal Architect Spatial Module 
Consultant. Remember  Member s the House  has just adopted and launched the Spatial Planning of 
Nakuru and I want to appreciate because most of the Member s were in Nakuru when the Spatial 
Planning was launched by Dr. William Ruto , the President of the Republi c of Kenya and theref ore 
when one has such experience we believe and we have no doubt that this experience in Spatial 
Development will go a long way in developing the  Molo and its environs. We did not have any 
Petition  against or for this person and looking at all other requir ements, the Committee  
recommends that having considered the Academic  and Professional  qualification, experience and 
oral submission during the Vetting  process, the  Committee  finds Mr. Kakai Thiongo suitable   to 
serve as a  Member  to Molo Municipal Board .  
Saira Diebo Njoroge , I want to mention  it is the first time that we have seen a youthful and 
energetic and focused person coming on  Board . I want to take note of the Date  of Birth , this lady 
was born on 17th June 1995 in Nakuru Count y, she is a youthful lady and indeed she was able to 
convince the Committee  that despit e her age she is very articulate,  she is visionary and she is 
committed to serve and therefore she also qualified by having a degree from a relevant Institution . 
Measures  to improve Drainage, Waste Management Issues , new ideas to improve management of 
the Board  and I remember  asking her how are you going to mingle with elderly  Member s 
considering your age? I was and on behalf of the Committee  we were c onvinced that this is a lady 
who is energetic and focused to give youthful input to the Board  and it is important to have a youth 
in the Board . From where I come from, it is said if you see a flock of cows moving without some 
small animals then it means there is no future for that. So, I want to say on this there i s future for 
Molo because I can see some small cows within  the huge flock of Molo.  
Honorable Speaker, Mr. Evans Ngige Gashau is a Member  of Molo Municipal Board . He is a 
Businessman  and we looked  at all the issues and there was no Petition  for or against this particular 
Nominee  and therefore considering that he satisfies the requirements of Chapter Six of the 
Constitution  on Leader ship and Integrity  having been cl eared by the relevant Authoritie s that he 
has not been dismissed from any office for contravention of the provision of Article 75 of the 
Constitution which deals with conduct of State Officers.  The Nominee  demonstrate s knowledge 
in Land Matters , Planning  and D evelopment and therefore the Committee  recommends this person 
to serve in the Molo Municipal Board .  
Having done that, I g et to Gilgil  as the Third Municipal Board  proposed with their Member s to 
serve in that Board . We received a person called Teresia Kariuki Karuma, a Member  to the Board  
and we looked at the Date of Birth, she was born on 18 th December 1975 in Nakuru County. We 
looked at her professional  and academic qualifications. In  the professional experience, th e 
Nominee  is currently a Director of Nafuu Cereals and Nafuulink Supermarket in Gilgil  with a net 
worth  of Kshs 5 Million plus. She was able to articulate the roles of the Board , challenges of Poor 
Drainage, Revenue Enhancement and we as well as a  Committee  never received any Petition  for 
or against the Nominee  and the Committee  proposes her to serve on the Gilgil  Municipal Board  if 
allowed and adopted by this particular House.  
Sharma Wangui Njuguna , a Member  to Gilgil  Municipal Board , the Nominee  is currently serving 
as a Board  Member  at Olekusutan Primary School . She previously held the following positions ; 
Board  Member  of Dijon Academy in Gilgil , Human Resource Manager and you can go through 
with me  Member s, you can r ead through. The interview on knowledge and decision making , we 
found that the  Nominee  was able to have  issues of poor drainage, issues of D evelopment Partners 
compliance to the Public Participation rule as it has been envisaged by the Constitution and by 
extension, the Public Participation Bill in this Assembly . She was able to articulate all the issues 
as expected.  
The Committee  did not receive any Petition  in support or against the Nominee . And the refore, the 
Committee  in its own wisdom considering all those factors, it proposes that having considered the 
academic  and profession al qualifications , work experience and  oral submissions, the Committee  
finds Mrs. Sharma Wangui Njoroge suitable to serve a s a Member  for Gilgil  Municipal Board .  
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Joseph Maina Theuri to serve as a Member , we also looked at some issues that 
came up and there were a number of issues surrounding th is in terms of the authenticity, in terms 
of whether he comes at that particular region .  Mr. Speaker, it is worth mentioning before this 
House that indeed, there were some Member s who raised some issues concerning th e Nominee . 
After a long and lengthy delib eration  on this particular Nominee , it is worth noting that he was 
appointed on a Competitive Appointment. It is important Member s to note that there are those 
people who were nominated to the  Board  through a Competitive Appointment or  appointment 
through  Professional Bodies . This particular person Mr. Speaker, was evident that he was 
appointed on a Competitive Process. What does that mean? That means that the Advertisement  
was put, the person applied, the person was shortlisted and therefore it was  forwarded to us.   I want 
to mention that recognis ing the issues raised by Honorable  Member s, specifically from Gilgil  and 
other Member s that he is not a resident and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will come back .  
Because  of time, I want to explain further the process in terms of the requirements for one to be 
appointed in a Competitive Process . Mr. Speaker, we looked at all the professional qualifications, 
and there  was no Petition . I want to repeat  that the Committee  did not receive any Petition  in 
support or against the nomination of Joseph Maina Theuri.  It is worth noting that up to the time 
we were vetting, the Committee  had not received any Petition , any opposition in terms of 
contravening that Law .  I want to make it clear, so that  as we move on , the Committee  recommend s 
that having considered the academic  and professional qualifications, work experience and 
submission during the vetting process. Mr. Speaker, the Committee  confirm s that… 
Honorable Speaker with your permission, allow me to just… I may not come here. Honorable, 
there are m any documents there. Honorable David Muraya just  give me some documents there, 
because there is something I want to emphasi se here as I move on to other Nominee s.  
Mr. Speaker, as a Chairperson  I had to go further and dig deep, because when Member s raise 
issues , I do not leave it that way. I have to find out as to whether I have to defend my position . 
There are some of the issues that had been raised during the vetting process that this particular 
person has no permanent dwelling in Gilgil  and has nothing to do with Gilgil . Mr. Speaker, I want 
to say that I am in possession of the land Title Deed of this particular person. That is within Miti 
Mingi and theref ore it confirmed  beyond doubt that this particular person has properties in Gilgil .  
So, Mr. Speaker in due course I want to share this with you so that Member s can also peruse . As 
a Chair when I receive some issues I have to go further and confirm , so Mr. Speaker the Title Deed 
in his name is available, Member s can confirm and therefore the Committee  approves or 
recommend for approval of such a person.  
Mr. Stephen Kimani Njoroge as a Member  to the Gilgil  Municipal Board , equally, we received no 
Petition within the timeframe that was created and put into the Gazette Notice by the  Clerk of this 
Assembly . And therefore, Mr. Speaker going through all these , the Committee  recommends that 
we consider this particular person to be a Member  to the Board  of Gilgil  because we found it fit.  
Mr. Joseph Kiarie Waweru a Member  of the Gilgal Board  Mr. Speaker, looking at all the 
professional experience , the Nominee  is a Chief  Execut ive Officer of Kapaso Events Company.  
The Nominee  is worth that amount o f money , and on knowledge and decision making, the 
Nominee  was able to convince the Committee . There was no  Petition  received for or against this 
particular person . Therefore Mr. Speaker , the Nominee  demonstrated impressive knowledge on 
land matters , Planning and Development . The Nominee  possesses  academic qualification s and 
experience related to the mandate of the Muni cipal Board . And for that reason, the Committee  on 
Lands, Housing and Physical Planning  therefore proposes to have this particular person as a  
Member  to the Board . 
Ms. Pauline Ndunge Mbuva also a Member  of Gilgil  Municipal Board , Mr. Speaker With your 
permission again, I will not want to go through . We did not receive any Petition  against th is person 
and considering all other factors,  the Committee  hereby suggest s or proposes to approve the 
nomination of th is person.  
Mr. Speaker , in Naivasha I want to m ention here that we received quite a number of Petition s from 
the Member s of the public, which I will mention here who had petitioned  the nomination of certain 
Member s. Mr. Speaker, with your permission, we received Petition  from Moses Kimani Mulu, on 
behalf of the Kamba community, they felt that they had not been represented in the nomination.  
 Mr. Speaker , as well the Committee  received a Petition  from Sh ayo Amos on be half of the Luo 
community, and without the fear of contradiction, honorab le Amos and the  rest here, unfortunately 
or fortunately enough , this is  the person that we also contested with him, of course, he was vying  
on a UDA ticket , and therefore he felt he c an have his own way  by saying that the Luhya  have not 
been appointed, so have a Petition  from Amos Sh ayo. 
We also had a Petition  from David Oduori Ki -Loo who had petitioned  the Assembly  and the 
nomination through the Luo community, they felt that Minority  groups in Naivasha had not been 
represented.  It is worth noting, Mr. Speaker , as we move on  in future appointments, we will be 
looking at the Minority  groups like Luo, Luhya and Kamba in the subsequent nomination, and 
therefore, Mr. Speaker those are the Petition s we received.  
 However, we also received Petition s which were  disregarded  for Non-Compliance ; Petition  by 
Mr. Absalom Muku usi on behalf of the Naivasha Professionals. The Professional Bodies in 
Naivasha had been given a letter to forward somebody who w as to be nominated in the Board , Mr. 
Speaker I want to confirm here that the l ist that had been presented there before, they felt that they 
had been shortchanged, because the person that th ey had forwarded was not the person they 
wanted . So I do not know how quickly they reali sed, because this Petition  now lacked merit, 
because the second list that we were using to vet the particular person they were contesting against 
was not on the list, a nd therefore, that Petition  died on arrival, and therefore it does not hold water 
because the person they were contesting against was not an issue anymore . She is Lucy Gikara 
because again, she came in through the neighborhood , and not the Professional Bodies as they had 
alluded to it.  
We get to Jonathan Warothe Kuria ; it is important Member s to note that net worth  we looked at 
that, we looked at all the other issues, and it is important honorable Speaker,  at times once a 
Teacher  you will always remain a  Teacher . It is important to note that this particular Nominee  was 
once a Councilor and  I served with him in 2007 , and I want to mention here that he was the Mayor  
to Municipal Council of Naivasha. He also served in the first Assembly  of this particular Co unty. 
And Mr. Speaker , it is also worth noting that he was also the Chair person  for the  Committee on  
Lands, Housing and Physical Planning  and this does not mean that these are some of the areas that 
this particular Nominee  was given a limelight but indeed, old is gold ; this guy was able to express 
himself and to demonstrate a lot of experience in matters of the  Board  and therefore Mr. Speaker, 
the Committee  finds it worth to have him on the Board  as a Member  to the Municipa l Board  of 
Naivasha. Mr. Speaker, there is no Petition  again received against or for him. It is worth noting, 
there was no any Petition .  
The second person was Mr. Joseph Patrick Njehia Mukui as  Member  to the Naivasha Municipal 
Board . I am sure Mr. Speaker  up to this point Member s have acclimati sed themselves on the 
proceedings of this endeavor. I do not want to labor myself too much because now they know the 
sequence. Let me just get to the point  that there was no Petition and  this particular person is 
subsequently proposed to be a  Member  to the Board .  
Mr. Speaker, the second person Mr. Richard Cheruiyot Langat who is a Member  proposed to this 
particular Board . The Nominee  showed some experience , the Nominee s is currently the  Chef/Chief 
Executive Officer/Founder at Potter’s Touch Cuisines Limited/Potters Hospitality  and I know 
some of the people have met him and tasted some of the food made by him . We did not have any 
Petition  against him. We therefore Mr. Speaker , considering all other factors, the Committee  
recommends that this particular person becomes a Member  of the Municipal Board  of Naivasha.  
Nancy Mugure Waweru, a Member  of Naivasha Municipal Board . Subsequently Mr. Spe aker, 
there was no Petition  received for or against this particular person. And looking at all the academic  
qualifications, this Committee  hereby recommends the approval of such a person on this particular 
Committee  and to serve as a  Member  of the Municipa l Board  of Naivasha.  
 Mr. Peter Kimani Gitau , Member  to that ; date of birth 10th October 1965.  He holds a Bachelor 
of Science (Finance) degree from Pennsylvania State University. The Nominee  is a Director in a 
Naivasha County Hotel and Diamond Lighting . All those kinds Mr. Speaker, the Committee  
never received any Petition  and looking at the suitability, this particular person is hereby 
proposed to be a  Member  to the Naivasha Municipal Board . 
 Lucy Wangeshi  Gikara, a Member  to the Naivasha Municipal Board , no Petition  received, and 
the Member  is hereby proposed to be a Member  to the Board .  
Mr. Speaker, those are the Member s that we had proposed. But i t is worth noting, as I emphasis e, 
as I sit down Mr. Speaker, two or three  things. Number one, the advertisement was put in the 
Kenya Gazette by 21st of that month a nd by the time we were doing the vetting, the Committee  
had not received most of the Petition s against those Member s. Mr. Speakers  it is worth noting that 
there is a lso an Advisory Letter , which I will also share with you, after Member s contributing, I 
will also want to unleash that as I summari se that I will also share with you the advisory that has 
been given to the County  for running late. Mr. Speaker, these Member s, the Board s have a lot of 
benefits to our entity. Mr. Speaker, we cannot afford to lose millions of monies  that come along 
with the  Board s because of other issues.  
I will imagine and request that Member s if the re are any issues, we can panel beat a car, but let us 
have our car in place s o that we have to attract the Member s. Part of the criteria that are required, 
the Board  Member s are to be in place, we have to have the Board  Managers and these Board s have 
to be inducted before the time.  
As per the Notice  that we are given, we ought to have had these Board s by 31st July. We are already 
late by two weeks or three weeks. H .E the Govern or has done her due diligence to request that we 
really expedite this. It is worth noting Member s, we will be proceeding for Devolution Conference , 
and we  will be also be headed for CASA games. So, the timeframe for two weeks, we w ill not  and 
may I ask the Chair, I want to plead with you that please let us not waste any other time. I am 
coming from the Minority group who feels probably have not been considered in this particular 
nomination. And Mr. Speaker it comes a time where you put your personal interests  aside, you 
look at the benefit of the Count y and for that reason Mr. Speaker, I want to urge even if I am 
bleeding internally, I want to request Member s that let us have these Board s in place, for us to 
attract some money to this Municipality , which again  would go a long way into developing this 
County .  
(Loud Consultations)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) : Honorable Chair person did  you just say that you are bleeding 
internally, or it is figurative?  
Hon. Peter Palang’a : It is figurative Mr. Speaker , and you know at times  you may l ack words to 
explain , but I am saying and in that regard  Mr. Speaker, I mean  I have received some Petition s, 
some Member s are even  calling me , you are representing us as a  Minority group, where is our 
fate?  But again, I am looking at the bigger good in terms of the timeframe  for having these Board s. 
That is what I wanted to express regardless of the Petition s that we have received , Member s I want 
to request that we swallow our pride  and save our County by having th ese Board s to attract some 
funds  from the World Bank. Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to call a Member  to second.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  The Honorable Member  for Turi . 
Hon. John Macharia : Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir for the opportunity to second the Report . As I 
arise , I second the Report  with the following facts ; I am pleased to say that I  am a Member  of 
Lands, Housing and Physical Planning Committee  and in the Second Assembly  I served as the 
Vice Chairperson for five years, and according to how w e were able to vet , I can say without any 
doubt that the Report  that has been submitted by the Chairperson  for the Committee  is according 
to how we were able to vet and those Member s are very much qual ified. Therefore, because I am 
one of those people who want to see Nakuru  County progressing , and after passing this particular 
Report , Nakuru County  will be able to benefit an amount of 600 Million from World Bank for 
Development.  
I therefore urge this honorable House  to support the Report , and also the Member s of the public 
together with the Honorable  Member s were being accorded the opportunity from the time the 
names were being brought to the Assembly  to up to 28th of last Month, so that we can channel 
their Petition . And because we do not have such Petition , I therefore  second and urge all the 
Honorable  Member s to support the Report . Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you the Honorable  Member  for Turi. The Motion  is-That 
pursuant to the provisions of Section 11 (1) (2) (3) of the Urban Areas and Cities Act of 2011, 
Section (9) of the Public Appointments Act , that deal with the County Approval for 2017 and the 
Standing Order 48 (4) , This House adopts the Report  of the Committee  on Lands, Housing and 
Physical Planning on the vetting of Nominee s for the appointment to Nakuru City, Naivasha 
Municipal, Gilgil  Municipal and Molo Municipal Board s. The Motion  has been seconded and it is 
open for debate. Honorable Membe r for Menengai and later the honorable Mercy Kilel in that 
order.  
Hon. Wilson Mwangi:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker I rise to support the Motion . Mr. Speaker, I also 
want to thank the Committee  for quite  a good job that they have done. Mr. Speaker, since the Gilgil  
Naivasha and Molo County Council were elevated to Municipal Councils Mr. Speaker, here it 
comes with the goodies that the three Municipal Council s will get in terms of funding. And maybe 
in ter ms of getting funding from the donors . Mr. Speaker , the problems that the three Municipal 
Councils have been facing  bearing in mind that  there have been so many challenges in those 
Municipal Councils. Mr. Speaker, the Nominee s that we are going to give the  jobs of managing 
the three Board s, I have heard that they are qualified , they have the experience  and also, they are 
professionals. Mr. Speaker, we have heard the Chair trying to look at the issue of the tribal 
affiliations but here w e are, it is a matter of the Member s who have the experience. Nakuru , bearing 
in mind that is a cosmopolitan. Mr. Speaker, we are mostly looking at the experience of the 
Member s who are going to represent the Board s. So Mr. Speaker, I have seen the proper 
represe ntation, I have heard most of the tribes being represented in those Board s also Mr. Speaker, 
we are also looking at the Integrity of the Member s of those Board s. 
 So Mr. Speaker when I was going through the Report , we are happy that also the Committee  
recommended representation of the youth ; and that is a very good decision.   
So in my recommendation Mr. Speaker, I wish this House  to recommend the Nominee s so that 
work can start in the three Municipal Board s. So I wish to support and urge Member s of this House 
to support the Report  so that work can start in the Municipal Board s. Mr. Speaker, I support.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you . Honorable Mercy Kilel  
Hon. Mercy Kilel:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for thi s opportunity. I also like to welcome very much 
the students at the Gallery  and to tell them that educatio n is the greatest equalis er. And if they work 
hard in  School , they will be able to sit among the distinguished people of the society.  
Now Mr. Speaker , I also want to support this  Motion  today, and to congratulate the Chairperson 
honorable  Palang ’a for passionately presenting the Motion  on the floor of the House . Mr. Speaker, 
it is rare to see people support such Motion s vigorously, energetically, the way Hon orable  Palan g’a 
has supported this Motion  and presented.  
Honorable Speaker , looking at the caliber of people in the list, t he Nominee s are people who are 
educated and well learned , looking at a Member  called Joh ra Said Ali,  that lady  Mr. Speaker, her 
qualification if Member s can look at it is quite interesting to note. Additionally, there are young 
people in the list and it is really good and it gives hope to  the Member s and to the young people of 
this County , that it does not matter your age, you can always serve and you can always be of help 
to developing our urban society.  
Additionally, Mr. Speaker, as the Chair person  has said that this Count y is trailing behind in terms 
of the timelines, Mr. Speaker I would like to urge this House  to support th is Motion  and to pass 
the names without any contradiction. So Mr. Speaker, I rise to support this Motion  and to 
congratulate the Committee  at large for presenting such a rigorous work in this floor of the House. 
Thank you so much.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you, the Honorable  Member  for Murindat.  
Hon. Peter Maina:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to first and foremost commend the Committ ee for 
the job well done. And also, being a Member , I understand that they took a lot of time. They burned 
the midnight oil to ensure that they have done the vetting and done it well. However, Mr. Chair, I 
would like to support this Motion  with an amendmen t. And the reasons for the amendment , Let 
me refer to Gilgal Municipality . Mr. Speaker, be very sincere. If you look at the Urban Act, Article 
14 schedule 4 , it states very clearly that for a person to qualify to be nominated in the Municipality 
Board , he has to have lived in that Municipality for more than five years. Number two, such a 
Nominee  should be a permanent resident in that Municipality . And last but not least, such a 
Nominee  should have a business in that Municipalit y. Referring to the document that has been 
placed by the Honorable Chairperson for the  Lands Committee , the Title Deed that he has placed. 
The Title Deed is reading Miti Mingi, but unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, Miti Mingi is not part and 
parcel of the Munici pality, because Gilgil  Municipality is made up of three major centers. We have 
Langa Langa, we have Gilgal Town, and we have Kikopey.  
Therefore, that document that has been placed in this honorable  House does not hold water, and it 
might be null and void.  Mr. Speaker, it has been indicated that there were no Petition s that were 
laid before the Committee . But Mr. Speaker, it has to be reali sed that elected Member s from Gilgil  
are walking Petition s for the residents of Gilgil  Constituency . Therefore, they have the right to 
express the concerns of the resident s, whether the Petition  was written or not. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker I am proposing that we support the Motion , we pass it, but with amendments.  
Hon. Eliud Chege:  Point of order, Mr. Speak er. 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  What is the Order?  
Hon. Eliud Chege: I wish honorable  Njoroge to explain what he means by saying that Member s 
of Gilgil  are walking Petition  because Mr. Speaker , if I am not wrong by my understanding, a 
Petition  should be forwarded  to the House and the Speaker . That is what is qualified to be a 
Petition . So, the describing of honorable Member s as like Petitions , sincerely Mr. Speaker, I do 
not understand. Maybe h e can explain because he could be misleading the House .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  The Honorable  Member  are you misleading the House?  
Hon. Peter Maina:  Mr. Speaker, I am not misleading the House. Elected  Member s have a job and 
a responsibility to rep resent the people. And therefore, we received concerns from the residents of 
Gilgil , especially the Business Community, and therefore, as an elected Member , I feel I have a 
right to stand in this House  and express that concern. Therefore Mr. Speaker that  is why I want to 
justify that an elected Member  can also be a form of a Petition ; a walking Petition . 
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Mr. Speaker . I also need clarification … 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  What is it Honorable Mwangi because you have granted yourself 
the Microphone . 
Hon. Joseph Muraya: Sorry Mr. Speaker, but thank you  for allowing me to proceed. So  Mr. 
Speaker, when the Member  for Murindat is telling us that he has a role in Representation, Oversight 
and Legislation ? Is he in order, misleading this Hous e that he could not have advised his resident s 
to write a Petition  and bring it to the Committee , is he in order?  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Now, the honorable  Member  for Murindat you have brought a 
very important and significant discussion about what a Petition  is. Because there is a threshold. 
And there is a way that Petition s are done to this House . Then in the past we hav e not had walking 
Petition s. So basically,  that is a new proposal. But as of now a Petition  to have the threshold to be 
termed as a Petition , there is a process, there are documents to be filled in this House . There  is a 
framework, how it is done. And so, for now  you did not consider any other form of Petition , apart 
from what  now we have in our Standing Orders . What stands as a Petition?  And so, it is good to 
clarify that we…  
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: Point of information Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  What is it?  
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: It is just a point of Information  Mr. Speaker, just in addition to what you 
are saying, a Petition  cannot hold water if it does not have a signed Affidavit by a particular person 
Petition ing. So, in this case just as you are saying, and I am just wondering, an Honorable Member , 
in a secon d term , Honorable Member  like myself, seem not to have gotten this right. A Petition  
cannot be verbal. A Petition  must be written, it must be signed by  Affidavit . And that is the 
understanding of the Petition  because it is important that you put it clear, nobody can walk with a 
Petition . And if anything, Mr. Speaker our roles as MCAs, we do the Oversigh t, we do the 
Legislation, Honorable Member  would have advised the Petition er so to speak, if there were there, 
to put in  it writi ng and a signed affidavit and that is what holds water.  Mr. Speaker, alongside the 
Memorandums  we received from Mr. M uli, there were 16 in number I mentioned. One of them 
was never agreed to be a Petition  because it did not have a  signed Affidavit . So that i s the case. 
Mr. Speaker,  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honorable Member  from Murindat this is your last chance to 
clarify what you submitted as far as your position on this matter is concerned, because already I 
have given you more than two times. This i s the last time . 
Hon. Peter Maina : Now Mr. Speaker, I want to plead with the Member s, that we agree to do 
justice to the people of Gilgil . There is no point whatsoever for us giving them someone who does 
not come from Gilgil . Someone who does not have a permanent resident in Gilgil ; someone who 
does not have a business in Gilgil  Someone who does not have interest in Gilgil  whatsoever.  
Ther efore, it is my plea that you agree we do justice to the resident s of Gilgil,  that we pass all the 
names, except this one. And it does not affect anything, Mr. Speaker, because in Molo, we were 
expected to vet seven, only six of them showed up. So, it does  not change anything. It is not going 
to stop the operationali sation of the Gilgil  Municipality.  
Therefore, I want to plead with Member s for the sake of your brothers and sisters from Gilgil  
Constituency who are being questioned day in and day out by the electorate , as to how an outsider 
sneaked into the Municipalit y. I would want you to consider that and pass all the names in Molo 
in Nakuru Municipality in Naivasha but in Gilgil , let us pass all the names except this one.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the order Hon. Muraya?  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. You have asked the Member  to clarify about 
the walking Petition . The Member  has run away from that, again. I want to ask him whether he 
wants to use this Hou se as the Petition  to disapprove that name.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): That matter is closed for now  on the  nature of the Petition . The 
Honorable Leader  of Majority Party and then after the Leader  of Majority Party, the Honorable 
Hassan.  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang’at ): Thank You Mr. Speaker sir. I was actually rising on  
Order 57. This one is on issues of Amendments  of a Motion  and maybe as much as we feel for the 
Honorable Member , I would have really wished also to put in consideration the sal ient points that 
he has raised.  
Order 57, talks about the Proposer, this  is on issues of amendment to a Motion . That the proposal 
of amendment to a Motion  shall, before moving it, hand the proposed amendments in writing, 
signed by the Proposer  to the  Clerk , at least two hours before the Order is read.  
I feel and sympathi se with what my colleague and great friend is really putting forth , but in terms 
of this House being a House of law and order, his point may not hold water because he ought to 
have done this two hours  before so that it gives us time to ventilate and be able to advise the House 
accordingly. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Leader  of Majority Party.  Hon. Ali  
Hon. Ali Abdi : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I am standing to seek for information. If all Honorable 
Member s can go to the last page of your Report  where all Honorable Member s of this Committee  
have signed against this Report . I am just sitting here and wondering who is Hon . Peter Njoroge? 
Why was he signing this Report  if he had any issue with this Report ? This means that this Report  
is good and it should be passed without any amendment. Thank you honorable Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): The Honorable Majority Whip?  
The Majority Whip ( Hon. Fadhili Msuri ): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I think the discussion about 
who is a walking Petition  or who is a running Petition , I want to continue with where we left before 
my good brother here took us the other way.  
I rise to support this Report  and the great work done by this Committee  under the able Leader ship 
of our S enior Chair person,  and what has impressed me is that for the first time since Nakuru 
became a County, the Minority community in this  City has a space within the City Board  and more 
so the Muslim Community has been given an opportunity to  serve  the people of Nakuru in the City 
Board  through the nomination of one Mrs. Johra Said Ali.  
Where we have come from since the advent of Devolution, it has  really taken  a lot of energy and 
time to fight for spaces so that we can represent our people and today, for one of us to get a space 
to represent the interest of not just the Muslim Community but the people of Nakuru City within 
the City Board . That is impressive , and I believe my other colleagues from the other Municipal 
Board s that  is Gilgil , Molo and Naivasha also share the same sentiments.  
When we were doing the  interview which I was part of, we did an interview for a very young lady. 
I do not even think she has reached 25 years old. Just by interviewing her, you could see the 
aspiration and the belief she had in herself of what she thought she is going to contribute to see the 
people of Mo lo get the benefits under the Municipal Board . I want to urge Honorable Member s 
that we all rise up to the occasion, support this Report  and approve it as it is in totality.  
Because it is 4:30 P M and it is a Wednesday, and where I come from, Wednesday is called a 
“Ladies’ Night ”. We want to go and prepare ourselves. I want to urge my colleagues, let us pass 
this Report  as it is and let us provide the opportunity for the people of Nakuru City Board , 
Naivasha, Molo and Gilgil the chance for them to enjoy the immense resources that are going to 
come as a result of this. I support.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Member  for Lakeview Ward.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want first to  congratulate the Chairperson Lands 
Committee because of the firmness that he has taken in leading this Committee. I am part of this 
Committee and I can tell you that this Report  should be fortified with great defense because if you 
look at the Member s that were forwarded to this House by our Governor, they are some of the best 
brains that we have.  
If you go to one Mukui in Naivasha, you will find that he is one of the persons who wrote various 
Report s that have led to the development of this Country. He wa s an Engine in the Government of 
the former President, Mwai Kibaki and the Economic Agenda of that Government has come to be 
seen even to this day.  
When I go to the last nominee, Madam Rose, when I interviewed her because I was in that 
Committee, I saw a young person who is focused, willing to deliver to this Country and Nation. 
These Member s have integrated and interacted with Mr. Cryspus Wathimba. My alma - Mata  tells 
me he is one of the best brains that we have within Nakuru. We do not have the luxury of  time that 
we keep some names off the list because as a House, let us remember  where we come from. I want 
to remind these Member s that a time like this, Mheshimiwa Fadhili has told us that it is about 5:00 
PM.  
A year ago, a time like this, the Ballot Boxes were being closed. This is one year down the line 
and we cannot stand here on the day that we came here and pull another person down. We must 
uphold that greatness of Nakuru. You must remember  where you came fr om because today, I have 
been touched by the speeches that our President always gives and he says that when he was elected, 
he was given a chance; not that his community had the majority Member s within the Country, but 
he was given that s eat by all these o ther people within the Country. Brotherhood will push us far 
and let us always remember  where we c ame from. I rise to support all those names without any 
change. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): thank you Hon. Member  from Lakeview Ward.  
In order of precedents, the Minority Whip is on the floor and now, the Honorable Member  for 
Keringet Ward, in that order.  
The Minority Whip ( Hon.Virginia Gichanga ): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for giving me this 
opportunity to contribute on the Report  on the Nominee s for the three Municipalities and the City 
Board . I congratulate the team. I have seen that in the Lands Committee, we have professionals 
who can come up and arti culate issues during vetting. Congratulations Member s and keep up the 
good work.  Honorable Chairman, I see you are about to run out of breath while trying to urge the 
Member s to support your Motion . You have done a great job despite the fact that you are s aying 
Minoritie s were not considered, there is always a next time.  
My contribution first of all would be on the gender issue. If you look at the composition of all the 
Member s from the three Municipal Board s and the City Board , we have a good representatio n as 
far as gender is concerned. There is youth, there are women and that makes this Report  qualify to 
be passed by this Honorable House.  
The Member  from Lakeview Ward has talked about what I wanted to talk about, mostly on this 
day of 9th of August; that is the day we were elected and we need to do justice as a way of 
commemorating the day we were elected as Member s of this Honorable House.  
If you look at the composition of all the Member s, you see all of them have Degrees , some have 
Mast ers. There is one here, this Mukui guy, who has like so many Degrees and Diplomas and he 
seems to be a person who during Kibaki’s time, he was the Economic Planning Advisor . In Nakuru 
County, we need such a person because economically, we need to grow. Our  Naivasha 
Municipality needs to grow and I believe, with such a person in the Municipal Board , he will not 
only be of importance to Naivasha Municipal Board  but to the whole County. I believe when 
Madam Governor was giving these names, she had done due dil igence on the candidates she 
wanted to work with the Board s. 
I also would like to congratulate my worthy opponent, Hon. Jonathan Kuria Warothe for being in 
this Board , but I hope whoever has been given the work of the Board s and still has political 
ambitio ns, they would be able to manage their political interest and to shove it aside and work for 
the County of Nakuru and also work for the Appointing Authority . I rise to support and urge this 
Honorable House that when you get to be a Municipality, you have b enefits because now you will 
be benefiting from the World Bank money. Whatever comes with the World Bank is not the same 
as what comes with us as the Ward Fund or the Headquarter project. The World Bank brings 
goodies . So, I urge this Honorable House, ther e is no one time we have everything on Board . 
Nakuru is a mixture of all the tribes in Kenya; it is a small Kenya and there is no one time we will 
have all the tribes fitting in one thing. The only thing I would like to urge Her Excellency Madam 
Susan Kihi ka, if there arises some other appointments, let her consider those who were not 
considered in this Report . I rise to support.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Hon. Member  for Keringet.  
Hon. William Mutai: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I also rise to support this Motion  but then, there 
are some few things that I want it to go on record for future reference.  
The reason as to why I support this Motion  is because people of varied ages have been considered 
and gender has also been considered; which is a great achievement. The ladies now have something 
to be proud of because quite a number of them have been considered.  
There was something that I really wa nted to put across very strongly at the beginning but when 
my colleague Hon orable  Fadhili and Hon orable  Palang’a stood and said that they are very satisfie d. 
My main reference was on defending the rights of the  Minority but when they said that they are 
quite okay, I felt like it is very important to put this thing in record again for future reference in 
that, if you check on the list analytically, you will find that there is no ethnic balance. I have no 
problem with the region because in any case, the regio ns are distributed in the County. You check 
on the Kikuyus, they are about 19 out of 26. The Kalenjins  are 2 out of the 26. The Muslim is 1 
and 1 Kamba.  
Hon. Fadhili Msuri: Point of Information.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it, the Majority Whi p? 
Majority Whip (Hon. Fadhili Msuri ): Mr. Speaker sir, my dear brother has gone  on to profile 
tribes in terms of composition. I just wish to remind him that Muslim is not a tribe. It is a religion. 
Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the in formation, Minority Whip?  
Minority Whip (Hon. Viginia Gichanga ): Mr. Speaker sir, if you look at the Naivasha Municipal 
Board , we have a Lang’at. In Naivasha, Kalenjins are not the Minority. This document does not 
really involve those issues of who are the Minority here and who are not the minority there; it is 
about the composition and soon, I think we would have other Cities and Towns coming up. Let us 
say Olenguruone has become a City or a Municipality. How many Kikuyus do you expect to be in 
that Municipality? I rest my case.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honorable Minority Whip is talking about the future and 
the Report  is for now. Do you have any new information the Honorable Member  for Turi Ward?  
Hon. John Macharia: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to inform Hon orable  Mutai, the Member  
for Keringet Ward, that the number of Nominees  that were required for the 4 Municipalities were 
28 and in Kenya, we have more than 45 tribes. Theref ore, I do not believe we can distribute as a 
County so that we are able to allocate for each and every tribe in Kenya. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Mutai, kindly conclude your submission.  
Hon. William Mutai: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I did not know that my statement will be so 
emotive but to me, that is the truth. I was giving statistics but I have no problem. I started by saying 
that I am going to support the Motion  but in future as we go forward, we can be considerate while 
distributin g the positions. Otherwise, I stand to support.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honorable Member  for Kabazi.  
Hon. George Talam: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support this Motion . I really thank the 
Chair person  for having this time and vetting the Nominees . I do support the Nominees because 
they have qualification but my point is, for fairness in this House in a democratic way, let u s vote 
in a secret ballot. I know some of us here cannot rise and say no but let  us go that way.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya: Point of order Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable Member  for Viwandani Ward, today your points of 
order have exceeded the limit. We have gotten what the Member  for Kabazi is saying. We have 
taken  note of that.  
The Honorable Member  for Rhonda  
Hon. John Gachiri: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Nasimama kuunga mkono Mswada  huu na pia 
nikishukuru Mung u kwa siku ya leo kwa sisi ambao ni  County Assembly ya Nakuru ya tatu kwa 
sababu ya Mungu kutupatia nafasi hii mwaka mmoja ambao umekwisha.  
Nikiangalia orodha  ya Member s ambao walikuwa katika Kamati  hii ni kuonyesha ya kwamba 
walikuwa na imani kuhusu Ripoti yao na nikiangalia naona ni watu wane tu ambao hawaku tia 
saini  katika  Committee  na wengi wao ni  wale walikuwa nje ; ambao wamesafiri ndio maana 
hawakupatikana. Nasema hivyo na kuunga mkono ya kwamba Ripoti hii inastahili …  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There are Member s who are abroad or what are you insinuating?  
Hon. John Gachiri: Namaanisha hao ni wale huwa wanaenda Ng’ambo mara mingi. Hata nje ya 
Nakuru ni ng’ambo. Hata kule  Kapkures ni Ng’ambo , especially  Mheshimiwa Tanui hapa unaona 
ni wa ng’ambo upande ule mwingine wa Nakuru.  
Nasimama kuunga mkono nikijua ya kwamba Kamati hii ambayo inaongozwa na Mzee  wetu wa 
miaka katika Bunge hii na katika  Council, ambaye ni Mheshimiwa  Palang’a, ambaye najua 
tumefanya na yeye kazi sana akinitembeza katika Kaunti  hii, tunamuamini katika kazi yake na 
juhudi zake na tukiangalia Ripoti kulingana na vile  wameenda  through  katika kila mmoja wa wale 
ambao ni  Nominees,  nawezakusema ya kwamba  it is worth  katika kazi yao na katika juhudi zao 
na wale watu ambao wameteuliwa ni watu ambao wako na umaarufu, kama vile Mheshimiwa Muli 
ambaye ndiye Chairman wa Matat u zote hapa  Nakuru County.  Yeye ndio anasimamia matatu; ni 
mwanabiashara ambaye ameingia sana na amefaulu sana. Watu kama hawa ndio tunawahitaji 
katika Bodi zetu ili kuhakikisha ya kwamba hata katika mambo h ayo ya Matatu,  katika 
yanayohitajika yatakuw a na manufaa na  County hii yetu tunahitaji sasa kuendelea sana tukijua 
ya kwamba hii ndio Bageti  yetu ya kwanza ambayo tumepitisha. Kwa hivyo, tuko na uhakika hata 
katika mambo ya pesa kama zile za  World Bank  na pesa zingine ambazo zinakuja kwetu , Board s 
hizi zitatusaidia sana kuhakikisha mambo yetu yanaenda vizuri.  Kwa hivyo, nashukuru sana hata 
kwa nafasi hio na ninaunga mkono.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Hon. Member  for Maai Mahiu who happens to be 
the Vice Chairperson for Lands Co mmittee and later, Mheshimiw a from Malewa West Ward and 
then we are going to get other Member s. 
Hon. Eliud Chege: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. First, I would like to thank our Member s in the 
Lands Committee which I happen to be the Vice Chair, for the good w ork. I also would like to 
commend the Leader ship of Hon. Palang’a who is our Chairperson.  
When we look at this Report , we divided the Committee into two and I happen to Chair the  vetting 
of one of the groups. For sure, most of the people from Gilgil and those from Naivasha whom we 
did vet are qualified. I happen to get one of the Nominee with a Degree  from New York. I was 
surprised to see the size. It was almost like a table. That  is my first time that I saw a Masters Paper  
from the USA. It was of a recommendable size. Therefore, by saying so, I would like to say and I 
urge this House, let us adopt this Report  and give a chance for our Municipalities to be enacted.  
Being people of good heart and lovers of this County and representatives of our people in Nakuru 
County, when we look at the past regime, they took 100% of the advantage of Municipality . For 
example, I come from Naivasha and being a Member  of this Committee on Lands and P hysical 
Planning, I happened to look what are the functions of this and what have they achieved there 
before.  
When we just looked at Naivasha being a Municipality , in the last 4 Financial Years , they were in 
a position to do a Market , a Municipal Park, a Tarmac Road in Lakeview Ward and some cabros 
within town and some lights. That was the last regime and now this is our time and our regime. I 
do not think as Member s of this House that we have the l uxury  of time and because this Committee 
is just a branch of this House, the Report  we have here , we are mandated by this House. We are 
just a branch. When we table this Report  here, it is no longer our Report . This is the Report  of this 
House and the Report  contains well wish es of our people.  
When we look at oth er Counties, for example, I might give like Kiambu County. They have almost 
10 Municipals and that they attract a lot of financing from World Bank. When you look at Nakuru 
County, it is a City. We only have Naivasha that has an active Municipal  only and no w we have 
an acting Gilgil and Molo. Today, I am surprised if somebody can rise in this House and try maybe 
to argue otherwise because if you have only one Municipa l, the argument of this House should be, 
how are we going to get 5,7 or 10 Municipalitie s because Nakuru is now a City. It is very 
unfortunate that it is a City with only 3 Municipalities.  
I am urging this House, let them give way so that at least, when these Municipal Board s are active, 
they can give way for Njoro, Mau Narok and Maai Mahiu. Member s whose Wards happen to be 
from these Municipalities and City should take 100% advantage of being there. For example, my 
Ward is in Naivasha Sub -County and does not fall under a Municipal but because of the love that 
I have for Nakuru and for our people of  Naivasha, I cannot afford to dodge with such a document. 
We definitely need to adopt this Report  and therefore, I plead, being the Vice Chair to this 
Committee, and because Hon orable  Member s gave us that chance and entrusted us to undertake 
this mandate, I want them to trust us and also give us power now so that next time when we are 
given a duty or something to do, we are going to do it vigorously with a lot of energy expecting 
that those who mandated us and this House are going to accept and they are goi ng to adapt it.  
When we want to empower even our Committees, it is when we look at what performance and 
how th ese Committees are performing because coming up with Report s in this House, the House 
should easily be in a position to adopt those Report s and wh enever we have a very serious issue, I 
urge Hon orable  Member s most of the times to be friends of those Committees because this Report  
was very crucial.  
Anyone who felt that they had an interest or any input should be a friend of this Committee. I 
would li ke to commend Hon orable  Dorcas Gathere , She was with us during that vetting process 
and the process was very tiresome. We did the vetting from morning up to evening. We were not 
even given a chance to take a cup of tea and the Member  was with us the whole day. That is the 
spirit I want this House to move with.  
I would wish and plea d to this House, let us adopt this Report  and let us look at the betterment of 
our people. Let us focus Honorable House. If today, we get like 7 Municipalities, we can attract 
almost a billion because if every Municipality is given Kshs . 100 million and now we have like 7 
Municipalitie s, for our brothers from Mau Narok Ward, the work of this Committee is now to push 
the Executive to give more Municipalitie s and to give way for eac h and every area to have a 
Municipality so that we can attract these funds . 
I rest my case and I urge this House to support the Motion .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Before we proceed to the Member  for Malewa Ward, Hon orable  
Kamau Eliud , when you started, you talked about a book size of the table. Were you cowed by the 
contents therein? Were you keen to check on the content because a booklet could be a booklet?  
Hon. Eliud Chege : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. When I was talking about the siz e, I was just 
trying to use a figurative language to make this House understand the kind of people we vetted 
because despite having that Masters from USA, he also had a Degree from the University of 
Nairobi and when we were trying to scrutini se the two Papers, that is when I was in a position to 
understand that from the USA, their sizes are somehow bigger. We looked at every aspect and we 
interrogated everything. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Member  for Malewa West Ward.  
Hon. Fr ancis Kuria: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. First, I will start by commending the good job 
by the Committee. I say kongole kwa wao . 
When I look at the  Academic credentials for these Board  Member s, we have Professional s, we 
have  Engineers , and we  have people with logistic experience ; and remember , this has  a timeline. 
We have people here who will be able to formulate and implement Integrated Development Plan . 
When I check at their credentials , we have people who will adopt Policies, Plans and also  
Strategies.  
Since the Committee has taken their responsibility, I rise to support this Motion  because those 
people are able to meet the targets and deliver services. It is my plea that let us be the great people 
in this House who will discuss ideas. Let us not be people of small mind who will discuss people.  
I urge this House, the way this vetting was conducted, I support. When we look at Naivasha 
Municipality, we have a Kalenjin there but the vetting was done without looking at the tribe. We 
have 42 trib es in Kenya, plus one; that is the Makonde and we cannot fit in this list. Those who 
were not lucky to be in this Board  Member , the next phase, we are going to have Kuresoi where 
the majority will be the Kalenjins. We will not come and say we do not have K ikuyus there.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable Member , talk about ethnic balance without 
mentioning the …  
Hon. Francis Kuria: I stand guided Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Hon. Kamau from Kihingo Ward?  
Hon. Simon Kama u: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. You know, the Honorable Member  for Malewa  
cannot stand and say that we are not discussing people. We are discussing people; even those 
people who were vetted by the Committee are people. Therefore, you cannot say that we are not 
discussing people whereas the ones contained in this Report  and find ings are people as well.  
Hon. Francis Kuria: I stand guided.  
Hon. George Talam: Point of order ! 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Order number what, Hon. Talam?  
Hon. George Talam: Point of information to the Honorable from Malewa Ward. Is he in order to 
say that we are discussing people and so, we have small mind? Is he in order to discuss about other 
tribes on the other side and he says we are having small minds? Is he in order?  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable Member  from Kabazi Ward, is that in formation or is 
it a point of clarification? What information?  
Hon. George Talam: Mr. Speaker sir, what I wanted to say is , that it is a point of information 
whether he is in order when he  say s that we are discussing about people whereas the Nominees  
that were vetted by the Committee are also people and he is  accusing us of discuss ing them, saying  
we are small minds. Is he in order?  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honorable Member  for Malewa West Ward.  
Hon. Francis Kuria: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I  stand guided. You guided me and I withdrew 
that statement. It was not to become a topic.  
Therefore, we do not want division s in this House. We work as one House, with unity and we do 
not want division s. I humbly request the Honorable Member s we support th is Report , knowing 
very well this is a kitty coming from another source. When we say we do not support this Report  
yet we have a timeline when this Report  should be submitted, it is like we are denying ourselves 
our own kitty. I therefore urge this House t o support this Report . It is not 100% done but I humbly 
request let us not deny our County, let us not be biased and let us work with the plan that we ha ve 
been given here and things will be well. Thank you. I support.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): T hank you. Member  for Barut Ward.  
Hon. Bernard Kirui: Asante sana Mheshimiwa Sp ika kwa hii nafasi ambayo umenipatia. 
Nimesimama kuiunga ingawa roho yangu haiku  hapo kwa sababu ya yale maovu tunayaona 
kwenye hii karatasi.  
Tumes ikia mambo mengi yakisemwa hapa.  Ukijaribu kuangalia hio orodha , ni vile nilikuwa 
nimesema ule wakati kuwa haireflect vile  Nakuru County  inakaa. Hata ingawa tunaambiwa 
tungoje  Olenguruone ikuwe  Municipal ndio tujipangie pale, lakini pia tunasema ule mkate ambao 
uko kwa meza, tunafaa tule pamoja kwa saa hizi. Ile ingine ambayo itakuja badae tutagawa 
pamoja kwa sababu hii serikali ambayo unaiona ikiwa hapa, hata sisi kama jamii ambayo 
tunaambiwa tungoje, tuliichangia ndio ikafika mahali iko saa hizi. Ikifika mahali pa kusukumwa, 
hatuwezi kubali na hata hizi  Report  zinaendelea hapa saa hizi, hata wale ambao tunawakilisha 
wanangoja kupata matokeo tumesema nini hapa ndani.  
Ukiangalia ile orodha  ambayo imeletwa hapa, hata kama tunaambiwa tuko kabila arobaini n a 
mbili, hizi kumi na tisa ambaz o zimeenda na jamii moja zingepeanwa kule kwingine moja moja ili 
kila mtu apate moja kwa sababu hii  Nakuru ni ya kila mtu; sio ya mtu mmo ja, ni yetu sisi wote.  
Mimi najua kila mtu yuko kwa hio laini na kila mtu anaogopa kuipinga hii kitu lakini mimi 
mwenyewe nimesema hata kama niko hapa, roho yangu haik o hapa. Ingawa tunasema 
tunaipitisha, lakini hapo hakuna haki ambayo imetendwa kwa makabi la mengine.  
Ukiangalia sisi kama jamii ya Kalenjin,  sisi ndio tulipiga kura ndio tukapata hii serikali ambayo 
iko saa hizi na kama tungepiga upande ule mwingine, hii tuko nayo saa hizi tungekosa. Hata kama 
hao wengine wanasema wako wengi, tunafaa tunafuatana. Mkiwa kumi na tisa, sisi tuko kumi na 
saba hapo kwa sababu bila sisi, hamngekuwa hapo. Hii si vizuri. 
Ukiangalia hii ambayo tulipewa juzi na watu wanatuona hapa kama sisi ni wajinga. Juzi wakati 
tulipatiwa ile  Board  … 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Ka ruri): Order ! Mheshimiwa, that is un -parliamentary.  
Hon. Bernard Kirui: I withdraw that one, Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the order Hon. Kamau ? 
Hon. Eliud Chege : Mr. Speaker sir, let me not say the number of the Order but …  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable Member , if there is no specific order, we may dilly 
dally back and forth. Allow Hon. Member  for Barut Ward to finish.  
Hon. Bernard Kirui: Asante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunisaidia hapo. Mimi najua watu 
wanatafuta hii shingo yangu lakini ni sawa tu. Nilikuwa nikisema, ile orodha  tulipewa juzi, wale 
ambao wanaenda kuvet hii Kamati  tuliletewa juzi. Nilikuwa najaribu kuangalia wale ambao 
walipewa hio kazi , unapa ta sasa hizi jamii zingine ambaz o saa hizi hawa onekani hapa wanapewa 
kwa sababu hio ilikuwa ni kitu ambayo inaenda tu wiki mbili au tatu na kazi yake imeisha lakini 
hii ambayo inachukua miaka tano, hapo hakuna kitu amba cho kinaendelea. Tunapikiwa lakini 
Mungu anajua tu. Siku ya Mungu ikifika, pia tutak uwa hapo. Asanteni.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member  for Kiptororo.  
Hon. Alex Bor: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to oppose  and I am opposing on the grounds 
that honorable Member s have said that their hearts are not there. So, mine totally is not there and 
let this one go  on record. Hon. Speaker, we do have the numbers and I think analytically , it should 
have been used to distribute these ones. So, I just want to say that I am opposing and it should have 
been distributed according to  the numbers. If you go the way of voting, I know tutashindwa  but 
wacha tushindwe nikiwa najua  I opposed it. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you . The Member  for Maiella then we move to the other 
side. 
Hon. Jane Gituku : Thank you for this op portunity and also thank you the Chairman for Lands 
Committee for the good work they have done. You know that it is actually a hard task but 
somebody has to do it. I would also like to comment that the people we have vetted even if they 
have political ambitions , Honorable Speaker , you will agree with me that as he sits as a Speaker, 
he was also in politics and so some of these things we cannot discuss them. Somebody just becomes 
a politician or even an officer depending on the circumstances. S o, let us not fear, let people come 
up, let them challenge us so that we can know we have a responsibility.  
On the document, I have just noticed that some of these people who were vetted are lacking some 
of the credentials that we really require because o f what we call Performance Contract and also for 
Integrity  and that is what we call network. You look at page 23 we have a certain James; page 16 
we have got a Crispus and also page 34 we have one Sahara but you notice that their net -worth are 
not reflecte d. The reason why we need this net worth reflected  is because the job you are given 
also requires that you have some integrity, something that can be used to measure as we progress 
on issues that are EACC and all that matter s.  
You might be good but somewh ere along the line, we require some measure s so that we can be 
responsible. Also, I want to recommend the issue of P eter Maina (PM) , as a Member  of this 
Assembly, I think we have a responsibility for the people w ho voted for us and even if you do  not 
bring  a Petition, I think we are within our rights also to express our fears. We should be able to 
accommodate one another . So as much as there was no Petition PM, it is good for the people of 
Gilgil and Morendat  to know that you were also concerned.  
Finally, I would like to ask a question from the Speaker , being  in this Assembly for the first time 
and also having read the Standing Orders, because we keep learning as we said when we came 
here, because somebody ha s suggested that we go the secret ballot way. I do not know the 
difference between taking the question on the floor and going the secret ballot but because we are 
here for a reason, I think we should be able to get things right because when somebody asks f or 
secret ballot, it seems that person has got reservation s. So,  I believe we stand advised by the 
Speaker on the way forward on the voting of this Motion . Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you Hon. Member  for Maiella; the Mem ber for London . 
Hon. Bernard Gatuso : Thank you Mr. Speaker, for giving  me this opportunity , also I take this 
opportunity to commen d work well done by the Committee  of Lands . I am part of the  Committee 
and I think in terms of qualification s, academics, Chap ter 6 of our Constitution, skills in terms of 
decision making and also in terms of how they were able to articulate issues, I believe they 
qualified on that.  
Mine  is to urge honorable Member s that we pass this Report  because I believe it will come with 
funding from the Development Partners . And considering  that my Ward  has been able to benefit 
from such funding because a greater part of London Ward  has been able to develop in terms of 
tarmac  from such funding. The oth er thing I believe is that we will be able to get funds from 
Development  Partners  that will enable us build structures that will  inform us in terms of revenue 
collection; that will be able to do away with this question of Own -Source Revenue .  
The other thi ng in terms of farm ing, that much of the M unicipality  is evolving or developing, I 
believe that agricultural economic areas to some extent we will be able to do away with post -
harvest losses whereby we will be able to do some storage facilities and also deal with road 
network that will enable farmers to get far m produce from farms to market s in real time.  
The other thing is about floods that usually happen during rainy season. I believe with such funding 
and partners and existence of th ese Board , we will be able to do away with drainage or we will be 
able to do  modern drainage system s that will enable us to deal with flooding in this City and also 
in the Municipal ities. I am a resident in London Ward  where we have menace in terms of Waste 
Management, Giotto  dumpsite in our area and I believe with such funding an d partners and the 
Board  being in place, we will be able to come up with a structured way on how we can reduce or 
have formal ways on how to deal with Waste Management . Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me 
an opportunity and I arise to support the Report . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you; the honorable Member  for Kamara . 
Hon. John Maritim:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I also arise to oppose the Motion  and I want to 
oppose it in two dimensions; Firstly,  Nakuru County is a cosmopolitan region and as such, it is 
meant for all tribes but here in Nakuru it seems that one tribe override s the others and so I believe 
what is depicted in this Report , even staffing of County Assembly you see that some of our tribes 
are taken literally but others are taken kee nly.  
Secondly, t here is this gentleman by the name Richard Cheruiyot a nominee in Naivasha ; I believe 
the Report  will go through well but this gentleman  is in catering or something like that . I believe 
if he could be moved from Naivasha back to Molo so th at he can meet his friend called Wesley 
Kipkemoi Ruto there because I believe he is the only person in Naivasha who is odd one out, in 
that when FM is switched, he is out of place as his counterpart  is in Molo.  
Hon. Ali abdi : Mr. Speaker point of Order ? 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): What is the  Order?  
Hon. Ali abdi : Can the Member  please substantiate  his remarks; I think the  Member  is doing 
catering; did you say something like that? Can you substantiate?  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Order! Address  the Chair ! 
Hon. Ali Abdi : Sorry Mr. Speaker can the Member  please produce evidence because this is a 
House of rules and records , we want to see evidence because you cannot mention someone that he 
is a Chief- Chef but you have no information  Mr. Speaker.  
Hon. John Maritim :  Mr. Speaker sir,  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel  Kairu): The Member  for Kamara kindly substantiate and finish your 
submission . 
Hon. John Maritim : Also, I was talking about Richard Cheruiyot who we have been told he is a 
Chief-Chef in catering; I mean what is catering? I believe it deals with food produc tion; cooking 
of food; it is a profession like a La wyer who deals with the law and so catering/ Chief- Chef that 
is a position and one thing that I was talking about. Thank you. The last thing … 
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Mr. Speaker point of information . 
The Speake r (Hon. Joel Kairu): What is the information?  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Mr. Speaker I would like to inform the House the said Paul Lang’at, this 
person maybe the  County should have an interest on who he is. When the Country was on a 
shutdown , this gentleman was doing free delivery of food s to most of the F lower Farms,  giving 
these people food. Mr. Speaker, that gentleman as we know him, you m ight classify him as a 
minority  yes, a certain tribe ; but I think he is one of the greatest people who served  this Country 
during Covid  time and I coming from Naivasha, I will value  such a person. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Kindly Hon. Member  for Kamara kindly finish up . 
Hon. John Maritim : Thank you Mr. Speaker; finally, there is another nominee by the name of 
Kagai Thiong’o; he was born in Nyeri and in the questioner there was a place that was asking do 
you understand the boundaries of Molo and he said he does  not understand the boundarie s of Molo. 
We have been told that any nominee who needs to be a Board  Member  of a given place, should be 
domiciled from that given area. So I think also that in future, the Chairperson  of Lands, Housing  
and Physical Planning or the Committee should take more cautious measures on giving us this 
information.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): What is its honorable Member  for Turi?  
Hon. John Mwangi:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker sir, I want to inform the honorable Member  for 
Kamara that I was in that vetting room and Mr.  Kagai Thiong’o was able to articulate issues, to 
explain himself and eventually we were able to ascertain that he owns some assets in Molo and 
therefore me as a Member  of Molo, we are satisfied Mr. Kagai Thiong’o as one of the nominees 
for Molo Municipali ty. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): The Hon. Member  finish up . 
Hon. John Maritim : A quick one; thank you, another thing also Mr. Speaker sir that I wanted to 
put across is that the promoters of Molo Municipal are people from Kuresoi South, Kuresoi North, 
Kericho usually come to Molo for banking. We have like five banks in Molo which  include Equity, 
Cooperative, National bank and many other banks and so I think Mr. Speaker, in consideration of 
the Board , we should get at least two people for Molo Municipal. T hank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you; the Hon. Member  for Waseges . 
Hon. Elijah Murage : Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this 
Motion . I rise to support , because this is  the song now;  this is our  new song of supporting , 
supporting,  and supporting .  And one of the Member s said we should be in unity but o pposing any 
Motion  or any debate does not mean that we are not a united Assembly. So, I rise to support but I 
know some of us here , you know me I am a man of the truth and I will always speak the truth; I 
am an honest person , a truthful man.  
Mr. Speaker, let me say I k now some here are profiling us honourable Member s, and as I conclude  
maybe , the Report  would be taken to our masters but I say, a time will come like Hon orable  
Member  for Ba rut has said; our God will come, t hank you Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Now we have to finish up; the Hon. Member  for Viwandani and 
then we come this way then we are done.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Thank you Hon Speaker; now I arise to support and to commen d the  good 
and well -done job by the Committe e on L ands and Physical Planning . Honorable  Speaker, I want 
to say that as a Sectorial Committee on Land s and Physical Planning , they have done a great job. 
Honorable  Speaker , when you turn this Report  at the back page, there was something , No. 7 on 
adoption of th is Report  by honorable Member s and the Clerk put it very well “ We Member s” not 
the Chairperson . “We Member s of this Committee on Land s, Housing and Physical Planning have 
pursuant to Standing O rder 187 of the County Assembly of Nakuru Standing Orders adopted this 
Report  of this  Committee on vetting of the Nominees to the positions of Member s of Nakuru City 
Board  Naivasha, Gilgil and Molo Municipal Board s and affix our signatures to confirm our 
Approval ”. Now Hon orable  Speaker we are short of time because now my coach is calling me 
because I am a player and I will participate in the CASA games and I do not want … 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Honorable Member  the issue of the CASA is not before the 
House . 
(Laughter ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Kindly deal with the Report  as it is with no hurry or with no 
invitations to other things. Deal with the Report  as it is . 
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Thank you I stand guided. So Hon orable  Speaker as a matter of fact, we 
shall not all be equal in positions, in numbers and we shall not all  at any time,  agree on one thing. 
So, we must have  disagreements then we can agree . And Mr. Speaker, the kind of arguments that 
have arisen from Member s of this Committee , these people qualify to be Member s of this City and 
our Municipal Board s. So Honorable  Speaker, I stand to support this work and urge this Hon orable  
House not to be cowed by the report s that we shall be taken I do not know where exactly ; we have 
God in Heaven and we serve one God and  nothing will change the truth .   
Mr. Speaker we ar e united and this is why or maybe the reason we have not experienced any 
occurrence of death s like other Assemblies and so we must be grateful Mr. Speaker because our 
unity has brought us together and our God has walked with us  in this journey of one year. So, I 
rise to support Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you; the Hon Member  for Flamingo and immediately 
thereafter then the Chairperson; will have to respond and then I will put it to question . 
Hon. David Muraya : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for giving me this opportunity to contribute on 
this Motion . First, I would like to congratulate our Chairperson  for a well -done job and I want to 
congratulate all  Member s of the Land s, Housing  and Physical Planning Committee  for the job well 
done. I rise to support this Motion  because I understand when we vetted  Member s of those Board s, 
all of them were qualified and we found that it  is good we endorse those people because our County  
is much better than anybody or any individual .  
We want to adopt this Report  because we have one Municipality which is Naivasha and as a 
Member  has said, now we have another two and I heard people of Molo saying that they want to 
see those  Municipalities functioning. What I would urge our people is this; those who we want to 
adopt this Report , they represent the Nakuru County and they do  not represent  any ethnic group in 
this County . Kwa hivyo  if anybody among us is given that opportunity, it is his or her responsibility 
to know that they are being given that opportunity to serve the good people of Nakuru County and 
not one tribe.  
I would like to  urge what our MCA from Murindat  has said that he is fighting for the people of 
Gilgil to be served or their interests to be considered by one of their own but all I would like to say 
is that in future maybe , we are going to use the proper criteria to choo se whoever we are going to 
consider in future but because of time , let us join hands as Member s of this Assembly  and support 
this document as it is and for me as MCA for Flamingo Ward I support it 100 per cent . Thank you  
Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Jo el Kairu): Thank you the Hon orable  Member  for Flamingo. The Hon 
Chairperson respond . 
Hon. Jane Gituku:  Mr. Speaker sir , please some information , I do support this document fully, 
this was not recorded  
(Laughter ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu ): Thank you, the Hon Member  for Maiella. The Chairperson  
Hon. Peter Palang’a:  Once again thank you Mr. Speaker , allow me to give a response or to reply. 
First and foremost, I wish to thank all Member s for your contributions that you have made to this 
particular Motion . I wish to mention some few issues so that I leave the Speaker to put a question. 
Point N umber one , we had two ways of  Appointment - We had a Competitive Process of 
Appointment  to any  Nominee and we had  Nominees to be appointed by Professional Bodies . In 
that regard I want to mention for purposes of Gilgil and Molo for example; Kagai Thiong’o he is 
coming on Board  as a Professional from the Architect Body. In that regard the Architect 
Professionals forwarded his Name. So he did not come from a Competitive Process and the law 
provides that , for such a person to be given an opportunity, he must have some interests or 
permanent dwelling in that and we were limited as a  Committee because  we could not have chosen 
on beh alf of Professional Bodies that had forwarded their names because those names were 
forwarded in that regard.  
Number two, for  purposes of Joseph Maina Theuri whose name was in the contest, I am happy as 
a Chair  to mention that the Honorable Member  for Murin dat who had initially indicated that he 
does not come from Gilgil , he says that he comes from Miti Mingi which is not part of the 
Municipality  but in terms of Constituency , he has confirmed that this particular person comes from 
Gilgil - not necessarily within the Municipality . Mr. Speaker that particular person contrary to 
Kagai Thiong’o his name was forwarded through a Competitive Process where the Interviews  were 
conducte d.  
For purposes of appointing such a person, the Act provides for that person must have a permanent 
dwelling in such a place. With the evidence of Title Deed, he presented I want to believe that 
document would never be altered at any given time and theref ore confirms that person has 
permanent dwelling in that particular area. As I move on, just to finalize, as the need to why we 
need this Board , I could be having issues it is acceptable, agreed but let us look at the bigger picture 
and gains of having thes e Board s in place.  
I am looking at a situation for example and my Vice Chair ably alluded to it. Kiambu as a County 
has ten  Municipalities ; that means other than the local funding by the County Government of 
Kiambu, that particular County  attracts funding  from the World Bank to those Municipal Board s. 
For example, come to Naivasha the market that was launched by His Excellency the President 
worth Kshs 600 Million -plus was put up with money from the World Bank not from the Counties.  
Afraha Stadium which is under construction worth over Kshs 800 Million, that money has come 
and being granted to us by the World Bank. I am just imagining what if we had such Municipalities  
as many as Kiambu. We could not be struggling with our meagre resources because this will  trigger 
some development and therefore I wish to urge honorable Member s and persuade them; to have 
the interest of this County . Please kindly you could be aggrieved but kindly there comes at a time 
when Leader s sacrifice; we sacrifice for our County, we sacrifice to have these monies. Mr. 
Speaker allow me just to mention that as a Department, we have a plan that after adopting th is 
Municipal  of Molo and Gilgil, we intend to have Mau Narok being elevated, we intend to have 
Njoro, Mai -Mahiu, Subukia plus other many towns that are ready to be elevated and this will come 
along way into developing and giving development to our people.  
Mr. Speaker , I want to summari se, kindly honorable Member s let us sacrifice for once that on 
behalf of this County , let us have th ese Board s in place , it will trigger monies, employment to our 
people among other benefits, because the World Bank is not goi ng to fund if we do not have  the 
Board s in place. The World Bank is not going to fund if we do not have Municipal Managers of 
the Board s in place and remember  part of the criteria to be looked at, this are criteria that has been 
set and Mr. Speaker , I did make copies of the letters from Council  of Governors expressing their 
need to have this. For that reason, without much ado, I wish humbly to request that kindly , 
Member s let us sacrifice our personal interest s on behalf of the  County to have these Board s in 
place so that we move forward. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you the Chairperson  for that response and I now want to 
proceed to put it to question. Question  
Hon. Peter Maina : Point of order! Mr. Speaker  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): What is the Order?  
Hon. Peter Maina : Mr. Speaker, I am raising on Order No.70, which says that “Unless otherwise 
provided by the Constitution, a question arising in the Assembly shall be decided by the majority 
of the Member s in the Assem bly present by voting ”. Mr. Speaker, it is my humble request because 
this has been a very emotive debate and we would want Member s to make their decisions without 
the fear of intimidation that you rule in this House that we take a secret ballot. Thank  you Mr. 
Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you Hon. Member , there is Standing Order No .70 but then 
there is Standing Order No. 71. So, when you are reading no.70 ( 1) you cannot isolate it; you may 
need to read 70(2) . You can check that which says that - “In ascertaining the results on a question 
under paragraph (1) the Speaker shall in the first instance collect the voices of “Ayes ” and the 
“Nays ” and shall declare th e results accordingly ”, then now the Standing Order 71 now provides 
for different scenarios.  
Hon. Peter Maina : Mr. Speaker we wanted to plead with you to treat this matter with an exception. 
It has not been like any other debate;  the matter is quite emoti ve and so our plea is that you allow 
we take a secret ballot in a quick manner.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Hon. Member , we first of all in the first instance have to collect 
the “Ayes ” and the “Nays ” and then after that we can proceed if the need be to other systems. So, 
Hon. Member s we…  
Hon. Peter Palang’a : Mr. Speaker , point of information; just as we move forward … 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): What is it; any new information or maybe on the contr ary to what 
the Speaker has ruled?  
Hon. Peter Palang’a : The information is that you have clearly read the provision of Standing 
Order  and this House being a House of rules, then we have no any other reasons rather than 
adhering to the rules. So, in case th ere shall be division in terms of the voices raised to whichever 
side that is when we shall get to that Clause. So, we must ensure that we need to get to whether we 
are having a Division in the House or not.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): So, we proceed t o read the question . 
(Question proposed that pursuant to the provision of Section 11 (1) (2) and (3) of the Urban 
Areas and Cities Act 2021, 2011 Section (9) of the Public Appointments the one that deals with 
the County Approval Act 2017 and Standing order 48 (iv) this House adopts the Report  of the 
Committee on Lands, Housing and Physical Planning on the vetting of nominees for appointment 
to the Na kuru City, Naivasha Municipal, Gilgil Municipal and Molo Municipal Board s.) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
MOTION  
THIS HOUSE TO ADJOURN FROM TODAY 9TH OF AUGUST 2023  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): There is a Motion  by the Leader  of Majority party . 
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang’at): Thank you, Mr. Speaker; I rise to move a Motion  that 
pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 31 (iii) , this House to adjourn from today 9th of August 
2023. We move this Motion  because the eve nts that are ahead of us , the first one is actually to 
enable Member s to be able to attend the 8th Annual Devolution Conference which i s coming up 
soon at Uasin Gishu,  which demands that all of us as a County Assembly be able to attend so that 
we can mingl e and parti cipate on the issues that touch on  us.  
The second one is that we can vividly remember  as a House and Assembly that recently we were 
granted the rights to host the CASA G ames and it is upcoming  immediately we finish with the 
meeting in Eldoret Mr. Speaker , and we are the host and of course we would like to continue 
preparing and also have enough time to participate and host the rest of the Counties . That one will 
come on around 15th -19th after w hich in the normal Calendar of this Hou se, we are expected to 
proceed on  recess which is from 19th to around 27th of August. So, when we look at all these, I 
would wish to request that this House proceeds on recess until 19th September 2023. This one was 
actually in accordance to the Assembly Calendar. I would wish to request my friend Hon. Hassan 
to second this  Motion . Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
Hon. Ali Abdi :  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I also wish to take this opportunity to support the Motion  
that we adjourn th e House until 9th September  because of the Devolution Conference that we have 
and the CASA Games. I second  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you , I want to propose a question . 
(Question proposed that pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 31 (iii), this House to 
adjourn from today 9th of August 2023 to enable Member s attend the 8th Annual Devolution 
Conference and the County Assemblies Sports Association Games scheduled to take place from 
15th-19th and 19th to 27th August 2023 in Uasin Gishu a nd Nakuru Counties respectively , and 
further proceed on recess until 19th September 2023 in accordance with the Assembly Calendar) . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable  Member s, this House stands adjourned until 19th September 2023 at 9.30am.  
The House rose at 5.40 PM. 
 
 
  
 