COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 2 nd  May 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:45 AM  
[Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
CONSTRUCTION OF WARD OFFICES  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  There is a Communication ;  Hono u rable Members this 
Communication  is reference to the construction of Ward Offices . As you may be aware the 
Assembly  through the County Assembly Service Board in line  with the Assembly Strategic Plan, 
proposes to construct permanent Ward Offices across the 55 Wards . In this regard, Members are 
requested to identify appropriate Public Lands that are centrally located in their respective Wards .  
Honorable Members you are further ad vised  to ensure that the identified Public Lands have all the 
requisite Legal Documents to facilitate this process. Kindly note that this information should be 
availed to the Clerk of the  Assembly latest 6 th  June, 2023. Thank you.  Next order.  
PAPER  
NAKURU  COUNTY SUPPLEMENTARY BUDGET II OF 2022/2023  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  There  are Papers  to be laid ;  there is a  Report of the  Committee 
on Budget and Appropriation s  on the Nakuru County Supplementary Budget II  of 2022/2023 from 
the Hono u rable Chairperson for the  Committee on Budget  and Appropriation s .  
Hon . Alex Mbugua: Hono u rable Speaker I wish to lay a Report  for the Committee on Budget  and 
Appropriation s  on the Nakuru County Supplementary Budget II 2022/2023. I lay the Paper .  
PAPER(S)  
NAKURU MEDIUM TERM EXPENDITURE PAPER ORIGINAL ESTIMATES FOR 2023/2024 –  
2025/2026.  
COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF NAKURU THIRD INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT PLAN 2023 - 2027  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  Thank you ;  there  is another Pape r , the County Government of 
Nakuru Medium Term Expenditure Framework Original Estimates, 2023/2024 –  2025/2026. It 
will be laid by Honorable Alex Langat ,  the  Leader of Majority Party or any other L eader who has 
been delegated to that function. The L eader of Minority Party Honorable Wanjohi.  
Hon . Philip Wanjohi: Thank you Honorable Speaker , I wish to lay two Papers ;  the first is the 
County Government of Nakuru Medium Term Expenditure Paper Original E stimates for 
2023/2024 –  2025/2026. The second Paper is the County Government of Nakuru Third Integrated 
Development Plan 2023 - 2027. Hono u rable S peaker I lay the two Papers .  Thank  you.  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  Thank you ;  the two Papers  are laid and the two Papers  which are 
the Budget Estimates and Third Integrated Development Plan for the 2023/20227 are hereby 
committed to the Committee on Budge t and Appropriation s .  Chairperson take note.  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
NAKURU COUNTY SUPPLEMENTARY BU DGET II, 2022/2023.   
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  There is a Procedural Motion by the Hono u rable Alex Mbugua, 
the Chairperson  Committee  on Budget  and Appropriation s .  
Hon . Alex Mbugua:  Mr. Speaker sir, I wish to move the Procedural Motion that, that 
Notwithstanding ,  the provision of Standing Order 49  (5) (b) ,  this House resolves to debate the  
Report of the C ommittee  on Budg et and  Appropriation s  on the Nakuru County Supplementary 
Budget II , 2022/2023.   Mr. Speaker sir, t here are various  reasons as to why we want these be 
expedited. You reali s e that so much l ies  ahead of this County , time has moved and we have 
w orkers  who have not been paid and this House is deemed to move on  recess soon and hence  I  
w ou ld w ish from the side of the Committee  on  Budget and Appropriation s  to move the Procedural 
Motion .  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  A n Honourable  Member to second th at.  
Hon . Peter Maina:  Hono u rable Speaker , I am the MCA for  Murindat and I would like to second 
the Motion.  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  Tha nk you. The Procedural Motion;  Notwithstandin g the 
provision of Standing Order 49(5) (b), this Hous e resolves to debate the Report on the Committee 
on Budget and Appropriation s  on the Nakuru County Supplementary Budget II 2022/2023. The 
Motion  is open for debate. The Hono u rable Minority Leader.  
The Minority Leader (Hon. Philip Wanjohi):  Hono u rable Speaker , I wish to support that we 
proceed with the Procedural Motio n as presented by the  Chairperson for the Committee  on Budget 
and Appropriation s . The mood of the House  is that you put the question so that we proceed  with 
the debate. Thank you Hono u rable Speaker.  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  Thank you ;  Chairperson is t hat the mood of the  House ?  
Hon . Alex Mbugua: I want and wish to take this opportunity to start on the R eport…  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  I just wanted to confirm if it is the mood of the  House that we 
put to question so that the Proced ural Motion is passed ;  that is I wanted to confirm . Hono u rable 
Members I want to put it to question that , Notwithstanding the provision of Standing Order 49(5) 
(b), this House  resolves to debate the  Report on the  Committee on Budget and Appropriation s  on 
the Nakuru County Supplementary Budget II 2022/2023.  
( Question  put and agreed to)  
 
MOTION  
NAKURU COUNTY SUPPLEMENTARY BUDGET II 2022/2023  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  There is a Motion  by the Chairperson  for the Committee on 
Budget  and Appropriations  
Hon . Alex Mbugua: I want to move a Motion that Pursuant  to the provision of Standing Order 
210(6), this House  adopts the R eport of the Committee  on  Budget and Appropriations  on the 
Nakuru County Supplementary Budget II 2022/2023. Hono u rable Speaker, I  wish that I go through 
the Report. This House  gave the Committee on  Budget and Appropriatio n s  some time a week ago 
to go through the Repor t that had been brought to this House  from the County Executive wing and 
on behalf of the  Members of the Committee  on Budget  and Appropriation s,  and as required under 
Section 135 of the Public Finance Management Act  2012 and Standing Orders 218, it is my 
pleasure to present to this House  the Committee ’s  R eport on the s econd Supplementary Budget for 
the Financial Year 2022/2023 .  
Hono u rable Speaker, the Budget and Appropriation s  Committee is well constituted and has been 
given various mandates by this House  under  S tanding  O rder 189  and its main mandate bein g -  
1.  I nvesti gate, inquire  into the R eport on all matters related to Coordination, Control and 
Monitoring of the County Budget.  
2.  Discuss and review the estimates and make recommendations to the House  
3.  Examine the County Fiscal Strategy Paper presented to the  Ho use  
Hono u rable Speaker, Pursuan t to Standing Order 218 , the Budge t and Appropriation s  Committee 
examined and discussed the 2022/2023 Supplementary Budget and ma d e recommendations 
considering  the provision of Section 39 of the Public Finance Management Act, C ounty 
G overnment R egulations 2015 and Section 135 and 154 of the Public Management Act 2012. 
Through the examination, pursuant  to Section 135 of the Public Finance Management Act 2012 , 
the Budget Estimates and related  Docume nts for the County Executive and the County Assembly 
were submitted to the County Assembly.  
In review, the County Supplementary Budget II for the Financial Year 2022/2023, the Committee  
took into consideration  the views of the County Executive Committee M ember  for Finance.  
Acknowledgement  
Hono u rable Speaker , the Committee  on Budget  and Appropriation s  wishes to thank the  Office of 
the Speaker  and the Clerk of the County Assembly for the support extended to it in the execution 
of its mandate as well as the  Members of the County Assembly who participated in the process. 
The process has been tedious Mr. Speaker, but I want to appreciate that the Member s  of the 
Committee  on Budget  and Appropriation s  and your Office Hono u rable Speaker and that of the 
Clerk  p articipated in giving us insight into preparation of this crucial documents for this County .  
Honourable Speaker, t he Committee  also wishes to acknowledge the team from the County 
Treasury who appeared during the review process in time  Mr. Speaker, and they  gave the  Members 
a mp le time in form of answering .  It is therefore my pleasure and duty on behalf of the Budget  and 
Appropriation s  Committee to table this Report  and recommend it to the  House for adoption.  
 
 
Overview  
Hono u rable Speaker , this is the Second Supplementary Budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023 
submitted to the County Assembly for review and scrutiny and pave way for the enactment for the 
Second Supplementary Appropriation Act of  2022/2023 and subsequently the  second to be 
considered by the Third Assembly pursuant to Section 135 and 154 of the Public Finance 
Management Act, 2012.   
The Supplementary Budget Estimates seeks to appropriate a net additional amount of Kshs 100, 
310, 218 w hich  arises from revised Dono r Funds and Grants  as follows  –  DANIDA  additional 
allocation of Kshs 11.6 m illion , World Bank National Agriculture and Rural Inclusive Growth 
Subject (NARIG) additional allocation of  Kshs 95.7 m illion. World Bank National Agricultural 
Development Chain Dev elopment Project additional allocation of Kshs 70 m illion, Conditional 
Funds Kenya Urban Support Project (KUDP) additional of Kshs. 3.5 m illion. Interest earned in 
Nakuru City amounting to Kshs 18 m illion, Conditional Allocation from the World Bank Credit 
to Finance Locally Led Climate Action Program , County Climate Institution Support Level One  
additional allocation of Kshs  11 m illion . World Bank Kenya Informal Settlement Improvement 
Project 11 , red uction of Kshs 100 m illion . Agricultural Sector Development Support Projects  
deduction of Kshs 10.5 m illion.  
Hono u rable Speaker, the above funds have been summari s ed  on the table in the document as 
indicated there which is on page 7. Hono u rable Speaker, i t will be noted that  the  following  County 
Revenue Sources were enhanced, DANIDA additional allocation of Kshs 11.6 m illion , World 
Bank National Agriculture and Rural Inclusive Growth Projects is an additional of Kshs 97.5 
m illion and the order will continue up to note number ( f ),  because I have covered them previously.  
Conversely Hono u rable Speaker , the following Revenue Sources endured a reduction in the 
proposed funding -  Conditional Funds , World Bank Kenya Informal Settlement went down by Kshs 
100 m illion, Agricultural Sector Development Support Project went down by Kshs 10.5 m illion. 
It is imperative that we highlight a New Wor ld Bank Funding to the County  of Nakuru factored in 
this Su pplementary namely  - The National Agricultural Value Chain Development Project .  This  
allocation seeks to increase Market Participation and value  addition for targeted  f armers in select 
Value Chains in Project Areas .  
H ono u rable Members, those from Agricultural Wards this project will build on the foundation in 
farmers Mobili s ation, Productivity Enhancement, Climate Resilience , Water Management 
Initiatives and Digital Technologies laid by the National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth 
Projects . A total of Nine Value Chains that are Dairy, Poultry, Fruits, Bananas, Mangoes, a nd 
Avocado .  Vegetables  we have Tomatoes, Potatoes, Cottons, Cash ew nuts .  Herbicultu re  and 
Pyrethrum, those are the S ectors that will be dealt with  i n  totality .  26 Counties have been  selected 
for projects support based on their potentia l for inclusion and commercialis ation ongoing 
investment in Value Chains.  
Honorable Speaker, it is worth noting that this House is required to fully participate at the Ward 
Level and even at the Sub County Level on this, o n the Legal Compliance of the Supplementary 
Budget II for the Financial Year 2022/2023. In the review ,  the Compliance of the Suppleme ntary 
Budget Estimates II for the Financial Year 2022/2023 to the provision of the Public Finance 
Management Act 2021 , the Committee  established that the document had adhered to the Legal  
threshold set out in the Act as most of the information required has  been provided. Honorable 
Speaker , Pursuant  to Section 39(9) of the Public Finance Management Act 2012 , County 
Government Regulation s  2015, that requires that in approving any estimates under Section 135 
and 154 of the Act, County Assembly Approval shall n ot exceed 10% of the Approved Budget 
Estimates of a program  of Sub - Votes unless it is for u nforeseen and unavoidable need as  defined 
in the Section 112 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012. Like previously we had the 
influence and the issue of Covid  19 within the Country . Honorable Speaker, the Supplementary 
Budget II for the Financial Year 2022/2023 is in compliance with the Fiscal Responsibility 
Principle in that the total Recurrent Expenditure stands at 60.7% while the Development 
Expenditure stands at 39.3% pursuant to Section 107( 2) (b) of the PFM Act.  
I will move to the summary of the  Supplementary on page 11 of the 14. Honorable Speaker , the 
Supplementary Budget Estimates II for the Financial Year 2022/2023 seeks to  realign the changes 
in the Donor  and the Conditional G rants below as notable change is witnessed in the various 
Department s .  Kshs 3 m illion for the operationali s ation of the  Molo and Gilgil Sub County 
installations  of back up Solar System at the new Town Hall building and the Public Works building 
for and additional of Kshs 15 m illion . County Aggregation Centers and Industrial Parks 
Counterpart Funding  of Kshs 100 m illion.  
The Member s will remember that when his Excellency  the  President visited Nakuru Cou nty, he 
asked Nakuru County to appropriate Kshs 250 m illion which he will counter appropriate from the 
National Government for the start of the Industrial Centers within Nakuru County and the 
Committee  has started this initiative by ensuring that we have Kshs 100 m illion set aside for that.  
Construction of Early Childhood Development Centers (ECD s) facilities. We have gone through 
some of the projects that have stalled and most of the ECD centers within  this County  are in 
deplorable condition.  
T he Committee  appropriated Kshs 13 m illion  to try and get those faciliti es well taken care of across 
most  Sub Counties and Ward  level . Purchase and distribution of Pyrethrum of Seedlings  to 
Farmers  in Nakuru County at a tune of Kshs 12.5 m illion, Avocado  promotion in the  County at a 
tune of Kshs 15 m illion, Supply  and deliver y  of Potato Seedlings to the Farmers in Nakuru to a 
tune of around Kshs 17.5 m illion .  
It is worth noting that Agriculture  has  been well taken care of and let us maximi s e o n  the long 
rains  that are happening.  
There was an enhanced bursary allocation in Gilgil Ward of Kshs. 500 000.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
1.  That the County is directed to focus on ensuring completion of ongoing projects, with 
particular emphasis based on projects nearing completion to ensure that citizens benefit 
from such public investments as opposed to the starting of new ones. These projec ts span 
from hospitals that have stalled.  
We have one in Maai Mahiu and others in Naivasha. We have one at PGH. Anything that 
has not been completed going all the way to Molo and Kuresoi, we have urged that in the 
coming budget, they should be appropriate ly funded for them to be operational.  
2.  There is concern of the poor performance in the collection of the own source revenue, that 
the County Treasury should investigate the underperformance of revenue and facilitate 
collection to ensure that the targets are  met so that to avoid the physical risk caused by 
perpetual revenue shortfalls. The Ward projects must be prioritized and fast tracked to 
ensure they are timely completion. Further, the County to undertake an economic analysis 
of the need suitability of th ese projects to ensure that only optimal projects are undertaken.  
3.  The County is directed to submit detailed programs and projects for approval by the County 
Assembly on the following conditional allocation.  
4.  The county is further advised that the process of  identification or privatization of the 
programs and projects under conditional allocation above must be done in participatory 
and all - inclusive manner.  
5.  The Accounting Officer of a County Government entity shall ensure that the personnel cost 
of all appoin tees as well as promotion and salary increase can be met with the budget 
allocation voted for by the County Government entity pursuant to Section 119 (3) of the 
Public Finance Management  
Behind, you will get the table of various Departments, how the money was appropriated and my 
Members have approved that.  
That is Supplementary Budget 2 and I wish to ask Hon. Njuguna to second. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Chairman. Hon. Njuguna.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for giv ing me this opportunity and also to 
thank the Chairperson for articulating various issues that have been raised by this Supplementary 
2.  
This Supplementary 2 as enshrined in this Report has met the legal threshold that is required by 
the law and therefore , the Committee had no other business but to proceed to investigate whatever 
was brought by the Executive.  
I would wish to draw the attention of the House on the issues of enhancement of the grants that 
have come to the County. The DANIDA grants usually go  to the dispensaries and Level 3 
Hospitals. There has been an outcry across the County that the workers in those facilities have not 
received their dues. This is cured through this Supplementary Budget by the enhancements of 
Kshs. 11,605,000 that will be g oing directly to make sure that as we conclude the Financial Year, 
the Department of Health will not have any arrears that are owed to the workers in those facilities. 
Therefore, we are assured that our dispensaries are going to perform better so that the people of 
this County can enjoy the services that they are going to receive.  
If you look at the NALIC, we have a lot of stalled projects, including one at Molo; at the border 
of Kuresoi North and Molo Sub - County that is meant for cold room for potatoes in that region. I 
believe that this allocation is there to make sure that those projects that are stalling as far as NALIC 
is concerned can be completed.  
Also, late last year, we constituted Environmental Committee that was meant to look on the issues 
of environmental changes in our country and also in our county. Those funds that ha ve already 
been allocated here and were not in the budget are currently here to make sure that those 
Committees can undergo some trainings and also go to the ground to check into the issues of 
environmental changes.  
It was just yesterday that I saw in Kia munyi that there are a lot of things that are happening as far 
as environmental issues are concerned and therefore it is a high time that this Supplementary 
Budget addressed such issues and I believe from now henceforth, the Members of the public will 
have  a proper way of approaching issues concerning the environment.  
On the issue of Departmental Budgets, we have seen that Her Excellency the Governor means 
business. If you look on the issues of pyrethrum, she has really enhanced on the issue of pyrethrum 
b ecause we are competing with other Counties. Because Nakuru is meant to be the ambassador of 
pyrethrum, I have seen that the Department has been given enough to make sure that the 
Department of Agriculture is able to deliver and the citizens of this County  will be able to draw 
revenue from such kind of ventures that the County is investing on.  
On the issue of Industrial Parks, this County is aligned to the National Development Agenda of 
making sure that at least, these Industrial Parks are going to ignite t he economic agenda of this 
Country and therefore, this Supplementary is aligned to that and I am sure that in the near future, 
Nakuru will be the main engine of the economy of this Country.  
On the issue of avocados and other things, avocado is food; and i s also addressing the issues of 
environment and therefore, this is the way to go. I therefore wish to request this House to be 
considerate of this Supplementary Budget so that we can save ourselves from these issues because 
if we do not pass this Supplemen tary Budget, time is not on our side. We are headed to recess. We 
will be coming back later on the month of June when we would be addressing the issues of the 
main budget of the next Financial Year; that is 2023/2024 and therefore, we do not have time and 
I request this House to be cognisant of the fact that we are just remaining with only 4 Financial 
Years but we minus one because the final year, we will not be able to address the issues that will 
be raised in the budget.  
I therefore wish to second and re quest the House to pass this Supplementary Budget. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Member for Elburgon.  
The Hon. Member for Murindat.  
Hon. Peter Njoroge: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I would like to support the Report on the 
Supplem entary Budget but with one amendment and I will explain.  
In the main Budget, Financial Year 2022/2023, there was an allocation of Kshs. 4.5 million for the 
construction of Ward Offices in Murindat, particularly in an area called Shokereria and the work 
wa s procured …  
( Point of order)  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Mr. Speaker sir, the Hon. Chair for Budget opened the Debate and the Hon. 
Member for Elburgon was seconding. The Debate is not open for discussion which now the 
Member for Murindat has preempted. Let us fo llow the procedure; we open the Debate so that we 
proceed.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you for that. Hon. Member, kindly be seated. Sorry for 
that.  
( The Motion is that pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 210(6), this House of the 
Committe e on Budget and Appropriations on the Nakuru County Supplementary Budget 2 for the 
year 2022/2023 ) .  
Motion is open for Debate  
Now you are properly on the floor.  
Hon. Peter Njoroge: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I think it is because the other issue was a little 
bit urgent for me and my people that is why I was a little bit agitated with that matter.  
As I was explaining, the project was procured and competitively tendered and awarded to  a 
contractor and three weeks ago, we did a site handover but in the cause of the contractor doing the 
work for some reasons, he withdrew and cited lack of enough resources. Therefore, the funds were 
supposed to be retained so that the work can be retender ed.  
Looking at this Supplementary Budget, the money has moved and therefore, I am pleading, with 
the support of the Members, we pass the Report with amendment that we have retained Kshs. 4.5 
million so that work can be completed because the foundation has  already been done and if not 
completed, we will be doing a de - service to the people of Shokereria.  
Therefore, I would like to seek the support of the Members that we do the amendment because it 
is in line with one of the recommendations that has been don e by the Committee on this paper. If 
you can allow me to refer to that recommendation by the Committee, it is that the County is 
directed to focus on ensuring completion of ongoing projects with particular emphasis placed on 
projects nearing completion to ensure that citizen benefit from public investments as opposed to 
starting new ones.  
I therefore wish to make my humble submission. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member for Murindat, you know that process of moving 
an amendment on the flo or we expected that 2 hours before this sitting you be able to have written 
to the Clerk for purposes of processing so that it does not come like new information before the 
House when the Report comes to the floor.  
The reason for this is that if every Memb er would open, we would want to assume that they have 
a project that they needed done and then they open it at this point, the House would not be able to 
run in order. However, the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget and Appropriations through 
your Comm ittee, that was one of the recommendations that you have written strongly so now you 
may want to see how you take care of that but as far as the process and procedure for the House, 
you may not be able to discuss that amendment.  
Hon. Member for Menengai.  
Hon. Wilson Mwangi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion as it touches on 
so many lines that need to be supported, mostly in line of ECDs where they have touched on the 
Sanitation area.  
We have been having a very big problem on our ECDs whereby we have been having toilets going 
down and they have been a risk to our children. Also the issue of Industrial Parks, we have 
identified areas in Njoro at Egerton University whereby we shall put our Industrial Parks and they 
will go a long way  in making the youth have the Cottage Industries and also in terms of value 
addition of our products that we are really trying to push to our farmers.  
Also, in support of the Supplementary, we have the donor funding and this budget has really 
touched on ho w the funding will be utilised. In the former regime, we have been having the funding 
being utilised without the concept of the people who are being given the materials or the funding. 
As long as they have given the conditions that there must be a particip atory and inclusive public 
participation, I find this issue very light and we are going to have the priorities being given to the 
funding.  
In line with the subsidised material for avocado, pyrethrum and potato, this is the right time as the 
onset of the r ains are here and as we pass this Supplementary, we would wish that this material  be 
given out immediately so that our farmers can now do the planting as the rains are there. Otherwise, 
we may give out these materials when it is dry and it will be a loss to our County.  
I support the Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Hassan and then Hon. Member for Mauche  
Hon. Hassan Ali: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I also wish to support this Supplementary Budget 
2. If you go through the Report, something has re ally caught my eye; it is a National conversation. 
Something that as a County, we are very happy that the Governor has come out and really 
supported it. The issue of County Aggregated and industrial Parks. That is a National conversation. 
That is where emp loyment is for the young people.  
The other day, I was reading that KenGen in Naivasha is coming up with an Industrial Park. This 
is where our young people are going to get employment and we thank the Governor because she 
has seen it fit and supports these young people.  
I would also wish to add that it is very important that every now and then, we should at least have 
money and create Industrial Parks in Nakuru, at least, in each Sub - County. This is something that 
will go a long way in creating employment t o young people.  
The other day, I also saw the Governor calling out that the Suppliers and Contractors should be 
paid. That is something that is also going to help because there are young people who have supplied 
to the County Government and have not been paid. That is going well and it will support these 
young people at least to get something.  
Last but not least, the issue of potato seedlings. We are all aware that the Government is now 
distributing subsidised fertilizers. We are having rains now. This wil l go a long way in supporting 
our farmers to at least plant their potato seedlings because it is the onset of the rains.  
I wish to support this Motion. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you.  
Hon. Moses Koros: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I al so stand to support this Motion on 
Supplementary Budget 2. I wish to thank the Committee on Budget for coming up with this budget 
which is going to support especially our farmers during this rainy season.  
Right now, we have a lot of rains and avocado and p yrethrum which is very suitable for our County 
should be distributed on time so that the program becomes successful.  
Looking at the budget, I also would like to raise some concern, especially about the Department 
that cuts across. Looking at the budget, I  am not seeing funds committed to Disaster Manag ement 
and Humanitarian Services.  
This is a very important Department. We have had a number of challenges especially during the 
dry season. The County witnessed a lot of distractions emanating from fires and t he Department 
of Fire Rescue struggled so much to put off the fires but the personnel there were not able to 
effectively do the work because they are not well equipped. They are not also well trained and the 
facilities are not sufficient. With the onset of  rains, a number of Wards across the County have 
witnessed serious flooding.  
Recently we had gaps that have been created by flood rain which is quite dangerous. We have had 
a number of lives lost especially in Eburu Mbaruk Ward where seven lives were lost  and several 
other Wards have witnessed this problem. Looking at it…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri):Hon.Member for Mauche and Chairperson for Disaster, in the 
main budget there should be amounts allocated for Disaster. There is a Vote for Disaster unless 
t hat is a new item then we do not have evidence whether in the Cabinet or during the preparation 
of the Supplementary that was presented but what you need to do as a Department is look and 
liaise with the Chief Officer to see whether the amount that was vot ed is sufficient to run 
emergency issues through the Financial Year. Unless maybe you have new information on that.  
Hon. Moses Koros : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I stand guided but the Department seems not be 
given the due seriousness it deserves. I seek the s upport of all the Members so that this Department 
can be given sufficient funds to enable it to discharge its mandate. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Keringet then Hon. Member 
for Subukia  
Hon. William Mutai : Thank you very much Hon. Speaker. I stand to support this Report but then 
make some few observations and possibly recommendations for future and especially when we are 
discussing a very crucial agenda like this. I am really surprised when I get the Repor t some few 
minutes before the Motion  and  that I do not get time to read even do exactly what you have urged 
Hon. Member for Murindati. There is an issue that I also felt I should have communicated some 
two hours before this debate and especially making s ome reference to overview point no. 2 (g) 
about the World Bank. Kenya Information  Settlement Improvement Project that is (KISP 2). There 
is a project that was started in my Ward, Keringet Centre that was worth Kshs 38 million which 
has actually stalled and  as you can see there was some reduction in the funding from the World 
Bank. Unfortunately, again you can see that the Committee is appropriating around Kshs 100 
million which therefore means that most of the projects that will be undertaken once this Kshs  100 
million has been allocated will not be completed.  
As I support this Motion I still feel that there is a lot that should be done in future so that we are 
not found in a tight corner where we cannot make our own due and right recommendations to the 
Hou se. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Subukia.  
Hon. Isabella Makori : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for giving me this opportunity to support this 
Motion. First I would like to congratulate the Budget Committee for the jo b well done. I am very 
passionate on Agriculture and I can see that it is well covered. Our people are not lazy but 
sometimes it is due to lack of funds and good support. I congratulate our Governor for considering 
our people with pyrethrum, potatoes and e ven avocados. When our people get the seedlings then 
in future something like hunger and lack of finances will be curbed and our youths will get jobs to 
do.  
I urge the Executive to move with speed and take advantage of the long rains so that our people 
ca n also take advantage of it. I had done some enhancement on bursary and I communicated to the 
Office of the Budget but unfortunately it was not captured. I am humbly requesting your 
indulgence so that I do not do any injustice to my people of Subukia becau se in my office I have 
the forms that I had already allocated for the Kshs 500 000. Thank you Mr. Speaker and I support 
the Report.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Shabaab.  
Hon. David Wathiai : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to  support the Report by the Budget 
Committee and also congratulate the Budget Committee for the good work. Last  week when this 
Report was being laid in this House, it was committed to the Budget Committee but as per our  
Standing Orders, the Paper was supp osed to be shared to the Sectoral Committees so that they can 
go discuss it through to see how the Governor’s Report is and see if it touches on different 
Departments. Hon. Peter Maina wakati alisimama pale angepata hiyo  Ripoti kama  Chair wa 
Education…  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Point of information Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the information? Hon. Member for Shabaab have your 
seat.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Mr. Speaker, it will be erroneous for a Member to form an opinion that 
this Supplem entary Budget was supposed to be committed to different Committees. Once a 
Document has been tabled, it is the responsibility of each and every Member to go the Clerk’s at 
the Table Department and seek the Document that was brought.  
Secondly, it is the re sponsibility of each and every Chairperson once a Document has been tabled 
to follow it up with Table Clerks’ and to know what came. It is erroneous for people to form an 
opinion that the clerks should be following them to give them the Documents. If you l ook at our 
Standing Orders, it is not a requirement that once a Supplementary Budget has come it should be 
committed to the Committees. I believe that once a Communication has been made by the Chair 
every Member who is responsible or a Member who is concer ned has the responsibility of 
following up with the clerks .I remember a Communication was given even to those Members who 
want to change their projects to go to the Clerk’s Department or Department of Budget to make 
those concerns.  
Finally, on the issues  of Hon. Member from Murindat because it has also been raised, The Hon. 
Member did not follow the procedure and secondly those were not Ward fund. The Department 
knew what it was doing when it was asking for those monies through the Supplementary Budget. 
T his is a budget that is aligning funds and if they will not be consumed then the County will lose 
because it will never be operationalised by the County. There are Condition Grants that have 
already been raised by this Report; those Condition Grants will r emain in the accounts. They 
cannot be used because they have not been aligned or captured by our budget lines and that is why 
I want to inform the House and the concerned Member that there was no responsibility of any 
Committee to commit any Document to an y person but it was the role of each and every Member 
to follow up for this Document. I beg to inform the House.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Shabaab.  
Hon. David Wathiai : Mr. Speaker, when I rose to comment on the Report today I said that I 
support the Report. I do not know how the Hon. Member for Elburgon is reading the Standing 
Orders of this House. He is very learned but in kama alisoma hi i i kitabu  upside down…  
Hon. Nj uguna Mwaura : Mr. Speaker, it is wrong for a Member to raise a contradictory Statement. 
The Member is confused and he is confusing the House. Mr. Speaker….  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! Order! Members are not confused. Not at any given time.  
( Laug hter )  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : The Member wants to confuse the House by saying that I read the 
Standing Orders upside down. If I can read them upside down and understand them then that is 
my formula.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! Order! Hon. Member fo r Elburgon. Hon Members are 
not confused and they cannot be confused. They can also disagree or have a different opinion on 
a matter.  
Hon. David Wathiai : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I stand guided. Kama Mheshimiwa wa Murindat 
angepata hiyo  Document mapema  within the two hours angeweza kuandika hiyo  amendment 
alikuwa anataka lakini hakupata hiyo nafasi kwa sababu  the Standing Orders were not followed 
as it is so I stand guided and pray that next time when the budget is coming the Budget Committee 
and your O ffice is going to guide as the way the Standing Orders are…  
 The Minority Leader ( Hon. Philip Wanjohi ): Point of information Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the information?  
 The Minority  Leader  ( Hon .Philip Wanjohi ): The information t hat I wish to pass to Hon. 
Member for Shabaab is that the Supplementary Estimates were tabled in this House last week on 
Wednesday in the afternoon so there was enough time for Hon. Member of Murindat to present 
his grievances. Thank you.  
Hon. David Wathia i : Mr. Speaker…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Shabaab this is your last chance to submit your 
submissions.  
Hon. David Wathiai : Mr. Speaker when I stood here earlier I said the same thing that our senior 
here said. The Paper was laid here last week. My problem is that it was committed to the Budget 
Committee directly but it did not follow the Standing Orders. As we see…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member you were informed. When the Hon. Member for 
Elburgon was informing the House, he gave the  right information that whenever any Report of a 
Committee is tabled and especially a Report with monetary implication, it is deemed that the 
Report or any Paper has been committed to all the Sectoral Committees. It now becomes the work 
and the prerogative  of the Chairperson for any Sectoral Committee to follow up and if there is any 
need to follow up with the mother Department to be able to understand what is been provided for 
in monetary figures that could have a basis in the future.  
Hon. David Wathiai : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I stand guided.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. I would wish to close this by saying that the Hon. 
Member for Murindat has signed it. If you look at the last page no. 15 that is the Hon. Member for 
Murindat so he is in ag reement with the Report. He is not contending but he is in agreement with 
the Report. The Hon. Member for Turi.  
Hon. John Macharia : Thank you Mr.  Speaker sir. I rise to support the Report on Supplementary 
II because the Report is going to accord the Count y Government the opportunity to implement 
some of the projects that result as roll over in the last Financial Year due to insufficient funds 
which was brought about by the inflation prevailing in the Country.  
Therefore as a result of this Supplementary II , the respective Departments shall be able to 
implement those projects. In the Supplementary Budget we have the promotion of Agriculture 
through the planting of avocado, pyrethrum as well as the potato seedlings which are the certified 
seeds which will ena ble our famers to increase in productivity as well as to earn a source of living. 
The issue of the construction of sanitation facilities in our ECDE Centres is going to help our 
young children as well promote the issue of health in our facility.  
Lastly th ere is the issue of value chain in the 26 Counties which is also in the Agriculture 
Department and as a result of the Supplementary II, the value chain is going to be implemented in 
the 26 Counties which is also going to increase the level of productivity as well the revenue source 
in our County.  
Therefore I support and humbly request all the other Hon. Members to support the Supplementary 
II so that the County can to move in speed. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Minority Whip. Then the Hon. Member for Menengai 
West.  
The Minority whip  (Hon.Virginia Wamaitha ): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for giving me this 
opportunity to contribute on the Report. First of all in the overview no.2, this is part of what 
warranted this Supplementary II because you see the Supplementary Budget is meant to seek, 
appropriate and add additional amount of Kshs 100 million. This means that these grants came 
after we did Supplementary I, and we have to do Supplementary II which is this one now so that 
we can appropriate the additional amount we have been given as grants. The other thing i s the 
absorption rate. In recommendation no. 3, we see the Ward projects must be prioritised. Right now 
very little is happening on the ground and as Hon. Member from Turi has said, there are some 
projects which had been rolled over in our Wards which did not have any allocation. Right now 
we are urging the County and the Departments to fast track the Ward projects so that we can have 
something happening on the ground.  
Without this Supplementary II, some of the project will not be done.  I want to urge the  House that 
we pass this Supplementary II for us to also be on the safe side as far as absorption rate in the 
County is concerned. If nothing concerning the Ward projects is done, then the absorption rate for 
Financial Year 2022 - 2023 and projects which hav e not been done in the last years like 2021 -  2022, 
2022 -  2023 will be very little meaning you will hear people saying that money has been taken back 
to the Treasury which is very wrong. I urge Members that we pass this Supplementary II for us 
also to have something going on in our Wards. Thank you.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok : Asante Bwana Spika Kwa kunipa hii fursa kukubaliana na huu mjadala wa 
leo wa kupitisha Supplementary II. N i shukrani zaidi kwa sababu tumeona kwamba kuna sehemu 
ambazo miradi zilikuwa zimekwama  kwa muda mrefu na kwa kupitisha hii S upplementary B udget  
tunaona zile miradi zitaweza kuendelea kufanyika kama mahospitali .  N a pia mahali ningependa 
kugusia kwa upande wa ukulima ni kwamba wakati tunaenda wale procurement  wanaenda 
kutengeneza hiyo budget  ama kutenga hizo pesa upande wa agriculture,  tunaona kwamba 
huchukua muda mrefu na wakati ambapo tutaenda kupanda hizo mimea kama  avocado na maembe 
itakuwa pengine mwezi wa kumi ama kumi na moja. Na h u o ni msimu ambayo tunaona huwa ni 
msimu unaelekea kuwa kiangazi. Tukiangalia miezi iliyopita, kuna avocado  zilipeanwa pamoja na 
maembe na miche zingine lakini kwa sasa hatuna wakulima wanasema zilikauka na ningependa 
kuomba kwamba wakati wanapeana hela hizi waweze kupeana kwa haraka ili tuweze k uzipanda 
wakati tuko na mvua ya kutosha. Kand o  na hayo, tuko na shule ambazo ni za ECDE  ambazo 
zilijengwa zikamalizika na hata hawana dawati, hawana chochote pale na ninaamini kuwa chini 
ya uongozi wa Gavana wetu Susan Kihika  ni kwamba tutaweza kuzifungua hizi shule hivi karibuni. 
Asante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; before we adjourn, the last Member contributing  is 
the Hon. Member from Mai Mahiu Hon. Kamau. Chairman there are issues raised by Members 
specifically about the matter for Murinda t; the matter for Keringet that has been raised by the Hon. 
Member for Keringet. Hon. Chair, when you go to the overview, part (g) there is Kenya Informal 
Settlement Improvement Projects which is the KISIP II; it has been reduced by Kshs. 100 million 
and t hen there is an addition that is part (b) the same overview, that the World Bank the NALIP 
project is  allocating an additional Kshs. 95.7 million so maybe you will be advising whether KISIP 
II was to be used to do Agricultural Productivity Projects or may be the Hon Members including 
the Hon. Member from Keringet will take advantage of part (b) and push their projects to the 
various Departments. So that was a contradiction sort of, and it is good to be clear. The Hon. 
Member for Maai - Mahiu.  
Hon. Eliud Chege :  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity. First of all I would 
also like to commend the Committee for Budget and Appropriations for this Supplementary 
Budget. I would like us to look at recommendation no. 1 where they are talking about advisi ng the 
Executive on completion of the stalled projects.  
Mr. Speaker, we have so many projects that are stalled. For example, when I look at my Ward, I 
have a Level Four Hospital which has stalled for the last three years and nothing has been done 
and so I  think if the recommendations of the Committee would be taken seriously by the Executive 
and they complete all the stalled projects, this Supplementary Budget will help us.  
Mr. Speaker, there is one thing that at least I would like the House and the Commi ttee to consider 
very critically. We have Municipalities that are coming up such as Gilgil and Molo. When you 
look at the main budget if I am not wrong, we allocated Kshs 10 million to each Municipality and 
now when you look at this Supplementary Budget, i n my opinion I think something was to be done 
to both Gilgil and Molo because I do not think with Kshs 10 million there is not much that can be 
done and also if we do not enact them, they were given the Charter three years down the line and 
we cannot see a nything being done.  
So Mr. Speaker, I would wish if we look at what is given to Nakuru City I think we have been 
allocated Kshs 850 million and in this Supplementary Budget, although they have done something 
at Naivasha Municipality but also Mr. Speaker, they can pave way for other upcoming 
Municipalities. Something should be done so that the Budget Committee Chair as we go on, please 
let us take these upcoming Municipalities seriously so that we can develop Nakuru as a whole. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Sp eaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Chairperson of the Budget and Appropriations 
Committee you may respond.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I will start first with the Disaster Management. 
We have monies within the Disaster Department mai nly within the Public Service and within the 
Roads Department since the powers or the Executive Order had not been brought to this House for 
us to give them money as a Single Vote. Mr. Speaker sir, Her Excellency the Governor issues an 
Executive Order befo re we do a main budget; we shall be having all those Votes well aligned and 
we shall have enough money for each and every Department that is there.  
For the case of Murindat, it is a case that arose from the Department where the projects originated 
from an d you realise that Hon. PM sits within the Committee of Budget and that shows that there 
is no favoritism whether you sit in the Budget Committee or not. Appropriation happens equally 
and equitably among all Members. When a Department feels that there is a  shift of goal and money, 
it is upon each Member to follow up on the budget because we have been given enough at our own 
Ward level whereby the Department there is no any interference. Mr. Speaker sir, I am also 
delighted because through your Communication , you ensured that we shall be having Ward offices 
at the Ward level and I advise Hon. Peter from Murindat to fast track on that because there is 
shortfall of revenue all across.  
On the issue of Keringet, KISIP II, area MCA has indicated there is a transfer of Kshs 100 million 
which has gone to be part  of the Industrial Park that the President requested that we put aside Kshs. 
250 million. Other Counties within this Country have al ready started on the same. We have asked 
the Governor to ensure that various Committees are taken to these Industrial Parks maybe before 
we do the main budget so that they can understand the gist of these Industrial Parks. So Mr. Speaker 
sir, as we follow up on this on that part of Keringet, that is where the colossal amount went.  
On the issue of Municipalities cited by Hon. Chege from Maai Mahiu, we have some of the future 
Municipalities and the moment we have tried functionalising the two Municipalities that is Molo 
and Gilgil, we have appropriated some money that these Municipalities will pick and I can tell 
Hon. Member Chege that in due time we shall do proper equalisation appropriating of money to 
all those Municipalities that require. I have listened to these Members and indeed they have got 
the gist of what this budget has and the nature of how it has been presented both at the County 
Assembly and the Executive. Because of time, indeed we had Members citing that in two or three  
years you will be getti ng that Nakuru County returned some of this amount of money back to the 
Treasury. It will be taken that these Members of County Assembly will not take any chance to 
hinder that whereas we have pending bills within this County that have not been sorted.  
Yo u find that Her Excellency the Governor committed to a tune of Kshs 1.8 Billion to settling the 
pending bills of various contractors. If we  have this money moving around the Counties, we shall 
have the economy of Nakuru moving on in a better way. Mr. Speak er sir I appreciate these 
Members and the House and the time that you have granted me on this supplementary II. Those 
are my responses Mr. Speaker sir Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Chair, I now propose the question.  
( Questio n proposed that pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 210 6 this House adopts the 
R eport of the C ommittee on Budget and Appropriation s  on the Nakuru County Supplementary 
Budget II of 2022/23 )  
( Question put and agreed to )  
(Applause)  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
HOUSE RESOLVES TO REDUCE THE PUBLICATION PERIOD OF THE NAKURU COUNTY 
APPROPRIATION BILL NO. II OF 2023 TO ONE DATY  
There is a Procedural Motion by the Hon. Alex Mbugua, the Chairperson Committee on Budget 
and Appropriations.  
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That notwithstanding the provision of Standing Order 119, this House 
resolves to reduce the publication period of the Nakuru County Appropriation Bill No. II of 2023 
to one day.  
Mr. Speaker sir, this Procedural Motion I wish to ask Members to support beca use as you have 
seen we have gone through this Motion and we have cited things that are pending before us. Mr. 
Speaker, most of the suppliers within this County are still loitering around this town not being paid 
because of the pending bills.  
Mr. Speaker,  in December last year, the Governor set out a Committee that will be investigating 
things that have not been paid. Mr. Speaker I know these Members of this House know people 
who have not been paid because of the transition of one Government to the other a nd we have 
workers who have also not been paid; currently under Environment Department, we have casuals 
who at the moment and at the end of this month they might not receive any amount from the 
coffers. We have workers within the County Government of Nakur u whose even the NHIF, another 
remittance at different organs of the Government has not happened.  
We also have the budget timelines and we know very soon we are supposed to be committing 
ourselves in the next budget and hence we do not want to move this. This Hon. Members will be 
going on a recess; I want the work of Nakuru County not to stall and this Vote is going to serve 
wananchi  at Ward level. Thank you Mr. Speaker and I wish to move that Motion.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. You want to  invite a  Hon. Member to second  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : I will invite Hon. Member Virginia to support.  
Hon. Virginia Wamaitha : Thank you Mr. Speaker I rise to support the Procedural Motion  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Members there is a Procedural Motion.  
T hat notwithstanding the provision the standing order 119, this House resolves to reduce the 
publication period of the Nakuru County Appropriation Bill No. II of 2023 to one day  
The Motion is open for debate. The Hon Member for Nakuru East.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Thank you so much Mr. Speaker. I arise to support the Motion for the 
reasons cited. It is true that most of our Members or wananchi  are suffering due to the unpaid 
pending bills and even the perception outside there is th at the County Government is not working 
due to lack of funds. It is right time and in order so that we can expedite  the working of the 
Government given that we are in the last month of the Financial Year. Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel K aruri): The Hon Member for Elburgon.  
Hon. Njenga Mwaura : Thank you Mr. Speaker, it is just a month ago when the Hon. Member for 
Malewa came to me and told me the Medical staff are not covered enough; they go to hospitals 
and are turned away for lack of suf ficient funds in their NHIF Kitty. All the contracted and staff 
in the County usually receive an additional funds from the County so that they can be able to 
operate sufficiently in the County or they can perform to the maximum as they work for us in the 
C ounty.  
However, that has been complicated due to lack of funds and I believe this Supplementary Budget 
is going to take care of that. Therefore I usually say that if we continue delaying service delivery 
or justice, we will deny people a lot of things. Th erefore what we are requesting is that time is of 
essence and time is very important. Now that the other activities in the course of the week and next 
week I also believe will be gazetting this thing belatedly, I would wish to request that we move 
with has te to make sure that the publication time has been shortened so that those people going to 
the hospital as workers of this County will be offered those services. Those people seeking other 
services may be able to be paid on time before the Systems start sh utting down.  
Therefore, I wish to request the House to agree with the Committee on this Procedural Motion of 
shortening the period so that we can move forward. Also due to time and it is already 12 pm I 
would wish that you put a question to the Motion so that we can move so that this document can 
be taken to Nairobi for publication and as we come back in the Afternoon Sitting, we can be 
assured that things will be flowing in the right direction. Thank you Mr. Speaker, as you consider 
that.  
The Speaker  (Hon . Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Member for Elburgon. I will proceed to put a 
Question  
( Question put and agreed to )  
( Applause )  
BILL(s)  
THE NAKURU COUNTY SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION NO. II BILL OF 2023 (First 
R eading)  
The Chairperson Committee of Budget and Appropriations take note of that, The Bill has been 
committed to your Committee for onward processing.  
 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable Member s this House stands adjourned to today 2.30pm  
The House rose at  12.10pm  
 
  
    
 