COUNTY  ASSEMBLY  OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly  (Second Session)  
Wednesday 2 nd August 2023 
Assembly  Building  
The House  met at 2:50 PM  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair ] 
PRAYERS.  
STATEMENT  
MIRUGI KARIUKI HOSPITAL  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a request for a Statement  by the Honorable Member 
for Nakuru East, Honorable Anthony Kanyere.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere: Thank you Honorable Speaker for giving me this chance to request for 
a Statement  that pursuant to Standing Order 47(2) (C) I rise to request for a Statement from the 
Chair person  for the Committee  on Health Services concerning the status of Mirugi Kariuki 
Hospital which is domiciled in my ward . Honorable Speaker Mirugi Kariuki Hospital is located in 
Nakuru East Ward and serves as a critical Health Facility to the residents and it surrounding.  
It should be noted that every person has a right for the highest attainable standard of health which 
includes the right to Health Care Services . For a long time,  the residents  of Nakuru East have been 
denied these rights  owing to factors that can be addres sed. Currently the  Facility is experiencing 
acute shortage of drugs, further it lacks basic infrastructure including an appropriate building  that 
so critical in its operations. This has forced the Managemen t to convert some of the spaces 
including Wards  for unintended use. Honorable Speaker , the problem is further  compounded by 
the fact that the categorization of the Hospita l is not known therefore making it difficult to ascertain 
the level of compliance with the set standards based on the category of the Hospita l. Honorable 
Speaker, it is worth noting that the Hospita l benefited from the construction of two  House s by the 
Nakuru Town East Constituency Development Fund (CDF) to act as a residence for the key Staffs . 
To date the House s have never been occupied instead they have been vandalized and are in 
dilapidated state. I therefore request the Chair person  to respond to the following -  
 
1. What is the County  Government doing about  the drug shortage and inadequate Health 
Infrastructure at the Mirugi Kariuki Hospital?  
2. Can the County  Government clarify on the categorization of Mirugi Kariuki Hospital 
bearing in mind that there is an existing gazette notice on condition to be met for each 
category of the health facilities.  
3. Which measure is t he County  Government is putting in place to ensure the two Hospitals 
Staff House s are occupied  to avoid further vandalisms  
Thank Honorable Speaker , that is my Statement     
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank Honorable Kanyere, the request is made to the 
Chair person  for the Committee  on Health Services , take note and we require a response to that 
request in 21 days. Next order.  
MOTION  
NJORO SUB COUNTY  HOSPITAL  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Motion  by the Honorable Chair person  for the 
Committee  on Health Services Honorable Njuguna Mwaura  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Thank you honorable Speaker , I rise to move a Motion  that this House  
adopts the Report  of the  Committee  on Health Services on the Visit Njoro Sub Count y Hospital 
held on 24TH May, 2023 and tabled on the floor of the  House  during the Morning Sitting . The 
Committee  on Health  is Sectorial Committee  established under the second schedule of the County  
Assembly  of Nakuru Standing Orders and is mandated to deal with all matters related to the County  
Health Services including in particular County  Health facilities and Pharmacies, Ambulance 
Services, proMotion  of Health Services , Primary Health Care, Li censing and control of 
Undertaking  that sells Food, Public Crematoriums, Funeral Parlous , Licensing of Dogs  and 
Facilitie s for the accommodation , Care and burial of Animals, Water and Sanitation Services , 
Refuse  Damps  and Solid Waste removal. The objective of the visit was to ch eck on the status of 
the Health Facility, ascertain the quality of services offered to the Members  of the  Public and 
analyze  the achievements and challenges and areas of improvement as far us delivery of services 
is concerned.  
The Background Information  
2.0 BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR NJORO SUB -COUNTY  HOSPITAL.  
Honorable Speaker,  
Njoro Sub County  Hospital is located in Njoro Sub County  in Nakuru County . The facility was 
officially opened at around 1970 by the Catholic Church as a Dispensary and then later improved 
to a Level IV Referral Facility in 2010. The facility was then later gazette d as a Sub -County  
Hospital in 2015. It lies on a 7.2 acres piece of land. In 2019, the then Governor H.E Lee Kinyanjui 
opened the upgraded construction of Njoro Sub -County  hospital. The construction is still 
underway and is about 70% complete. It currently offers services to the public all over Njoro Sub -
County  under th e County  Department  of Health Services.  
The Facility  however has no Ownership Documents (No Title Deed ).  Allow me to elaborate and 
say that facility where is currently located, that land was donated by the Catholic Church and it 
was a Dispensary  area but currently owned by the County  Government of Nakuru and in that 
facility it House s the OCPD ( Officer Commanding Police Department ) and the DCC within the 
piece of land.  
There is a tag of war between the Board  and the National Government  as to who should reside 
within that compound because currently the OCPD and the DCC Njoro reside in that land and 
which we believe since it is a County  Land, there can be arrangement whereby even the Medical 
Staff s can be accommodated  in the said land.  
2.1 Services and Patients Served at Njoro Sub -County  Hospital  
The facility offers Outpatient Services, In-Patient Services, Laboratory Services , CCC/TB 
Services, MCH, ANC and Family Planning Services. The facility has a catchment population of 
about 70,000.  The Hospita l serves approximately 200 -250 patients per day and 160 -250 deliveries 
are done per Month . The facility has a bed capacity of 26 Patients . It was noted that the Outpatient 
cases vary on t he various seasons during the year as few patients visit the facilities during the 
planting season. This because much of time farmers are on their work and much of the time do not 
appear because they forego to take medicine during that time because they ar e busy on the farms, 
that is a notion that is there cur rently.  
The top most cases Report ed include: Urinary Tract Infection , Upper Respiratory Tract Infection , 
Diarrhea, Typhoid, Pneumonia, Tuberculosis and few HIV cases. The service delivery in the 
facili ty is good despite struggling with acute shortage of Staff . Services are offered on 24 -hour 
basis as cases from other Level II and III facilities around Njoro Constituency are referred there.  
There still exists an incomplete construction of the upgraded c onstruction that is about 70%. The 
hygiene levels of the facility are limited by the squeezed spacing. The waiting bay is too small 
compared to the too many patients it receives per day.  The structures in the facility are dilapidated. 
Free delivery servic es are offered as it is facilitated by the FIF and NHIF. There is inadequate 
Infrastructure and the  Hospital offers Maternity Services and Laboratory Services.  
The facility has no Theatre  and no Mortuary. The facility has one Ambulance  that services 
emerg encies from all over Njoro County  and therefore not adequate to respond to all emergencies 
in good time. There is a complete Constructed Maternity Ward with the intention of easing the 
congestion in the Old Maternity section. Njoro Sub -County  Hospital refe rs extreme cases or when 
congested to the Nakuru Level 5 Hospital. The Hospital has no pending bills and NHIF owes the 
facility about 5.2 Million. The facility is well equipped with drugs as 1/3 of its budget is used to 
buy drugs. The Facility has a Bore H ole that is serviced by the FIF.  Honorable Speaker , allow me 
to commend the facility because other facilities across the County  have huge Pending Bills but this 
facility has nil Pending Bill and they are doing extremely well and that is a case study or case 
example of how the facilities should be run across the County . On the other page we have the 
Service Charter, this are the services that they offer and how they charge them.  
2.2 Staff Esta blishment at Njoro Sub County  Hospital  
The facility has a current Staff Establishment of 33 Staff some on Permanent, Contractual Staff 
and Casuals. The County  Government has employed majority of the Technical Officers and 
Contractual Staff. The facility h as 1 general Docto r who handles complicated cases . Honorable 
Speaker  this is alarming, this a Sub County  Hospital that receive all referrals from other Tertiary 
Facilities  or Sate Lite Facilities including Naiswet, Lari, Mau Narok and also Mauche but all t hose 
facilities end up referring their patients to Njoro Sub County  Hospital that has only one Medical 
Superintendent . It is critical and it does not augur well. This facility ought to be given the support 
that it deserves so that all those cases that end up at Nakuru County  Referral Hospital (PGH) can 
now be domiciled at that facility so that the specialist cases and at tentions can be offered at that 
level where the residents of Njoro  can be able to rich. The facility also has  7 Clinical Officers , 16 
Nurses, 3 Pharmaceutical Managers, 4 Lab Technicians, 1 Nutritionist, 1 Administrator and 1 
Accountant . That number is too  low because a Level 4 Facility must have at least  5 Medical 
Doctors, 33 Nurses, 5 Pharmaceuticals Technicians and a  Pharmacist so that they can dispense 
drugs appropriately.  
There exist acute shortage of Staff  and the  Staff available do not perform their duties to the 
maximum thus poor service delivery. The facility lacks a clinician as the emergency room is 
managed by a Nurse . Njoro Sub -County  Hospital accommodates Internship Programmes and 
currently has interns from Botswana who are international Student s from Egerton University.  
The Nurses and Lab Techs work in shifts and  Computers are used as records. That means they 
have automated their records management way.  
3.0 PHYSICAL VISIT AT NJORO SUB -COUNTY  HOSPITAL  
3.1 Consultation Room  
The facility has a very small Consultation Room which doubles up as an Injection Room, 
Examination Room , Procedure Room and an Outpatient Room. When we went there to some 
extent we felt for the facility because we realized that if we can see the kind of ro oms that they are 
using as injection room or outpatient room, they are very squeezed. In fact, even the  Medics or the 
Nurses  and Clinicians  are not conformable even to turn in those rooms. Therefor we really need 
the County  Executive to expedite …….   
B AGNE S 
At the completion of the outpatient block that we have in that facility, so that the status of that 
facility can commensurate the revel that actually it has been gazetted for that facility and if such 
will be done Mr. Speaker even more patients will feel c omfortable to procure services from that 
facilities.  
The facility charges  
100 shillings for registration fee,  
100 for wound dressing  
200 for stitching  
100 for injection  
free consultation  
100 for the nutritionist counselling  
 they also offer free CCC  services,  
all the money is paid via M PESA. Therefore, there is nowhere that individual actually Tamper or 
come into contact with money. So, I can say they have semi -automated themselves as far as the 
issues of funds are concerned.  
 Due to the wide range  of service offered and the many cases it receives per day. The consultation 
room is often stuffy and patients have to wait for hours to be attended to.  
 MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH.  
The facility has two maternity wards where one is within the facility and an improved one on the 
separate building where mothers receive post -natal care and support for new mothers and their 
newborns.  
The in House  MCH has seven beds. While the improved on e has eight beds. Despite the facility 
receiving around 160 to 200 deliveries per month. The facility has one delivery bed situated in the 
improved maternity ward and deliveries are free of charge.  
Mr. Speaker You have pictorial documents are in this Repor t so that members can see the way that 
ward is, it is too small. Even the mothers I do not know how they coexist there. Sometimes you 
are told mothers here share beds, which is actually not good. And we really need a lot of 
improvements in that area.  
DELI VERY ROOM.  
This is where childbirth takes place, providing a safe and controlled environment for labor, 
delivery and immediate medical care for the newborn.  
 The facility has one delivery bed in the delivery room. You can imagine a situation whereby two 
mothers or three mothers want to give birth and is only one bed, they will be forced to actually 
offer birth on the floor, at this age Mr. Speaker, I think we are somehow retrogressive currently, 
despite the funds that are there, we need to do something.  
Mr. Speaker, they have a laboratory where they do a lot of screening, including the cancer and the 
rest. they also have counselling room and they also have the store But they are very small. They 
really need Mr. Speaker the upgrading of the maternity wing. A nd because that building that we 
have there, the new building is 70% complete. If it can be completed, I believe there will be a lot 
of reprieve in that facility. That facility is there and we have the pictorial attachment still. And that 
building is just awaiting some small completions works, so that the art facility can now be moved 
to that new building That is there. And I believe with that new building all the members of the 
public from Njoro and from the country can be able to enjoy services from that building.  
 ACHIEVEMENTS   
so far, the hospital is NHIF accredited. they have no pending bills to its suppliers and service 
providers.  
There is adequate supply of water in the facility.  
The facility has so far planted 320 trees around the facility among th e 24are fruit trees. Mr. Speaker 
this is the only facility that actually is environmental considerate. it has planted trees and if this 
can be emulated Mr. Speaker, I believe that actually even the County  will look green. And by so 
doing, I believe we are going to conserve the environment.  
Njoro sub -County  has a vaccination tent, adequate supply of drugs and this is the only facility that 
we realized that has drugs and Mr. Speaker they have bought these drugs for themselves with their 
small budgets that th ey have, which is a third but the rest of the facilities they need a lot of prayers, 
if not intervention of this House  Mr. Speaker.  
FINDINGS AND OBSERVATIONS.  
 During the visit to the hospital the Committee  observe d the following:  
That the facility has on ly one ambulance which serves the entire Njoro Sub-County .  
There  is an acute shortage of staff in the facility.  
That the M aternity operates on a 24 hours basis, but lacks adequate equipment, and staff to 
facilitate the high number of births.  
The Hospital Board is in the process of processing the Facility’s title deed. And Mr. Speaker, I 
would wish that actually the Committee  on L ands to intervene on this matter, so that that facility 
can be given its title deed, so that they can now operate and eve n  construct a perimeter wall around 
its boundary so that at least the security can be enhanced.  
The facility has inadequate and dilapidated infrastructure, which includes inadequate laboratory 
and laboratory equipment, inadequate toilets, poorly ventilat ed rooms due to improper positioning 
of the windows, in adequate space to accommodate Cash Officer, records and the office of the 
administration. you realize that if you could see where the records are, where the cash officers are, 
and the administrator, i t is like a allow me not to call it a kennel, it is like where Mr. Speaker the 
table clerks are and where you are, Mr. Speaker, a very small office that cannot actually House  
two individuals at a time. to some extent was because we found the revenue clerks  in that facility, 
they serve patient standing, Mr. Speaker, which I believe it requires some improvements.  
the hospital has shortage of supply of HIV testing kits Mr. speaker in the morning we had a 
statement that was sought by Hon. Ann and we said the c ases of HIV among our teenagers is 
increasingly it is alarming, but you find that our facility like Njoro facility does not have the testing 
kits, which actually does not actually sound nice, Mr. Speaker, and therefore, something more has 
to be done.  
the facility lacks systems mechanism of tracking drug movement, we realize Mr. Speaker that we 
have been complaining about drugs, but when they go to the hospital’s chemist Mr. Speaker, the 
way they dispense the drugs you cannot be able to track, so therefore there lacks security of our 
drugs and therefore the drugs can end up actually spilling out to the entrepreneurs around the 
facility and therefore they ought to have proper tracking systems of the drugs.  
 The facility does not have a Specialist Doctor such as Gynecologist Mr. Speaker, despite all the 
births that are offered at that facility. We do not have a Specialist Mr. Speaker  who can offer 
Antenatal services that is Post and Pre-Natal services to our mothers. And therefore, that is why 
you find that all  patients from Njoro sub -County , they end up at the PGH Mr. Speaker, which is 
not good Mr. Speaker  because we have that facility that is supposed to be offering those services.  
The Facility has no Theatre and no morgue, Mr. Speaker again, there was an iss ue that was raised 
by one of the Honourable  Members from Nakuru Town East about their accreditation of our 
facilities. And Mr. Speaker a Level Four that does not have a Theater, that is not a L evel Four, that 
is a Le vel Three or  a Level Four that does not have a morgue that is not a Level Four Mr. Speaker, 
that is A Level Three Mr. Speaker, and therefore as far as the accreditation of that facility, we 
believe that actually something ought to be done Mr. Speaker, so that they can acquire t heir proper 
status so that even when the members of the public goes to those facility, they can be freely 
knowing that they are actually going for certain services, while other services ought to be procured 
somewhere else Mr. Speaker.  
 COMMITTEE  RECOMMENDA TIONS  
 That the County  Government of Nakuru should allocate more resources in the Financial Year 
2023/2024. To recruitment of staff, such as nurses, doctors and lab technicians.  
The County  should construct a morgue and a theater in that facility.  
The County  should equip the facility with essential equipment’s, buy an ambulance for the facility, 
refurbish the facility and ensure completion of Maternity Wing.  
The Department  of Health should work with the Department  of Lands, housing and physical 
planning to fast track on the issuance of the facility’s title deed.  
 That the County  Department  of health should ensure adequate supplies of HIV testing kits in the 
facility.  
 That the County  Department  of health should com e up with a tracking system to monitor the 
movement of drugs supplied in the facility for accountability purposes.  
 Mr. Speaker, if this will be implemented. We are sure that, that facility, and other facility will 
have proper systems of ensuring that serv ice delivery will be realized. And the members of the 
public are going to enjoy the services that are going to be offered by those facilities.  
Mr. Speaker, once again, allow me to request that once this House  approve, or pass this Motion , 
we ought to see implementation. Mr. Speaker, I am on record that that in this House  I have passed 
more than 50 or 30 Report . But we have never seen implementation of those Report . And therefore, 
Mr. Speaker, it means the authority of his House  has been compromised. Mr. Sp eaker, it is time 
whereby if I use analogy let us use the analogy of a biting dog. Mr. Speaker, currently, we have 
just been barking dogs that cannot actually bite Mr. Speaker. We really need to invoke our 
authority. And make sure that once we pass these Report , after three months of a speaker or six 
months, when we go back to counter check whether our recommendations are implemented, we 
ought to find that these recommendations will ha ve been implemented Mr. Speaker  and this cuts 
across to all Department s, not only the Health Department . Because  Mr. Speaker, we can be doing 
a lot of work. But at the end of the day, our work will be trivialized by Department s.  
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, allow me to request the relevant Department s and the relevant Committee  
to take over this matter. And follow up to make sure that these recommendations and these Report  
are not going actually to gather the dusts onto the shelves or the archives of this Assembly . But we 
need to see its implementation being actually reflected onto  the force facilities or at the relevant 
Department  Mr. Speaker.  
 I beg to move and request honorable Alex from Naivasha to second.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you, honorable Chair  for Health Services. The 
Honourable Member for Lakeview.  
Hon. Al ex Mbugua:  Mr. Speaker, sir, allow me to take this opportune moment. First of all, to 
thank the Chair person  health Committee  for taking us through such a Report , Mr. Speaker, and 
Mr. Speaker also to commend him for the good work that he has been doing. He has taken us 
through various Report  and across various hospitals Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker the status of our hospitals at this moment, Mr. Speaker is mostly wan ting yesterday 
we were discussing a Report  from Bondeni hospital and a fortnight ago Mr. Speaker, we were 
discussing a Report  on Naivasha level for hospital Mr. Speaker. for us to be discussing Njoro sub –
County  Hospital of which we are told it is accredite d to be level four hospital without a Theater is 
something that should worry the County  at the moment Mr. Speaker. Without  a Theater, Mr. 
Speaker and we are told that we can see mothers within that hospital and even the size of the 
cubic le which they are b eing treated in Mr. Speaker. We should be worried as a County . However, 
Mr. Speaker  
C ERICK  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: … we must say that we find there is a big building in there being developed 
and the request from the Chair  and the Committee , which I am part of, is that we should commit 
amounts that will be able to complete such a building for the service of this people.  
Sometime last month, we had an accident at Londiani and that accident led to the spilling of so 
many patients within the Nakuru Level 5 Hospi tal. The patients who had come from Njoro could 
not get enough attention that time. Sometimes, you find that all these patients trickle to the 
Provincial General Hospital, we even compromise the hours of working of doctors and nurses at 
this Level 5 Hospit al. To decongest this Level 4 and Level 5 hospital that we have here, it is good 
that each and every Sub -County  have a functional Level 4 Hospital as we have been asked. It will 
also help in the accreditation of NHIF. With that, we shall get more money for  the patients who 
will be admitted here.  
I wish to support this Motion  by saying that let us arise to the Motion  as a County  and support 
such Report . As the Chair person  has indicated that many times, we have given Report  but they 
have not been acted upon. We know our Governor is of goodwill but the people who might be at 
the Department al level might not be willing to work at the pace that we would want them to work. 
This Assembly  should rise to occasion by ensuring that those who have been given the mandate  
by the Governor have performed very well.  
Yesterday, we saw the President doing Performance Appraisal to the Cabinet. I think this one shall 
come even to the Committee  levels within the Assembly  and also to the Members of the County  
Executive  because it is justified.  
I rise to support that Motion . Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Motion  is seconded and the Motion  is that this House  adopts 
the Report  of the Committee  on Health Services on the visit to Njoro Sub -County  Hospital th at 
was held on 24th May, 2023, tabled on the floor of this House  during the morning sitting.  
The Motion  is open for Debate  
Honorable Member for Viwandani.  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. As my colleagues have just said, we have 
had several Motion s, recommendations and observations in our hospitals.  
Prior to the Motion , there was a Statement that was asked by Hon. Kanyere from Nakuru East 
Ward. I do not want to say that Members have nothing to say but clearly, we need to see 
implementation. As I support and recommend the good work that is being done by the Chair person  
Health Committee , we need to see this happening and I want to beg this House  that this Motion  is 
just like the one that we had yesterday and we are going for County  Assemblies Sports Association 
preparations. Put this Motion  into question so that we can start seeing implementation.  
I beg that you put this into question because recommendations have been made so that we can now 
start following up as Members of this House and see that this happens. It is across the County  that 
we are experiencing the same problems in our hospitals. Put this into question and we will go into 
other business.  
Order!, Honorable Member for Maiella Ward. The Honorable Member for Viwandani Ward , you 
are preempting the business after this. We are not able to be sure that if we have not completed 
this business, that even if we go to the other business, we are going to be thorough.  
Honorable Member for Maiella Ward.  
Hon. Jane Gituku: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I suspect the Honorable Member for Viwandani 
Ward is really summari sing for all of us but I believe we all have something to input just before 
you put the question.  
He Chair person  Health Committee , we appreciate the good work you are doing and  when we look 
at this Report , I would request to recommend and to also support it but with a few amendments, 
especially when you look at this particular Report  that we have been given. You realise  that in this 
Report , they have not given us a recommendatio n on what you are supposed to do on the Kshs 5.2 
million that the facility is owed by NHIF which is a very big sum of money, owing to the fact that 
this facility also requires finances so that it can continue going forward.  
The next one I would like also to recommend; they say that the facility lack s clinician but they 
also say that they have got a number of Clinical Officers. I do not know because I am not in that 
Department , whether a Clinician is the same as Clinical Doctor because they say they have some 
Clinical Officers; they have mentioned a n umber there, and then they say somewhere there that 
the facility lacks a clinician as an emergency.  
I would also want to bring to attention the issue of digitising our system. Whenever Her Excellency 
the Governor flags off medicine, we really wait at the l ocal level to receive the same medicines 
that have been flagged and when you go round the hospitals, you are told that the drugs were 
flagged but we only received one carton of panadol s. That has been the case in my place.  
The digiti sation of these facilities, especially medicine, should be taken seriously.  
Finally, the Chair man has told us that they need an ambulance but the visual part of this document 
has an ambulance. We would like to know what is that that looks like an ambulance somewhere 
in those photos and they still require another ambulance or whether the facility requires two more 
ambulance. Maybe, they can tell us it is in a garage that requires a bit of mechanical repairs but do 
not ask us for another ambulance because I think we have fro m your document. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Member for Naivasha East Ward.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I do belong to this Committee . The one thing 
that I am really afraid of is that both us and the Chair  are very busy making some documentaries 
to fill some shelves because even from the lamentation of the Chair , it is as if we are being asked 
for a thesis by a certain Department  or University because we are doing so many and yet, we are 
still complain ing of non -compliance.  
I come from Molo and when I went to Molo with the Deputy Speaker today, some things have 
really struck my mind. Remember we had shared some of these things, that why do we have 
Assemblies in the Counties? Why are we in existence? Wh y are we called Honorable Members of 
Nakuru County ? It is because we need to do an honourable job and that is the job that the 
Committee  is doing; to make sure that we revive.  
There are some issues that are really detrimental which some of them are really catastrophic. For 
example, we know and it should be that all Department s must produce quarterly Report . Therefore, 
whatever we passed, we need to see whether in the quarterly Report , that was achieved.  
This House  does not work in a vacuum. Any time our House passes some Bills, Report  and 
whatever we do pass, that is why there is an Implementation Committee  that after 6 months, it 
does follow on what should be done or what ought to have been done.  
There is a problem that we are having as an Assembly . The H ospitals require a marshal plan. What 
we are doing, we have a very good hospital and good buildings but we lack the accompanying 
cranial manpower to run such a Department . What we have been doing and I think the Chair  
Budget Committee , because from us and the Governor, he is just a nose and the eye. He looks 
closer, even some call him the Governor’s boy.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Hon. Member for Lakeview Ward?  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Is Hon. Karanja in order to insinuate whatever 
he is insinuating?  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is he insinuating?  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Mr. Speaker sir, I do not know he is just being sarcastic. Who is the boy 
here?  
Hon. S tanley Karanja: Mr. Speaker sir, you know, I would like to be a Governor’s boy but now 
I have no capacity because he has already filled the vacuum. Therefore, it is good. I am giving him 
power and that is why he is the Chair person  of Budget Committee . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! We do not have boys acting on behalf of other Leaders 
in this House . You need to withdraw such statement. There are no boys here.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Mr. Speaker sir, that one is withdrawn. Semantically speaking, I was  
meaning that the person who is very close to the ear of the Governor that is why I used the word 
boy to mean, somebody who is of interest to the County .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Honorable Member for Kabazi?  
Hon. George Tallam: Thank you  Mr. Speaker sir. To honorable from Naivasha East Ward, some 
of us are in this Assembly  for the first time. I wonder these words that you are using, like 
carcinogenius, can you kindly define to us so that we can be able to understand what is 
carcinogenius.  We do not know whether you are abusing us in this House . Kindly define to us.  
Hon Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I was just insinuating that some things are 
gene tical. What we can say is that a problem that can kill but people cannot find a c ure. I am just 
being on earth so that you can board the bus. Let me go to point number 2 before I am distracted 
by people who want to look at phonological part of you.  
The Hospitals in this County  require what we …  
D SHARON  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : … can call a person with Marshall Plan. For those people who know 
history know what I am talking about. It is all about the American Revolution. Mr. Speaker we 
need a Marshall plan. Somebody who will take this County  from point A to point B. My problem 
has been that and Hon. Njuguna knows. Last Assembly  we said that if Njuguna was a Chief Officer 
or Chief Executive Committee  Member we could be very far because of his research. We need a 
CECM or CO with a revolutionary medical mind who is visionary and als o pragmatic. S omebody 
who can stand and show course where we are headed to and where we are but currently I am sorry 
to say  that we have and I am not insinuating the ones that are there but from what Hon. Njuguna 
has been complaining of and what you all k now is that we have a vacuum both in terms of mental 
and in terms of capacity so Hon. Njuguna will keep on lamenting. He will keep on being a hardened 
producer of documents that will last in the shelves because he has done that faithfully and he has 
also m ade us run like machines producing Report  after Report  without action.  
Therefore what we want to do Mr. Speaker and I said this yesterday, we need to call the Department  
to order. It should not be that because King’ori died then the whole Department  died.  I want to ask 
Hon. Njuguna to invite the CECM and the CO in the Committee  of the Whole so that we can talk 
these things out and if at all it means impeachment then why not impeach so that we can see that 
some of these things are going on. I am speaking li ke a revolutionist, like somebody who is a 
Marxist and somebody who needs us to see far and I think because Members are also sons of the 
Marxism Philosophy , then we will truly  go far . I support the Document.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Memb er for Malewa West. 
Hon. Francis Kuria : Thank you Hon. Speaker. I rise to support this Report  and Motion . Hon 
Karanja was a Literature teacher and that is the reason he is using these terminologies ; we will get 
used to them with time. When I look at this Report  there is a lot to be done. Firstly, 7.2 acres of 
land is a very big piece of land yet we cannot prove the owner of the land so it becomes risky 
because you might find that from nowhere someone will start c laiming the land. There is a lot to 
be done for the title deed to be processed and prove that Njoro Sub County  is truly the owner of 
that piece of land.  
Secondly, that facility has no morgue .I wonder where they take the corpse s to because as a 
Referral Hospital we expect deaths and that is normal ; so where do they take their dead bodies. 
That means that that facility needs a lot of funds and I would like to urge Hon. Members from 
various Wards who have such facilities to try improve the facilities by  sourcing for more funds 
from Ward Kitty and also from the Headquarter s level. I would also like to commend the work 
done by the Chair , he is a Researcher and as a Member of the Committee  I am in support of that. 
Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Than k you the Hon.  Member for Kiptororo.  
Hon. Alex Bor : Thank you Hon. Speaker, I rise to support the Motion  but first congratulate the 
Chair  and the Health Committee  because of the good work they are doing. I also want to bring to 
your attention that just as Hon. from Malewa west has said 7.2 acres of land is a very huge piece 
of land only to find that the health facility does not own the piece of land. There is somebody 
somewhere probably sitting ready to claim the piece of land. From my area that is Kiptoror o ward, 
I have eight dispensaries and one health center and only one has a title deed so there is a problem 
in this Department  of Health and I want to support what Hon. Karanja has said that this Department  
needs sanity. For us to survive politically, this Department  should be checked and questioned. As 
we speak I have received several calls from my place. Yester night we lost a small kid in my 
dispensary only because of negligence of duty by somebody in tha t particular dispensary.  
If this Hono urable House  can act just as the Chair  has said then I think this problem in the Health 
Department  will be solved once and for all. I am in support of this Report  and I want to congratulate 
the team. Hon . Members, there  is a problem and even as we s it now there is an outcry o ver what 
is happening in the Health Department . Thank you.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Nakuru East.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Asante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii. Acha niungane na 
wenzangu kuunga mkono Mswada huu ambao unajadili maswala ya afya katika Kaunti yetu na 
niseme ya kwamba hili jambo la afya linatakikana kuangaliwa kwa njia ambayo inastahili kwa 
sababu ukiangalia bajeti ambayo tulipitisha hivi majuzi, hii Idara ya Afya ndio imechukua pesa  
nyingi kutoka kwa bajeti. Si jam bo la kutabasamu kuskia kila mmoja akizungumza analalamika 
kuhusu hali ilivyo katika hospitali zetu. Kwa h akika ningependa kuambia Mwenye kiti wa Kamati  
hii hongera sana kwa kazi nzuri ambayo unafanya pamoja na Kamati  kwa jumla .  La kini pia 
ningependa kusem a ya kwamba jambo ambalo limetajwa hapa la kufuatilia yale mapendekezo 
ambayo yanatolewa na Kamati  ni jambo la kusikitisha sana kwa sababu tuko na Kamati  ambayo 
inatakikana kufanya hivyo.  
Tuache kusema kuwa sisi bado ni wageni . Ni wiki mbili ama tatu amba zo zinakuja na tutakuwa na 
mwaka mmoja katika hii Nyumba  kwa hivyo ningependa kila Kamati  ifanye kazi yake na pia tusiwe 
mbwa wa kubweka tu bali tuwe na meno ya kubite .Sitaki kuita  watu mbwa lakini ni jambo ambalo 
limesemwa tusiwe tu watu wa kubweka kwa sababu hii Nyumba  tunaangalia makadirio ya pesa 
na kama wananchi wa  Nakuru we need to have value for money and if we have to , just like Hon. 
Karanja has said  that if we need to bite we have to do that because it is not business as usual 
anymore Mr. Speake r sir. I have just asked for a Statement but you can see the recurring trend. We 
are talking about health issues in our County . I really need to urge Members in Implementation 
Committee  to act and let us see them rolling the coin. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Menengai and then the Hon. 
Member for Soin.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok : Asante Bwana Spika kwa kunipatia hii fursa na kwanza kabisa ningependa 
kumpongeza Mwenye kiti kwa kuleta mswada huu pia ningependa kuchangia kwa kusema ya 
kwamba ni vizuri ama kama ingewezekana itakuwa vizuri Zaidi tukipatiwa nakala maalum 
ambayo itatusaidia Waheshimiwa wa pale mashinani ili waweze kufuatilia zile kazi haswa kama 
ni za hospitali. Kama kuna supply ya dawa pale pia Mheshimiwa mwe nyewe anafaa kuhusishwa 
kwa sababu hata mimi mwenyewe ukiniuliza kama hospitali za kule Menengai West  walipata dawa 
kwa hakika siwezi jua kwa sababu wanafikisha dawa hizo bila kumfahamisha Mheshimiwa ama 
bila kupitia kwa ofisi ya Mheshimiwa ambaye anawakil isha sehemu hiyo. Ningeomba kwamba 
tuhusishwe pia tupatiwe hiyo nakala ili wakati kazi inafanyika pale mashinani au dawa 
zinapelekwa pale mashinani tuwe na sehemu ambayo kidole kinaweza wekwa ama sahihi ya      
Mheshimiwa ya kuthibitisha kwamba kazi hiyo i mefanyika, dawa tumepata na wananchi 
wameridhika na wajibu wetu kama Waheshimiwa. Asante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Hon.  Member for Soin.  
Hon. Degaulle Naburuki : Thank you Mr. Speaker, as I stand to support this Motion  I also want 
to congr atulate the Chair  health and his team for the good work they are doing. He has been visiting 
facilities and I hope that he will visit a facility within my ward very soon. As we all know that 
health is a key issue with our people so we have to be very ready  to support such Motion s. It is 
very clear and the Chair man said that during planting season people do not go to hospital and I 
wish to know what method they are using or maybe they do not get sick during planting time. This 
Report  is a replica of  a hospi tal known as Soin hospital in my ward whereby there are no drugs 
and other services are missing in the facility and the next hospital in the neighborhood is Baringo 
County  all the people from this side cross the border to the other side. I want to request this 
Committee  if at all they have time to visit my ward  and see what is there because there are no 
drugs and we do not have services like the x -rays and also a theater which is very important for 
minor surgeries and it would be very paramount for my peop le. I just stand to support this Motion  
and I hope the Chair man for health will visit my ward to see what is there. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Kamara  
Hon. John Maritim : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I rise to support the Motion  and also to thank 
the Committee  on Health for the great job they have done. These findings have triggered a lot 
especially us as Hon.Members in that I believe that people responsible for this are th e CECM, CO 
and others. I think in future when we are appointing these people or vetting we need somebody’s 
profession in a given field…  
E SIELE  
  Hon. John Maritim:  Like when you say for health should have either must be a doctor from a 
given institution;  because a person who knows like now a teacher would understand all students’ 
feelings in school. A teacher would understand that this student didn’t feed or didn’t get any school 
fees and things like that. So, in future I believe this honorable House  we s hall look upon the 
education background and professionalism such that we cannot play with our health system. 
Another thing also that I was saying is that the Committee  on health has set a good precedent in 
that all our wards/ sub counties we have some heal th centers and I believe this are problems we 
are all going on through. I recall where I come from, Kamara ward, and I live along the highway 
where there are some two health canters but they have no medicine; just buildings which have 
been dilapidated, van dalized. I think the best thing that can be done is that the Chair  of Health 
Committee  you should do it as a movement throughout the sub counties such that sub counties can 
also be heard. Thank you Mr. Speaker I do support.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the Chair person  on Health you be having an 
opportunity to respond. The Hon. Member for Shabaab.  
Hon. David Macharia : Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I arise to support the Report  by the Committee  
on Health and also commend the good work the Committee  is doing. Actually, the Committee  on 
health is making other Committee s look like they are not working because of the very many Report  
they have brought to this House . However, I believe that there is a plan to take most of our 
Committee s for trainings and ho pefully in the near future we shall be having as many Report  such 
as the ones being brought about by the Chair  Health into this House  and the Committee . As I sign 
out, I do not know when the Committee  on Health will be coming to Nakuru West Health canter 
that is in Shabaab Ward because yesterday, we had a Report  for Bondeni maternity which is in 
Nakuru East and now I do not know how or they bypassed my ward and landed in Njoro yet I am 
in the middle of  these two health centers. Therefore, I kindly request the Chair  Health to pay us a 
visit at Nakuru West Health center then maybe we will assist each other. This is because we also 
have other prime land that is being grabbed in Shabaab ward and I think it is a matter of priority 
that the Committee  visits the area and they take note of the problem that we have there so that they 
can assist me in following and taking back that land and bring it back to a public property. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker and I support th e Report . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Gilgil, deputy Majority Leader  
The Deputy Majority Leader  (Hon. Rose Njoroge): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I have stood 
here to congratulate the Committee  for the work they are doing, the hard wo rk and also the Chair  
and bearing in mind that in the previous term, he was still the Chair  in the same Committee  and I 
understand why he is bitter when it comes to lack of implementation of the Report  that they have 
brought in the House . I also want to ec ho the fact that there are some hospitals that have been built 
on properties that have no title deeds and now we have some people who are claiming the 
ownership of the land. You find the same cases in Gilgil where there is a dispensary at Karura 
whereby a private developer has come out claiming the land. I would like maybe to urge the 
relevant people that they should not be development allocated to land with dispute because you 
see they are hindering development. So, we want to develop the dispensary but we  cannot because 
there is a dispute. I would also like to invite the Committee  in Gilgil and I do not know whether 
they can extend the visitation to the health centers and dispensaries not only the Level -Four and 
the Level -Three hospitals and in Gilgil we h ave Psychiatric Hospital which is also very needy and 
we are expecting that any time the National Government can take it and help in funding the 
hospital. All the malpractices in this hospital we believe they are inherited from the previous 
governments or officers who were relaxed in their works. Therefore, in this Government let us 
have hope in the government of the day and I believe that they are going to do something and 
improve on it rather than having a notion of impeachment at this hour because I beli eve that in the 
course of the year, we shall have good results and we shall see what we shall have achieved by 
then. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the Chair person  of Health Services Committee  
responds  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaur a: Thank you Mr. Speaker, I am much obliged actually to respond to the 
members concerns and to begin with; there is a concern that has been raised by Hon. Member for 
Maiella, Hon. Jane Gituku, on issue of Clinicians . It is true Mr. Speaker that majority of Clinicians  
there they have been employed by the facility; those accommodated by the facility in the previous 
arrangement that they had and therefore felt that they were not comfortable to have carried that 
burden of employing thes e Clinicians  and they were hoping that the Executive through the 
Department  of health, could employ enough Clinicians  to serve that facility. Some of them that 
were serving, due to the way they were being remunerated, they felt that they were not comfortab le 
working in that facility and if they can be given enough number; bearing in mind that is a Level -
Four facility, something can be done. On the issue of Kshs 5.6 million, that is something that we 
raised yesterday and we said that actually that Her Excell ency the Governor through the Council 
of Governors, they can intervene whereby where you find that these facilities they can be given 
reimbursement from the NHIF; can be done on time as they do to private facilities. On the issues 
of digitalizing drugs, in deed the County  lacks system to track the drugs to the patients and if that 
can be done, I believe things are going to improve and therefore the level of spillage  that we 
detected can be reduced. The ambulances that is there at Njoro facility serves the Nj oro Sub County  
and in instances where a mother was at the Njoro facility and ought to be referred to PGH at that 
level, there can be com Motion  bearing in mind that the Njoro population at Njoro Sub County  is 
high  and  the other bigger facility like Lare, Mau Narok facilities and also the one in Mauche 
which is also big; if the ambulance can be in those areas, actually going to rescue a patient, you 
realize these major facility that is Level -Four for Njoro, then the patients are prone to suffering 
and there fore it is good if they can be given additional ambulances to support them. Mr. Speaker 
on the issue of implementation of Report , we take the blame we have Implementation Committee  
in this House  which I am also a member but we would wish that all the Repor t that are passed here, 
let it be a routing and a tradition that once a Report  has been tabled in this House  with 
recommendations; after certain period of time, we ought to see the results from the Committee s so 
that we do not feel demotivated or as if we are doing some work or that it’s not perceived as if we 
are out of order. On the issues of Kiptororo we are going to follow up that matter to establish why 
that kid or child died at our dispensary. There ought to be some procedures even trying to refer 
that kid and therefore we need to and we are going to seek for the Report  as far as that dispensary 
is concerned. On visit to Soin that is Mogotio Dispensary Level -Four as they call it, we have a 
program which we are following it; I believe that one of these good days we are going actually to 
be at Soin so that at least we can take note of what is happening there. Equally to other facilities 
including  the Gilgil facility and also the Nakuru West facility at Shabaab. We have a schedule that 
we are following and I believe that one of this good day we are going actually to find ourselves 
there and we are going to come up with Report  of as far as those fac ilities are concerned. Mr. 
Speaker on the issue of patients going to during the planting season, you reali se that majority of 
the local people in Njoro are farmers and even if you call them for a meeting and where we come 
from in Molo; if you call them for  a meeting even when they are planting, they will suspend 
everything to be on shambas  and that is why you could not see maandamano  in our areas because 
Mr. Speaker, we usually respect a lot of issues on land. When it is raining we concentrate on the 
issues  of land and perhaps that is the reason why they do not go to hospitals.  
On the issue of professionalism and this one is in the reference to what Hon. Karanja said, not all 
matters that call for impeachment and not all matters under all Department s that c all for persons 
to be  professional s in certain fields. Mr. Speaker, in the last regime at the National Government, 
we had Hon. Mutahi Kagwe being the Minister for Health and he did not have  a professional 
background to matters Health but the way that perso n was managing those issues of Corona, was 
extremely commendable because Hon. Mutahi Kagwe was ever on  the issues that w ere happening 
and he really tried to control the issues of corona.  
Therefore, it is a matter of understanding and goodwill as well as dedication towards whatever is 
happening and I can say maybe the Department  inherited a lot of bad things and that is why they 
are trying to steer this vehicle towards the direction that we believe we are going to arrive at our 
destination with guarantees.  We are hopeful because we said we have resources and all that it takes 
for the Department  to go to the right direction. However, if these matters can be captured by the 
Department , we believe things can be a bit better. On the issue of Kamara we have some times and 
according to our schedule which we are following to the latter, we will find ourselves to the 
Kuresoi North and Kuresoi South which we are yet to visit because on our schedule, when we 
intended to go there, it was during rainy season and we have tentatively rescheduled ourselves 
during January or when actually rains have subsided that is when we will find ourselves in Kuresoi 
North and Kuresoi South. Currently and sometimes back we went there and our Nissan van could 
not cruise some of those terra ins and therefore I believe we will find ourselves there and move 
across the County  to generate Report  which we will be coming up with recommendations that we 
want a certain Committee  and Department s to follow -up and make sure that the recommendations 
of the Committee  will be implemented to the latter so that we can save the population that we have 
in this County . Mr. Speaker I beg to request this House  to pass this Motion  and thereafter we are 
going  to seek statements. Somebody told me that via the tradition of this House  I cannot request 
for a statement or seek a Statement from a Committee  which I am a Member. I wish to differ that 
and wish to request that those traditions they outdated and we want to say any Member via our 
Standing Order have a right to request for a Statement. We are going to request for these Statements 
as far as the implementation of these Reports  are concerned; either at Committee  level or at 
Committee  of the Whole where we are today so that we can ignite that process and we can make 
sure all the Department s are working and also the Committee s that we have fear are working. 
Otherwise Mr. Speaker I want to rest my case and request this House  to pass this Report . Thank 
you. 
The Spe aker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Chair . I want to put it to question  
Question proposed that this House  adopts the Report  of the Committee  on Health Services on the 
visit to Njoro Sub County  Hospital held on 24th May 2023 tabled on the floor of the House  during 
the Morning Sitting ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
This House  is adjourned to Tuesday next week 9.30 AM 
The House  rose at 4.45 PM 
 
 
 