COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday  28th February, 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 02:55 PM  
 [Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware) In the Chair ] 
PRAYERS . 
MOTION  
VISIT TO PROVINCIAL GENERAL HOSPITAL (PGH)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  We have a Motion  from Hono urable Njuguna 
Mwaura, the Chairperson  of the Committee on Health Services . Is he in the  House or a 
representative of the Committee? Maybe  we can get another Membe r to move the Motion.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok : Mr. Deputy Speaker , I think we should adjourn because the quorum does 
not meet the threshold of this  Motion . 
Hon. William Mutai: Mr. Deputy  Speaker I concur with my colleague Honorable Member ; it 
is like the Member s of the Committee  are not ready to champion and give direction concerning 
the Motion . I beg that this Motio n be moved to another day.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Honorable Deputy Speaker I would like to bring to your attention 
that the  Chai rperson  for the Committee  on Health Services is in the House.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  Welcome Chairperson, there is a Motion that is 
supposed  to be moved by you.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Thank you Mr. Deputy  Speaker , I want to apologi se that we have 
arrived late from two facilities that we had gone to visit to see how they are conducting their 
business and also so as to make recommendations as far as Health Service delivery is 
concerned. I rise to move a Motion that this House  adopt a Report of the Committee  on Health 
Services on the site visit to Nakuru Level 5 Hospital ( PGH). It is true the Committee  on Health 
Services proceeded to PGH to see how the members of the public are attended to and we went 
there on a mission . This is because the PGH is the Apex Facility for this Count y and therefore 
we felt that if we begin with the Facility we  were going to get a clear picture of how our 
Facilities are.  
We visited different  Department s whereby we visited knowing that all the Departments that 
we have at the  PGH are also in the ground Level which are Level 4, Level 3 and Level 2 and 
whatever challenges  were there we thought were the same and the Member s when they come 
through the Report will confirm that the same challenges that are there are the same challenges 
that they are going through in their facilities. The objective of the visit was to access the quality 
of services offered to the members of the public, the working environme nt of the staff of the 
facility, the challenges the staff are encountering and make recommendations as far as the 
objectives are concerned.  
When we went there, we visited the  Outpatient , the Inpatient, Administration Block , the 
Auxiliary Services Units  and the Speciali sed Clinics . We also visited the Waste Management 
Site where all the medical waste is taken but unfortunately  we found that Department was 
inactive because the machines had broken down . We said that once we post the Report the  
Committee on Implementation  will follow up to make sure some of the recommendations that 
are here are going to be followed. We also visited Oncology Department where we went to the 
Chemo  and the Banker and we saw that since the services began, many people have been 
enjoyi ng the services including the neighbo uring Counties. We were also made to understand 
that the patients who were being attended at KNH and the MTRH have been told to come back 
home and enjoy the services at our Referral Facility.  
The pictorials herein in the Report  show that it is true we were there and I want to commend 
the County Government of Nakuru because so far, our people are getting proper ser vices and 
attention in this department. We also went to Mothe r and Baby Wing and in this facility, we 
realised there are many things that are offered there ; we have the Gynecological Services , there 
is the Nursery  for the new born babies  and other services  that can be found in a Maternit y. The 
facility is a beehive of activities and the Medics there and Nurses  are doing what they can to 
bring on board new people to this County. This is one of the facilities that has given us a proper 
picture as a County . We also went to the Morgue  because there were complaints  and we reali sed 
the Morgue  is old and  small  for a County facility and therefore as you see later there are many 
challenges included in this Report and Members will see some of the recommendations that we 
have put forward. You will reali se that a  part from the Morgue  at the PGH  which serves a s a 
Private Morgue , we have Kwa Jack Morgue which is a County Morgue . 
The Kwa Jack Morgue carries everything including Police Cases and it is ju st a critical Morgu e 
that is just adjacent to the PGH Morgue . I can recommend that we have a proper facility there 
because not all who pass on are police  cases or accidents and we recommend that there be a 
proper facility to take care of our people. I had already commented about Waste Management 
and the Medical Waste Management and the  Committee on Implementatio n should visit there 
because of how things ar e operating there . Just two weeks ago an Organi sation dealing with 
environmental issues realised that somewhere around Kapkures  or Ng’ambo people are 
dumping Medical Waste including used syringes in the bush ; they could be Private Facilities.  
Therefore, we said if the Waste Management Unit at PGH can be repaired , all the Medical 
Waste in the County  can be taken there and it will be recycled and taken to Gioto Dump Site 
and that is why we want the Committee on Implementation to make urgent follo w up as far as 
Waste Management System  is concerned.  
We also went to Trauma Cent re, which  is immediately after the Triage . When  you arrive at the 
facility the first Department to receive you is the Trauma Cent re so they can Triage you and 
see if you have any other  Medical conditions that need attention but the Trauma Centre we 
have is very small. There was a project that was started by the National Government during 
Kibaki ’s regime and the building has stalled; it has been there for ages and it is not of any use 
to anybody and based on the fact that we are located on the Northern Corridor on a highway 
and most of the times we attend to accidents issues we are requesting that, that Trauma Cen tre, 
the Department t o collaborate with the National Government so that th ey can complete and if 
they can not we can recommend  that the County Government to appropriate some funds to 
complete the facility so that members of the public can start enjoying the services at that 
Department.  
We went to the Pharmacy  and asked on how they dispensed their drugs and we reali sed the 
PHG has drugs. They were put to task to explain  on how some  claims of  drugs  getting out of 
the facility and they explained. We also went to the Records facility and they said they are 
automating the Health Records that we have at the facility and the Department ha s really tried 
to make sure that  all the data on all  patients is au tomated .  
We also went to Emergency  and Casualty Department  and we were made to understand that 
the Department operates for 24 hours and there was acute shortage of staff in the Department 
and we said we are going to make recommendations and as far as we a re concerned there are 
recommendation s we have made concerning the same. We also went to Outpatient Department 
which is a new facility, the one the President of the Republic of Kenya  had come to see . I can 
tell you that is a Department of its own and other  Counties are coming to benchmark  and if 
things can be hastened so that it can be equipped . That Department is a hospital of its own kind 
and other Counties  are coming to benchmark there  and we reali sed that the County Government 
of Nakuru can priorit ise and the issues or challenges of the PGH will be issues of the past.  
On the first floor, there are Laboratories , the Maternal and Child Health (MCH) , there are 
Pediatric s and Dental Clinics where those services are being offered and the members of the 
public will enjoy services without walking around . If one visits the  PGH and he/she is  referred 
to the farthest Department, he/she  will get tired but with the Outpatient Block,  patients will 
enjoy services within the same floor.  
On the Second Floor, we have the Speciali sed Clinics ; we have the Dermatologist, ENT, 
Medical and Surgical  and Public Health. On the Third Floor we have Administrative Offices . 
Currently if you go to the facility and see where the Medical Superintendent , who is the 
Director of Health is sitting , you will sympathi se with them . If you see where their offices are 
you will be shocked yet this is  a hospital that makes a lot of collection and we believe the new 
block will offer a change of things so that we can say confidently that Nakuru County is leading 
in matters health.  
There are certain challenges that we believe the facility has and allow me  to spe nd some few 
minutes here because I believe if the challenges are sorted we can rest assured that Nakuru will 
become a Tourism  Centre on Health Matters . They are - 
1. Shortage of Hu man Resource;  when we  were  introduced  to the Oncology Department, 
we lear nt that people are coming from Samburu, parts of Laikipia, lower parts of Uasin 
Gishu, Baringo, Narok, Nyandarua and Kajiado and parts of Kiambu….  
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker due to such expansion of services, e veryone is flocking to PGH. 
Therefore Mr. Deputy Speaker the number of staff that they have cannot handle the huge  
population that is flocking there . Therefore, we are requesting the Government to do something 
as far as employment of staff is concerned.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you also reali se that other people from outside , that is outside the Country 
are poaching our Medics. Mr. Deputy Speaker ; we are training them, we capacity build then 
one day after acquir ing those skills they go outside in search of greener pastures. We are  
therefore  saying not only are we going to employ, but we  as we employ  we ought to make the 
package for the Medics better  so that they can comfortably serve this Republic because I 
believe our people are patriotic and they would wish t o work in this Country.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker c hallenge number two is under a transition of equipment and resources 
due to lack of staff to operat e the  same. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we reali sed that we have a lot of 
equipment, updated equipment as far as health i s concerned  yet some of the staff that we have 
recruited  cannot handle the technology that we have, including some of the current X -ray 
machines that we have . Therefore we want the County to be training these staff Mr. Deputy 
Speaker so that they can be updated as far as medical technology is concerned.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker on the issues of the Trauma Centre as I had said, that matter Mr. Deputy 
Speaker  is that the incomplete facility is showing  a bad s tate and a bad picture as far as the 
facility is concerned. Mr. Deputy Speaker if it can be completed, I believe things are going to 
be good.  
Another issue Mr. Deputy Speaker is the issue of the perimeter wall. You reali se that the PGH 
does not have a proper fencing, and therefore  Mr. Deputy Speaker w e request that the 
concerned Department visit s and  Mr. Deputy Speaker I believe things can change.  
We also noted Mr.  Deputy  Speaker as I had alluded the  microwave shredder at the  Waste 
Management Unit is not function ing. And Mr. Deput y Speaker  for instance today, we were at 
Bondeni Maternity and the waste has been heaped ; there is a mountain of waste and not just 
waste but medical waste which is a health hazard Mr. Deputy Speaker  just because the PGH 
microwave shredder and other machin es are not operational. Therefore,  these are matters that 
require  urgen t attention so that Mr. Deputy Speaker we can  rescue the Satellite Facilities that 
we have.  
There is also a dispute between the hospital and the Kenya Medical Training College 
concerning land ownership Mr. Deputy Speaker . We also heard about the philosophy of a 
needle and camel, and Honorable Duale is not in the House because he usually discourag es us 
from talking about the camel. But it was once  said that once a camel  insert s its head into the 
needle hole Mr. Deputy Speaker, it usually makes sure that the whole body go es through that 
hole.  
 Mr. Deputy Speaker PGH land was so big we gave some piec e of land to a secondary school 
in that area. And I can see the Member here. And also on the other side, we gave the Kenya 
Medica l School  but Mr. Deputy Speaker, the KMTC is actually claiming each and every part 
of the PGH and remember KMTC is not a County  Facility ; it is a Facility of the N ational 
Government Mr. Deputy Speaker. We would wish that the Department of Lands gives us the 
title deed so that these issues of land ownership can be sorted once and for all Mr. Deputy 
Speaker  because  they are preventi ng the facility from  coming up with development agenda 
because those people are trying to put a caveat as far as th e land is concerned. And that is a 
hospital and Mr. Deputy Speaker  as I said, they are just camels who just went through the 
needle hole and now they are claiming everything Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is  congestion at the morgue and as I said , it is because of unclaimed 
bodies from the facilities and therefore Mr. Deputy Speaker that Morgue needs a lot of 
attention ; at leas t it should  be expanded.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker the Committee sat down and came up with the following 
recommendations.  
1. The County Government of Nakuru through the County Treasury should allocate funds 
for recruitment and hiring of staff, refurbishment of the infrastructure that is including 
the perimeter wall and repairing of the Cold Rooms at the PGH in the Financial Year 
2023 / 2024.  
I am happy Mr. Deputy Speaker that we h ave the C hairperson Budget Committee who 
is also a Medic and also a Member of Committee o n Health. And I know Mr. Deputy 
Speaker that he is going to take it up because it is his profession ; he is going to do 
something as far as that is concerned Mr. Deputy  Speaker.  
2. The County Government should intervene and ensure that the Trauma Centre is handed 
over to the County for completion.  
I am happy Mr. Deputy Speaker because last week or two weeks ago, His Excellency 
the President of the Republic of Kenya Dr. Wil liam Ruto was at that facility  and we 
can say he is aware of the same and we wish to see and to request for responses from 
the necessary Department; t hat is the Public Works Department  Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
as far as this is concerned .. 
3.  The County Governmen t of Nakuru should ensure that the microwave and shredder 
machines are operational for effective and efficient waste management in the hospitals. 
Not only in that facility Mr. Deputy Speaker, but also the Satellite facilities as I said 
Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
4.  The Department of Land s and Physical Pl anning should liaise with the Department of 
Health Services to solve the land ownership tussle between the two Institutions  Mr. 
Deputy Speaker . If the issues of land will continu e escalat ing Mr. Deputy Speaker , you 
can be rest assured we will find even where we have constructed the Mother and Baby 
or the Banker , we will be told we are in the wrong place and we will be surcharged Mr. 
Deputy Speaker for constructing our facilities in a land that belongs to us Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Therefore, we are requesting the Lands Committee Mr. Deputy Speaker 
together with the Department of Lands through the Implementation  Committee  to 
process the issues of the title deeds as far as th ose facilities are concerned.  
 
5. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also wish to suggest amendments to the Report and give 
further recommendation Mr. Deputy Speaker because there are also teething issues of 
NHIF at the facility. Currently Mr. Deputy Speaker the Facility  is owed by NHIF Kshs 
50 million which is accruing from the past quarters and current state of the facility I 
think we are at Kshs 100 million debts that are owned by the NHIF Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
There is a continuous delay of reimbursement for our facilities not only the PGH Mr. 
Deputy Speaker  but the rest of the facilit ies. That is why Mr. Deputy Speaker  you see 
that our facilities are walking on their knees . It is b ecause the NHIF is not reimbursing 
our facilities on time. And we are requesting the Department of Health together with 
the Ministry of Health in the National Government t o work out on the way the facility 
will always be reimbursed on time so that the facility can offer proper services without 
struggling.  
6. Six is on the issue of staffing Mr. Deputy S peaker because already we have said about 
hiring . Mr. Deputy Speaker there is a bunch of staff  who are underutili sed. We have 
Specialists in our facilities and the y just com e to the facility for two hours then the y go 
to their private clinics yet we are paying them Mr. Deputy Speaker. I can tell you , and 
the Medics in the House can con firm that one S pecialist can be paid up to a tune of 
Kshs 700,000 . They are paid even better than some of our MPs in the Country Mr.  
Deputy Speaker but these Specialists do not report to work.  Mr. Deputy Speaker We 
are saying, it is time for the County Government of Nakuru through the Department of 
Health and also the Public Service Board came  up with a way they can supervise th ese 
mem bers of staff;  they can do so by introduc ing the biometric system of registering 
those who are in the facility. And also the workload must be proved that when these 
Specialists report to work they at least attend to a given number of patients Mr. Deputy 
Speaker . Today if you go to the PGH and we have all those Specialist s, you will find 
that they are referring the patients to their clinic s and they even decide when they are 
going to take their patient s to the theaters and therefore I would wish that that one to be 
captured Mr. Deputy Speaker.   
7. The issue of Human Resource Department in our County , you reali se that PGH alone 
has like five doctors who are under Medical Training and they are servicing Kenyatta 
(KNH) and also Kenyatta University F acility. And also MTRH and the st aff that belong 
to Nakuru County Government rather than being paid by the National Government they 
are paid by the County Government and yet they are not offering services to us.  
One of the Medical staff Mr. Deputy Speaker can go for a  full year for Medical 
Training ; those are r esources that are spilling away  Mr. Deputy Speaker and we are 
recommending that the Department should sit down with the Ministry of Health and 
craft ways whereby those who will be under training, because training  is the 
responsibility of the National Government  Mr. Deputy Speaker, they can tak e care of 
them ; they will be paying them whenever they are on the training.  
If these recommendation s are going to be put into actuali sation I can assure you, Mr. Deputy 
Speak er, we are going to be on the right track  and t hings are going to run smoothly  Mr. Speaker  
Deputy.  I beg to move that this House adopt  this Report so that these re commendations can be 
implemented so that when we will be going to other facilities  we will be comfortable knowing 
that our Giant Facility is in good shape. And by so doing  I can say  Nakuru people will be in 
safe hands Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
The Deputy  Speaker : Thank you Hon. Njuguna let us get a seconder. Hon. Wamariamu  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker. I do hereby like to second the R eport 
that th is House do adopt th is Report.  Mr. Deputy Speaker you know when Hono urable Njuguna 
talks and you know he really like s issues of Health , you may not add a lot  and we also adopt 
becau se he is our Chair and he is the de-facto . But Mr. Deputy Speaker let me add two issues 
as I second. One, today we also visit ed two hospitals. That is Langal anga and Bondeni that is 
where Hon. Fadhili comes from but he was absen t. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the PGH ought to be 
a Referral Hospital and  that one, I think it should be like that b ecause that is what normally 
happens up to today. That is where we are having a lot of congestion. Today when we went to 
Langa Langa and to Bondeni , we fo und that the only thing you need to do is to have somebody 
who is really controlling the hospitals when coordinating , such that you do not have people 
going to the PGH while they come from Bondeni yet there is a hospital in Bondeni offering the 
same servic es. 
Therefore, I do plead that one should be a Referral Hospital so that everything can go well.  
Number two, Mr. Deputy Speaker as we talk, there are issues that the Council of Governors 
rather than it being a Council or visiting the President ’s area, shou ld be doing one of these 
issues and I think we have our able Clerk here and that Health was devolved  I think we shou ld 
have the extent of what  was devolved to the Counties. That is what we should be knowing  
because currently we are talking about a hospital  that is in Level Five, in Level Six, yet they 
do not have the autonomy of running themselves. That is where we are going wrong . The 
Counties  for example Nakuru County is supposed to run the PGH but when a Doctor moves 
out he moves with the services yet the County is left to pay.  
That is what has been happening where we mount some lights in terms of Mulika Mwizi  and 
the rest  and the MP does so but the County is left to pay . The Counties have been given very 
minimal support that you suffocate these hospitals with clients, yet deny them money power.  
Therefore, I think these are some of the things us Members should engage in so that we can 
run. The last one is on issue of land. You know Hon. Njuguna gave out that example of th e 
issue of the needle and the camel and that is why God made sure that it will never come to be. 
You will never see a camel pass through the hole of a needle . It will remain as Njuguna talked 
about ; just the way he was taught by his grandmother , he will al so continue saying that the 
reason is because Mr. Deputy Speaker we cannot have the issue of land …The Provincial 
General Hospital was the original owner of the land and yet we had the County giving out the 
tittle deed last time. We said where we have publi c Institution, they should be given tittle deeds. 
Now we continue talking about the same. The first thing that should happen is that public lands 
should be given tittle deeds. Otherwise we will have those Institutions without the power to 
control the issue  of land.  
I thank the Health Committee. During the last Assembly it did well and in this Assembly, it is 
doing well but what we should do is to make sure that those people leading the Health 
Committee are also healthy such that when you stand like my Chai r, you are not suffering from 
ailments that you can control.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware): What are you trying to insinuate Hon. Stanley?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Mr. Deputy Speaker you know we have a very able Chairman and also 
we adopted Hon. J ohn Macharia but now they are not able to control their mass.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware): What do you mean by mass?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Mr. Deputy Speaker sir I do not want to expose Hon. Njuguna’s 
situation because now he is not fine. He w ill tell you he is not okay.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. What parameters is Hon. Karanja 
using to say that I am unhealthy? The only person who can confirm whether I am healthy or 
unhealthy is my wife. I can tell you I am healthy 100%.  
Also, I request the Chairperson Welfare Committee to make sure there is a gym around. After 
this, I would have gone to a gym. Thank you.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Mr. Deputy Speaker sir, you see I was not lying. His conclusion has 
said that he is unfit.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Let us not get into that Hon. Members; the 
Report has been tabled and it has been seconded and it is open for Debate.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. First of all, I would like to commend 
this document. On page 13, since I am not a Member of this Committee, people have been 
pointing at me asking if I was among them because the picture is not that clear and I think Hon. 
Njuguna and the team will improve about the picture. Secondly, I would like t o comment about 
the visit that they made recently and it is a good job. I would request the team led by Hon. 
Njuguna to visit the Provincial General Hospital at odd hours so that they would find the state 
of the service that is there. If they visit at nigh t, I believe they will come with a good and 
reasonable  information because at night many people have been visiting there and …  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Order Member! Kindly use good language.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok: Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. The services at night is very low. Most of the 
doctors are not around. Only nurses are operating at night and we cannot get services from the 
clinical officers.  
Recently, I met a grandmother who served as a nurse at the Provincial General Hospital and it 
was v ery unfortunate she told me that the old buildings are the same and they are being used 
to date. Through Hon. Njuguna and the team, we would like to improve the structures so that 
at least we can have new structures that can accommodate a big number of pat ients and doctors. 
Also we need our hospital, the Provincial General Hospital to pave way to other Sub -County 
Hospitals to come from Level 4 to Level 5. The Provincial General Hospital reflects the image 
of Health Facilities that we have in Nakuru County a nd we want it to improve from Level 5 to 
Level 6 so that it will pave way for other hospitals to come up.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Hon. Member. Hon. Alex.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. First of all, I want t o thank Hon. 
Njuguna. This is a gentleman who I have come to like in form of leadership. In the few months 
that we have been here, he is a Chairman who has taken Members of Health Committee to 
various Hospitals. Today we toured two hospitals. Last week we toured Naivasha Hospital and 
also Provincial General Hospital. He is an industrious man and I see a Health Cabinet Secretary 
in my Government in future.  
One thing that I have come to learn from these visits in the Hospitals is that some of the things 
that are not working well. When we visited the Provincial General Hospital, I was amazed to 
see Health Records being backdated to the last 10 years and still the people who have died even 
up to 15 years ago the staff still have the records. You will find that respiratory diseases will 
occur out of the papers that are decomposing from that situation hence, I urge all Nakuru 
County Health Facilities to be updated  so that we can have an interlink on Patient Information 
from one Centre to the other.  
We visited the Cancer Centre. You will find that it is one of the biggest in this region. In fact, 
the Chairperson refers to it as the Health Tourism Generator within N akuru County because 
they have patients from across Counties and across Regions coming to this Facility. What will 
amaze you is that it is only the Radiotherapy that is working there. Cancer is a major disease 
that is affecting our people within this Count ry and within this Region. As such, you will find 
that for us to treat cancer very well, we must incorporate Chemotherapy because that is the 
only way we shall help our patients not go to other regions like India or even Nairobi. In other 
words, this is a World Class Facility but without the Chemotherapy part, it will not serve the 
people well.  
We have an Oxygen Therapy Centre within the Provincial General Hospital and it is so amazing 
that the Facility is in another world. I do not know even whether it wa s built by people who 
have come from this Country because you will find that recently, we suffered from Covid -19 
whereby you find that the Country was going short of oxygen but Provincial General Hospital 
has a facility that can generate oxygen that can se rve the entire Country but this Centre has 
been underutilised because I would expect that all people taking their patients to the Pediatric 
Unit, those are very young children who require oxygen therapy and as such, we would like it 
to be factored in that there be piped connectivity to all the beds within the Pediatric Units within 
and also to the Mother and Baby Care Unit at the same Centre.  
I heard one of the Members complaining of a picture that has been taken on page 13. I would 
like to confirm that th e gentleman at the back is not him because maybe he thought of the long 
hair and the picture is depicting him. The picture was taken in black and white; that is a Morgue 
and when you are going to a morgue, there is no business of taking beautiful pictures there. I 
think you will spare the Chairman Health Committee on that.  
The Outpatient Department, you will find that we have machines that were used to control and 
contain the queues of the patients who are there.  They are no longer operational and you fin d 
that most of them have been damaged. I find that these visits to the hospitals, these Reports 
that are being generated should be encouraged to other Departments and in so doing, we can 
help our people in such a manner that the Medics can be accountable t o the people, to God and 
to our taxes. I want to commend this Committee and I am a proud Medic and I say that I feel 
very good serving under Mheshimiwa Njuguna. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Mheshimiwa  Kanyere.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. First, I want to commend the 
good work that has been done by the Committee on Health and to highlight on the issue that 
they have recommended. I picked one of them and for me, I find that it is a seri ous issue on 
matters to do with Medical Waste Management. There have been mushrooming Private Health 
Clinics and Hospitals. I would like this Committee to recommend that each and every clinic 
should account for waste management because it has become a mena ce. As the Chair Health 
has said, it was shared in one of the groups whereby we saw some medical waste being dumped 
on riverside and that is so hazardous. I would like this House to recommend that each and every 
clinic that comes up should have a Waste Man agement Mechanism so that they can account 
for their wastes. Also in the Report, they have given out the clean bill of health on matters to 
do drugs. I would like to bring to the attention of this House that we have an issue when it 
comes to drugs. Our pat ients are being sent out to buy drugs in private chemists. This has been 
a routine for quite some time and it has been found that most of the doctors within our Public 
Facilities are operating these chemists. I think the Chair should dig further into this issue of 
drugs.  
On the matter to do with the elevation of these Facilities to Level 4 to become fully fledged 
Hospital. In my Ward, I have a hospital by the name Mirugi Kariuki Dispensary and it was 
built sometimes back and it has some wards which are supp osed to be used by patients. I would 
like to report to this House that those wards are being used as drug stores and people are crying 
out. This Government should come up with mechanisms to put up some drug store. My Ward 
is being used as drug store and th ose facilities are not used as they are supposed to be used. I 
would like to invite the Committee of Health to my place so that they can ascertain what I am 
saying.  
Matters to do with the Trauma Centre, I think this issue has been brought up clearly. This was 
an issue to do with regime change. When the regime changed from Mwai Kibaki to the regime 
that was there, that became a stalled project. As it has been reported here, our President was 
there the other day. I would like to recommend that the Government should do something about 
the Trauma Centre because if we can jog our mind back when and why the Trauma Centre was 
brought up, it was brought up during the time when we had that issue of Sachangwan fire and 
God forbid, we should not have such a thing but a s a County, we are not prepared. We should 
give priority on that Trauma Centre.  
There is an issue to do with Specialists. It has been brought up clearly that most of our 
Specialists in our facilities are operating their own Private Facilities and you will rarely find 
them in Government Facilities. We should have  a way to have value for money . Our Doctors 
or Specialists should account for what they are being paid for. With those few remarks I would 
like to support. Thankyou.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph N gware): Thank you. Hon Gatuso.  
Hon. Benard Gatuso : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir for giving me this wonderful 
opportunity so that I can give my input. I believe, especially we as Leaders and for those 
working in Health Facilities, we have a role to play . The first thing we are supposed to do is to 
educate our people or sensitise them Referral Hospital. If they get to understand the use of other 
Level Hospitals, it will be easy for them to realise the Preventive or Promotive Health Measures 
that are to be  taken.  
Secondly, we are supposed to provide regular trainings for officers working there because to 
some extent attitude is an issue within the Hospital Fraternity. If they can be trained frequently, 
they will be able to realise how they are supposed to receive and take care of patients as they 
undergo all the treatment and all the services within the hospital. The other thing I believe 
Njuguna has put it well in terms of Human Capital, there are some existing gaps that are 
supposed to be realised. The Co unty Government or whichever entity that usually facilitates 
them with the resources should employ so that we can have enough Human Capital to serve 
our people. The other thing is about our equipment; as much as PGH has enough facilities, we 
need to get mo dern facilities and equip them so that proper services can be offered.  
Lastly, we have been having problems in terms of Pending Bills that are making things not to 
roll within the hospital. That is another thing that has to be considered so that the Healt h 
Facilities can serve our people effectively. I take this opportunity to commend the Health 
Committee for the job well done and I stand to support the Motion. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon Joseph Ngware): Thank you. Hon. John.  
Hon. John Maritim : Tha nk you Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also rise to support this Motion and 
also to commend the Health Committee for the good job. I picked some issues here about the 
mortuary. There are some Cold Rooms that are not functional. When we talk of mortuary, it is 
a plac e where dead bodies are stored. When the mortuary is functioning and there are bodies 
in there, then it means that there is a lot of congestion. I believe the Government should come 
up with a regulation stating that when a dead body stays in a given place for more than four 
months the Government should do a disposal by itself so that we can decongest our mortuaries. 
Another thing is about the Specialists.  We have been told that most of them are absconding 
their duties. The best thing we can do is that…  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon Joseph Ngware): What is it Hon. Wathiai?  
Hon. David Wathiai:  Mr. Naibu Spika, nimesimama kwa sababu tulisema hii ni Nyumba ya 
sheria na pia tukasema kwamba tukikuja hapa tuwe tumevaa kama waheshimiwa. Mr. Naibu 
Spika Mwenzangu  pale hajavalia tai.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok:  Point of order Mr. Deputy Speaker. Even Hon. Wathiai himself is not 
properly dressed. You can see how he has put his necktie. It is not properly placed.  
Hon Stanley Karanja : Mr. Deputy Speaker, when a Member stands on a point of order 
because he wants to make sure that the House is properly in order, you do not raise another 
point of order to counter the other point of order before the other one is substantively answered. 
It is as if there is a hide and seek or someb ody wants to make sure that it escapes your attention. 
Hon. Wathiai was alerting the Chair that something is in a mess and somebody else stands to 
point to the contrary. One is saying that this is not in order and that other one is coming up with 
the issue  of how the tie is. One has a tie but the other one has no tie. Mr. Speaker you should 
consider where the rules and regulations are not there.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): thank you Hon Member. Sergeant at arms Can 
you look at John and confirm  whether he is well dressed. Is he well dressed? Hon John kindly 
do the necessary. Thank you. We proceed. Yes Hon. Wathiai.  
Hon David Wathiai : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker and thank you Hon. Karanja for 
supporting me. Walikuwa wamenipangia lakini ya Mungu ni mengi . I rise to commend the 
work of the Health Committee. Congratulations to the Chair and the Committee for the good 
work that they did by visiting the PGH.  
Secondly, I would like to urge my fellow Members to please keep this Report  that has been 
given by the Committee on Health safely because I believe that if at all this Report is 
implemented, we will need to have this Document in future so that you can see the good job 
this Committee has done. Watukuwa wametupatia masomo na hata sisi wenyewe tutaw eza 
kufanya Ripoti nzuri kama hii kwa Kamati zetu mbalimbali.   
The Deputy Speaker ( Hon. Joseph Ngware): Do you want to be informed? Are you informing 
the House or the Hon Member?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : The House.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon Joseph Ngware): The House? Kindly.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Mr. Deputy Speaker the reason why we normally rise to back the 
Motion is because one we have read, digested, synthesized the Report and seen that whatever 
that has been brought is of help. I th ink you do read the body language and eye contact, the 
Member was not ready to contribute. Synchronizing the mind and the Report is becoming a 
problem.  
The Deputy S peaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Hon. Wathiai.  
Hon David Wathiai : Mr. Deputy Speaker, sitamlaumu ndugu wetu kutoka  Naivasha. Unajua 
watu wa Naivasha…  
The Deputy Speaker ( Hon. Joseph Ngware): Maybe you can prove him wrong by the content 
you have released.  
Hon. David Wathiai : I will take that as an advice because he has  been here more than twice. 
Maybe next time when we come here, I will be like you. You are one of those great minds that 
we have in here. I can take your mind and also Njuguna Mwaura’s mind. I have come to realise 
that Hon. Wamaitha is also as brilliant as  you guys. Sasa hizo zenyu zikichemshwa nikunywe 
nitakuwa kama wewe.  Anyway mine was just to commend the Committee. I would like to say 
that if this Report is going to be implemented then in future we are going to have a good 
Referral Hospital that will be  in Nakuru Town West and not in Naivasha. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Chairman Roads.  
Hon. Francis Kuria:  Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to support the Report but first I 
would like to congratulate the Committee starting with the Chair. I want to mostly emphasise 
on the Trauma Centre. We visited the same. The building that was constructed back in 2010 
has not been utilised for now and it is still not completed. As it is, it is getting older. It is of my 
great concern that that building if by any chance the County Government can be handed over 
that project it will be of great benefit to the residents of N akuru County. I therefore Mr. Deputy 
Speaker request the County to fasten the process so that building can resume and the services 
can be offered. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Hon. Member. Hon John you can 
proceed from wher e you left.  
Hon. John Maritim : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. Members are now in decorum. Okay 
I was talking about giving out a big up to the Committee on Health and there is an issue of snap 
check on the specialists. Snap check is a surprise visit to a ny given place. We cannot notify 
them that we are coming; we just make that snap check so that we can ascertain that they are 
there or whether they are doing their businesses there. I would like to urge the Chairman Health 
to be doing these snap checks and  I think things will be okay. Another thing that the Health 
Committee has shown is that we need to emulate what they have done. We as Finance 
Committee are planning to go out so that we can come table such a Report for us to ascertain 
that we are doing som e business.  
On the issue of pictures, I think the County Government of Nakuru can afford to buy a coloured 
printer. Regardless it being a hospital like what my friend has said about the morgue we need 
to see its colour so that we can know if the wall is d ilapidated or it is okay. I rest my case there. 
Thank you very much.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Hon. Nene from Elementatita. I thought your 
hand was up? Hon. Nene the floor is yours.  
(Laughter ) 
 
Hon. George Nene : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker  though I was not prepared but I want to 
take this opportunity to thank the Health Committee for coming up with such a Report. You 
will notice that our Health Facilities not only the PGH but the other facilities that have been 
captured here are facing seri ous problems especially with staffing and drugs. As we speak there 
is a facility in my Ward that serves a whole location but the doctor passed away and she has 
never been replaced. It is not only that dispensary, I have other three dispensaries that operat e 
with one doctor. I want to appeal to the Ministry of Health to ensure that they do something 
with staffing because the people are really struggling. The other challenge is the drugs. I do not 
know whether the drugs that are supplied in our hospitals are not enough neither do I know 
what is happening because two weeks after the drugs were supplied in my Ward, there was an 
outcry from common mwananchi  that they cannot access the drugs that they need in our Health 
Facilities. Therefore the issue on staffing and drugs are issues that need to be taken with a lot 
of care because they are the ones that are challenging our Health Facilities in our Wards. Thank 
you. 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Hon. Member. Hon. Kirui from 
Barut.  
Hon. Ben Kirui: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise to support this Report from the Health 
Committee. Kando na kuunga mkono niko na jambo kuhusu  NHIF pale PGH kwa sababu kuna 
wagonjwa huwa tunapeleka hospitali. Mgonjwa akitaka kulazwa, kuna maswali yanaulizwa 
pale Casualty  kama Mgonjwa anatumia NHIF ama analipa  cash. Unapata mgonjwa ambaye 
amepelekwa pale hana fahamu kwa wakati huo kwa hivyo anaandikiwa kuwa hana  NHIF. 
Wakati mgonjwa atakuwa a nahitajika kutoka aende nyumbani kuna zile pesa ambazo 
anapaswa kulipa ilhali mgonjwa ako na kadi ya  NHIF lakini kwa sababu hakuandikishwa ule 
wakati aliletwa akiwa hahisi vizuri. Mgonjwa akijaribu kwenda kufuatilia wanakataa kwa 
sababu hakuwa amewajulisha kuwa anatumia kadi kwa hivyo lazima alipe  cash. Ninasihi 
Kamati ya  Health waweze kuangalia hapo kwa sababu kuna wagonjwa wengi ambao wanabaki 
hospitalini na wako na kadi.    
Ya pili, tuko na  dispensaries especially kule kwangu tuko na  Kelelwet ama Burgei Dispensary 
imejengwa vizuri iko na kila kitu ; all the equipment ziko kule ndani lakini kufunguliwa ndio 
imekuwa shida. So pia nilikuwa naomba  Committee of Health waweze kutembelea hizo 
facilities waangalie vi le mambo iko w aweze kuleta Ripoti ndio hizo hospitali zifunguliwe 
ziweze kusaidia watu wa Bar ut. Asanteni.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Members it is like we are exhausting the debate. 
Yes Hon. Member  
Hon. Ann Wamaitha:  Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker for giving me this opportunity to talk 
on behalf of women of Nakuru County of whom I rep resent. First of all I want to thank the 
Committee on Health and the Chairman for a commendable Report. I want to talk about Mother 
and Baby Wing that we have. It is a true testimony it is one of the type of quality service we 
get. It is an assurance that the women of Nakuru, the mothers and children of Nakuru are getting 
quality  services.  
However, with every large facility we have disadvantages and I would like to have and ensure 
that we beef up the security at the Mother and Baby Unit so that we avoid ch ild trafficking just 
like Pumwani which is known for child trafficking. Thank you Mr.  Deputy  Speaker  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Can I proceed and put it to a question ? What is 
your feeling Members?  Yes Chairman Health . 
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Concerns that ha ve been raised and it will be prudent for me to 
respond so that the status can be known before you proceed to put it to question   
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you; yes . 
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Can I respond from here Mr. Deputy Speaker ? 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Yes you can . 
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : There is an issue that Hon. Rottok raised about doctors and nurses 
not working at night and weekends. Yes we are a ware with my V ice Chairperson ; we have 
been visitin g facilities at odd hours when everybody is comfortable that nobody is coming and 
we reali sed that there are those gaps and we said there should be biometric identifications of 
the staff who have reported on duty and they should also prove that they have s erved us and 
the people of Nakuru. Therefore that one we are pushing and I am requesting the Committee 
on Labour to take over on that matter because supervision should always go to the Labour 
Committee so that each and every Committee can address various c hallenges that they are 
going through.  
We have also talked about the old buildings . It is true there are old buildings ; that was a Military 
Barracks sort of Facility but we have already said there is a new Outpatient Department that is 
coming up that will  be a game changer because there will be a facelift of our facility and I 
believe that things are going to change.  
On the issue of accreditation of the PGH to a Level Six, it is true our facility is of that status 
but if we risk taking it to that  Level Six, it will no longer be our facility but a National 
Government Facility. However, there is a conversation around that we can make it a Parastatal 
of the County Government of Nakuru making the PGH a Parastatal of Nakuru County where 
it can comfortably  be managed by County Government of Nakuru so that we can put a caveat 
to the National Government from interfering with it.  
On the issues of the Health Records, it is true some of the documents that are there are as old 
as I am and they are trying to upda te them but because of the challenge of Human Resource 
they are going slowly but we believe one day they are going to do away with everything and 
that facility is to be automated including the Health Records.  
And the issue of Cancer Centre, it is true that the only  difference and  we the Member s visited 
the Banker because it was a new concept but Chemotherapy is still offered . There is a 
Department down there offering Chemo S ervices and I can comfortably say that we are a 
Regional Referral Cancer Centre.  We are offering both Radiology services and also the Chemo 
service. We are comfortably saying with whatever we have we can manage it. We are doing 
well and we can supply oxygen to other regions.  
On the issue of the biometric, the banking systems of ident ifying the patients , we recommended 
that but they said they are moving to a new Outpatient Department and they are going to equip 
it so that the patients can be identified by the machine to avoid queuing  whereby patients keep 
on complaining.  
On the issue  of waste management, it is true we are also short of bins and I am requesting 
Chairperson Environment tog ether with the Health Committee, we can sit down and come up 
with a Bill on the issue of Medical Waste because that is a thorny issue that we have not  
invested in. I can promise that as a Public Health which is Environmental H ealth, we are going 
to try our level best so that we agree  on the issue of waste management.  
On issues of drugs, it is true there has been rumo urs that drugs end up in private che mists and 
we are in discussion on how to put system s of drug tracking so that everything can move 
smoothly. We already saw what happened in Nairobi where the Governor got some drugs were 
being sold to the private persons who actually own the chemist s and o ther facilit ies.  
On the issue of drugs, it is true some of the facilities including Bondeni Maternity is a County 
store. Their wards are used as County stores and we did not know that at Mirugi Kariuki is also 
a Store. There is a Bill and I will ask those who are from the medical background including 
Hon. Alex that we need to come up with Referral Management Bill so that we can manage 
people who are flocking the PGH and yet we have certain facilities that can offer  same services 
sought at the PGH. I will invite them to a cup of tea so that we can discuss this matter as far a  
On the issue of the pending bills, it is true our facilities have huge bills that are yet to pa id to 
the suppliers and the rest. There are issu es that the PHGH has very huge debt amounting to 
more than Kshs 300 million. Th ese are the issues that we are saying they need to be addressed 
so that we rescue that facility from the bills so that they can concentrate on development and 
also buying drugs and pay staff that they employ. The Cold Rooms at the PGH Morgue are in 
bad shape and not only that facility  but all County Morgues are not in good sha pe and this 
needs to be checked .  
On issue of Trauma Centre, I have already discussed  that but also on is sues of pictures and 
printers. I want to request the C ounty Assembly, because they will be here for reference it 
would be prudent that they should be giving us colo ured pictures so that the Members can 
clearly  see them. That was making Hon. Member from Sha baab to miss the proper  views as far 
as the Report is concerned.  
Also on the issues of other facilities l acking drugs, it is a teething issue because of procurement 
issues. We engaged Her Excellency  the Governor on one meeting and she said something is 
being done and we are waiting to see how to sort some pharmaceutical and non -
pharmaceuticals in our  facilities.  
On the issue of the Health Protocols, if a nurse is not reporting at a facility, it as the prerogative 
of MCA to report to the necessary team who  lead at Sub County. Each team lead is responsible 
at Sub County facilities and should be contacted and it will give somebody to stand  in for the 
absent medical staff . It is true on issuer of N HIF if a patient cannot be captured during their 
first day when they arrive at the fa cility, it will be hard to prove that patient ’s presence at the 
facility. For the facility to claim reimbursement, the details of the patient are to be captured on 
the first day so that the facility can offer services. The biometr ic registration and the biometric 
system of capturing the data concerning the patient, if the patient was in a critical condition, it 
is the responsibility of the nurses and person who is admitting to confirm whether the patient 
had the cover with NHIF.  
On Mother and Baby, the issues of security, we have installed CCTV , there are security guards 
the County ha s hired some of the guards who usually ma n that facility to avoid issues of child 
being stolen. Therefore on the issue of security, we do not wish to say its maximum and next 
time when we go there, as a consultant I will be able to have  my view as far as security is 
concerned.  
Finally, I wish to request the Hon. Members who come from different Wards to be going to the 
Health F acilities to check what  is happening there because it will take time for us to go round 
all the facilities. They should request Statements from this House  and we can be responding to 
them and those staff reporting will know they have been put on check. Today at 5 am I was at 
Nyayo Hospital in Elburgon and I want to request Hon. Members to do routing checkups so 
that if they find any issue of concern, they can come here and request Health Committee to 
make site visits and make certain recommendations on their status.  
I also request Members to attend Board meetings of Health Facilities. According to our 
Hospital Management Boards they are Ex-Official Members and so they should attend and give 
views because they are representatives of their clients. So I wish to request the House to ad opt 
the Report and we are going to make sure that once adopted, I am going to put to task the 
Implementation Committee Chair to follow up th ese issues, and after three months, I will wake 
up to request for  a Statement as far as implementation is concerned.  Otherwise I beg this House 
to pass this Motion.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Hon. Member, I want to thank you 
for the good work you are doing and the Committee Members input. Members I would like to 
propose question . 
(Question proposed that this House adopts the Report of the Health Services Committee on 
the site visit to the Nakuru Provincial General Hospital on 24th November 2023)  
(Question put and agreed to)  
The Liaison Committee Members I shall see you after this p lenary session  
This House stands adjourned until tomorrow 9.30am  
The House rose at 4.15pm  
 
 
         