OCTOBER 18, 2022                                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tues day, 18TH  October  2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 12: 40 pm 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
MEMBERS OF COUNTY ASSEMBLY SERVICE BOARD  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   I have a Communication  to make. Honorable  Members , as you 
are aware the Majorit y and Minority Parties in the House are expected to nominate their 
representative s to the County Assembly Service Board pursuant to the provisio n of Section 12 (3) 
(C) of The County Government Act Number 1 7 of 2012. In this regard, I wish to direct the 
respective Parties to submit their nominees latest tomorrow 19th October 2022. Thank you . 
PAPER  
COMMITTEE ON SELECTION REPORT  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  There is a P aper to be laid by the Leader of the Majority Party.  
The Majority Leader (Hon. Alex Lang ’at): Thank y ou honorable  Speaker , I wish to lay before 
this Hous e the Pape r on the County Assembly of Nakuru Third Assembly , First Sessio n Committee  
on the  Selection Report, which  has sat and have been able to apportion  Members into the various 
Committees  of this House. I table .  
                                                  ( The Paper was laid on the table)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  Thank you, Honorable Members , we want to take responsibility 
that we started late today  because we  had some challenges in getting the Papers ready for the 
Report in terms of printing, we take responsibility, and we want to say that in the future, we will 
be more efficient.  
Honorable Members as we proceed , the Paper laid will be supplied to you as the Session  is ongoing 
and if you are not able to get then as we get out of here there will be a table where the Sergeant -
at- Arms will be able to furnish you with the necessary Report. Next order.  
OCTOBER 18, 2022                                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 NOTICE OF MOTION  
HOUSE ADOPTS SELECTION COMMITTEE REPORT ON NOMINATIO N OF MEMBERS TO 
VARIOUS COMMITTEES   
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  There is a  notice of Motion  from the Leader of Majority Party. 
Majority Leader (Hon. Alex Langat ): Thank you Honorable Speaker , pursuant to provision of 
Standing Order No. 156 , I give a Notice of Motion;  
THAT  this House adopts the Report of the Committee  on Selectio n on the nomination of the 
Members  to the Sectorial and the Select Committees , thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   Thank you, next order ? 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
THE HOUSE TO CONSIDER THE ASSEMBLY CALEND AR 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  There is a  procedural Motion by t he Leader of Majority 
Party...  
The Majority Leader (Hon. Alex  Lang’at ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, sir. I beg to move a Motion;  
THAT, Notwithstanding the provision of the Standing Order 49 , (Notice of Motion ), this House 
resolves to consider the Assembly calendar, which is attached to the  Order Paper, as proposed by 
the House Business Committee pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 181 (4) ; I submit.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   Thank you; that is a P rocedural Motion. Members take note that 
is a P rocedural Motion, and we need first of all to dispense off with it. So, we need a second 
Member to second the Motion. Hon. Minority L eader . 
The. Minority L eader (Hon. Phillip Wanjohi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I second the Procedural 
Motion as proposed by the Leader of Majority  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   Thank you. I know the Motion is that notwithstanding the 
provisions of Standing Order 49. The one concerned about the Notices of Motion. This House 
resolves to consider the Assembly Calendar attached to the Order Paper as proposed by the House 
Business Committee pursuant to the provisions of Standing Order 181 (4),  the Motion is open for 
debate. Hon. Stanley Karanja.  Mheshimiwa Stanley Karanja.  
 Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And also the Leader of Majority and Minority 
Party. I first of all start by supporting the  Motion o n the calendar. Mr. Speaker also  when you 
critically scrutini se this calendar because it is the first one in this session, I do think that if you go 
to second part that is the long recess that starts on 1st December Mr. Speaker runs up to 13th 
February 2023. It is sc aring that we just came  and we are leaving. But Mr. Speaker I do suggest 
OCTOBER 18, 2022                                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 that having it dispensed  and done with the agendas that the Majority has read on the Committees 
that at this particular t ime, we do a program so that this  long vacation recess can be utili sed 
properly. It is my request, Mr. Speaker that we do not leave Members…  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   Hon. Karanja there are two Mo tions. The one is to shorten the 
time for the debate from when it is supposed to be and pro vide that with the Motion is tabled and 
discussed. And if it is adopted, then if the Procedural Motion is supported, we proceed to the 
Motion. So, the first business is to look at the Procedural Motion whe ther we reduce the time that 
is allowed for Notice of Motion and the time that debate is done.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Speaker I think that is in order . I do  support . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  So does it mean that we put question ? 
Honourable Members I Put question that notwithstanding the provision s of Standing Order 49. 
This House resolves to consider the Assembly Calendar attached to the Order Paper, as proposed 
by the House Business Committee, pursuant to the provisions of standing order 181 (4).  
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
MOTION  
THE HOUSE APPROVES THE ASSEMBLY CALENDAR FOR THE FIRST SECTION OF 2022  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Motion by the Leader of Majority Party.  
Hon. Alex Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I beg to move the Motion;  
THAT, Pursuant to the provision o f Standing Order 31 and 181, this House approves the Assembly 
calendar for the First Section of the year 2022 as contained in the scheduled attached in the Order 
Paper. I submit.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): A Member to second the Motion.  
Hon. Peter M aina: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I do second the Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Motion is that pursuant to the provision of standing order 
181, this House approves the Assembly calendar for the regular sessions for the first session for 
the y ear 2022 as contained in the schedule attached in the Order Paper. The Motion is open for 
debate.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion that has been 
moved  by the Leader of Majority that we approve the calendar that has been presented to us. In 
every organization, there is always a break. Although like one of the Member said before is that 
the members are not sure what they are supposed to do with this break because they have just 
OCTOBER 18, 2022                                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 come. However, there is always a prog ram that is provided for and I wish to thank the House 
Business Committee for coming up with this program which will guide us until next year. 
However, the gaps that are here, it is important that we know what we can fill this gap with  training . 
Most of us  do not know the difference between a Motion and a procedural Motion that came up 
last week.  
Therefore, if time allows, these gaps that are here that something be provided where Members will 
go for an induction so that they are aware of their roles in the  House; they are also able to bond 
because even as we speak, probably we do not know one another  well. There are also terms that 
are used here; short recess, sitting days, long holiday and long recess. Those are the kind of 
terminologies that we should be inducted on so that when we come back, we are well furnished 
with the information and the terminologi es that are used in this House. I support that the Motion 
by the Leader of Majority that we approve the Assembly calendar. I support.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Leader of Minority has just supported.  
Mheshimiwa Karanja  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I do echo what the Minority Leader has said 
that we fill the skeleton with meat. It has been very tiring for some of us who went to Wanjiku to 
look for votes and yet we will be forced to go back there. If you check that one; the long recess 
from December to January and you know how the calendar has been. It has been the clapping of 
the Nyayo era, funga fungua.  Can we do somethi ng on here so that the Members can at least have 
pocket compliance. With your wisdom, I will urge you do something. All said and done, it is a 
good program and I think it is good we adopt it. I do support.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Peter.  
Hon. Peter Maina: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Allow me to commend the House Business for 
the job well done. I want to believe that this was their first sitting and they have already proved 
that they are up to task because they have already brought a very s ubstantial schedule that is well 
thought out and well scheduled. I want to refer to the second part, part b, with regard to the long 
recess. It is my humble prayer that now that Committees will already be formed, we could use the 
long recess for training s o that different Members in different Committees can be trained on their 
mandate in different Committees. Thank you …  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri ): Honorable Peter Palang’a.  
Hon Peter Palang’a : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I wish to contribute to this particula r Motion by 
agreeing  with the Honorable Members that indeed the calendar is what gives us a schedule, a time 
frame and a plan on what we want to do when and where and it also guides us.  
For the new Members I think it is important to note that we will be adopting the calendar from 
time to time in terms of giving us a schedule on how we move . I want to draw my attention to the 
OCTOBER 18, 2022                                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 very areas my predecessors have mentioned about. We are scheduled to go for our long recess 
from 1st December and I am of the sugges tion that we have just formed the Committees and these 
Committees as they are going to be operational, they are going to take over some of the issues that 
were handled by the previous Committees in the previous Assembly.  
It is true that there is a backlog  of some duties and work to be undertaken. In this regard I am 
looking at the long recess starting from 1st  December running all the way to February , I am of the 
opinion and if Members can agree because this something we can domesticate and approve within  
ourselves, that we reduce this time frame. We reduce the time we are proceeding for this long 
recess and at the same time we look at the time within which we have to resume back to the 
Assembly. Given that we have already wasted quite some time from the t ime we were elected, up 
to now and from the time we are commissioning operations in our respective Committees.  
Considering what is ahead of us Mr. Speaker, even the kind of work we have to undertake, the 
budgetary allocation and all these kind of stuff. M y suggestion, if Members will agree is we push 
the dates we are to start our long recess to around 8th or 9th December before Jamhuri day. Then 
also reduce the time frame we are supposed to come back to between January 20th and 3rd February 
So that we can catch up with the work that is ahead of us. We do not want to just be in office on 
papers but we want to be in office and at the same time on the ground performing what is expected 
of us.  
I suggest that we adopt this Motio n with amendments in terms of the dates within which we have 
to proceed for long recess and also reduce the time frame within which we have to end our long 
recess. That is my humble submission if Members can look at it critically in terms of what we have 
to undertake. Thank you.  
The Speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri ): There is an important Communication to make in regards to the 
foregoing that the Committee sittings will go on and then the calendar that we are approving is 
only for plenary sittings and of course yo u know what is happening as far as the Salaries and 
Remuneration Commission (SRC) circular is concerned about the plenary. I think all the concerns 
will be addressed when all the Committees are formed in terms of Committee meetings.  
The other Communicatio n to make is that the Office of the Speaker and the management will look 
into how to utilise the long recess. The Committees have to be trained, inducted and capacity built. 
So it is not lost on us and we have ways because this is a very creative Assembly and I know with 
the creation of the Committee on liaison that should not be something difficult. I want to assure 
you and assure the House that all those concerns will be addressed when all the Committees are 
properly constituted.        
 I propose the que stion that  
(Pursuant to the provisions of the Standing order 31 and 181, this House approves the Assembly 
Calendar for the First Session in 2022 as contained in the schedule attached to the order paper).  
OCTOBER 18, 2022                                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 (Question put and agreed to)  
Hon Stanley Karanja : Mr. Speaker I stand on Standing Order no. 1, Having done Standing Orders 
19 through 21 and having a new chambers the one we are in, I do request that the sitting 
arrangement for the Leadership  be considered…  If you look at the way it is, the Minority Leader 
is displaced here, the Majority Leader is somewhere there.  
Mr. Speaker we need to have order so that we are able to face the Leadership and identify them 
easily. Now if you ask who is the Minority Whip, we cannot trace them easily and therefore we 
need to  have the desks labeled so that we know when the Majority Leader is absent or when the 
Whip has absconded duty and therefore other than Hon. PM sitting anywhere even where he is not 
supposed to be, I really urge the House through your management to have th e sitting arrangements 
tagged so that we know the Majority Leader’s siting position and any other House Leadership 
team. As of the current position, I cannot identify them and thus they should sit where we are able 
to see and identify them …right now you ca n only see s omething looking white. . 
(Laughter)  
When he is there, I am able to identify him or her. You know there is something called facial 
expression and the eye contact. You can be able to know when that Leader is depressed and you 
can also know when t he situation dictates that things are good. When you see Leaders smiling, you 
know even Members pockets are smiling and thus we need to see their facial expressions.  
Can the leadership sit somewhere where we will be able to see them so when we do not have  
money we can visit them? Not coming and intermingling with us and we cannot identify them. 
Therefore can they be located in a strategic place? Otherwise that is my request. I can see Hon. 
Wanjohi is depressed  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon Wanjohi wo uld you want to confirm whether you are 
depressed or not:  
(Laughter)  
The Minority Leader  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): No Mr. Speaker I am not depressed I am okay. 
Thank you  
(Laughter)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Njuguna.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, if you view the other chamber, you realise that 
the other chamber is also labelled and we can request that this chamber be also labelled. On that 
issue, I would wish to request that whoever will be the Chairperson of the Welfare, Mr. Speaker 
we are squeezed in this chamber.  
OCTOBER 18, 2022                                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 In fact standing right now is a crisis, we have been requesting that our normal duties should be 
conducted from the other chamber , but whenever we have the v isitors we can be coming to this 
chamber. It is very uncomfortable here and sometimes sitting for some of the tall Members and I 
sympathize  with them because they are squeezing their feet and even actually clapping as our 
tradition on this House is impossi ble.  
Therefore Mr. Speaker what we are requesting is that let the chamber be labeled and then thereafter 
we can go to the other chamber. I am making that request because to some extent it is unhealthy 
to be in this chamber for long and therefore I wish an d I believe that you are going to take cognizant 
of that so that we can be feeling comfortable when we are discussing matters concerning Wanjiku 
in this chambers.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you , that is noted.  
COMMUNICATION  
MEMBERS SECURITY  
Something I need to communicate about security. That whereas the Assembly assures Members 
of their security, we request that Members take care of their belongings including their handbags, 
laptops and their phones because the Assembly is able to t ake care of an Hon. Member when you 
are within the Assembly precincts.  
However the Hon. Member is supposed to take care of his or her belongings so that we can enhance 
your security totally.  
ADJOURNMENT  
The House stands adjourned until today 2.30pm.  
(The House rose at 03.15pm ) 
 
 
  
 