COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 6 th  June 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:30 AM  
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
WELCOMING MEMBER S  AFTER SHORT RECESS  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  I take this opportunity to welcome you back from a 
repose that was designed through our Legislative Calendar to afford Members a unique chance to 
deliberate on pertinent issues affecting their El ectorates. As our traditions, this off  the  P lenary 
break is meant to give  Members ample time to have meaningful discussions with Nakuru residents 
without interruptions from Chamber  activities.  
It is therefore my hope that Members have come back more energi s ed and readier  to continue 
deliberating on the important legislative agenda before us. As required by the Standing Orders, the 
respective Assembly Committees and individual Members  are expected to finali s e B usinesses 
before them and present the same to the House Business  C ommittee for allotment of time.  
Hono u rable Members , as  you may all be aware, the Assembly , despite limited resources allocated 
to it, always strives to provide Members  with necessary resources to facilitate in discharging their 
Constitu tional mandate. This include s  organi s ing for capacity building, training workshops and 
other consultative meetings with key stakeholders.  
In this regard, it is my expectation that Members  appreciate these forums by carefully isolating 
issues that require legislation and policy direction for further deliberation before the floor.  
Hono u rable Members, permit  me to underscore the important role  Committees play in the 
legislative realm. Committees are the engine of the House and are expected to be more engagin g 
in generation of B usiness for the House. As such, they are expected to come up with elaborate 
work plans to guide their operations throughout the year. It is only by so, that the  House will be 
best placed to have a structured and meaningful approach to l egislation and oversight. The O ffice 
of the Clerk is therefore directed to facilitate Members  with the required technical support to the 
respective  Committees when called upon.  
Hono u rable Members , permit  at this juncture to remind Members  of the pending B usiness before 
the Committees:  
 
 
PENDING PETITIONS  
1.  Petition by the Torobeek Community of Nakuru County Seeking the intervention of the 
County Assembly regarding to resettling and legitimi s ing their existence in the  County 
–  Committee on Lands ,  Housing and  Physical Planning  
2.  A P etition by residents of Kiplemeiwo village, Kiptagich Ward, Olenguruone S ub - 
C ounty seeking the County Assembly through the relevant  C ounty Executive 
D epartment to undertake a fresh plot allotment  and  Public Participation exercise of t he 
plots in Kiplemeiwo village –  Committee on Lands ,  Housing and Physical Planning  
3.  Petition by the displaced person living in Parkview Sub - Location, Mwariki  Barut Ward, 
(Bordering Lake Nakuru National Park) due to rising water levels caused by Climate 
Change -  Committee on Environment, Energy, W ater, and Natural Resources.  
4.  Petition by Mr. Kennedy Mugo, a resident of Gilgil S ub - C ounty u rging the County 
Assembl y to intervene on motorbike sticker revenue generation system, payment of a 
non - e xisting  Firefighting D epartment and double taxation for business operating people .  
PENDING STATEMENTS  
1.  Statement requested by Hon. Simon Wanango  Concerning the Naivasha Sub - County Fire 
Station -  Committee on Disaster Management .   
2.  Statement requested by Hon. Stanley Karanja concerning the status of the Emergency Fund 
-  Committee on Disaster Management .    
3.  Statement requested by Hon. Cecilia Karanja c oncerning the status of Mogoiwet and 
Lenglent Early Childhood Education Centers in Visoi Ward and payment of the contractor 
-  Committee on Early childhood Education and Vocational Training .  
4.  Statement requested by Hon. Grace Mwathi concerning unsecured qua rries that pose 
danger in Bahati Ward -  Committee on Environment, Energy, Water and Natural 
R esources .   
5.  Statement requested by Hon. David Wathiai c oncerning the distribution of Hawkers 
Vouchers under the Youth Empowerment Program -  Committee on Budget and 
Appropriations .  
6.  Statement requested by  Hon. Antony Kamau  concerning stalled water pan ,  project in Mzee 
W anyama, Nakuru East Ward -  Committee on Env ironment, Energy and Water Resources .  
7.  Statement requested by  Hon. Ali Hassan Abdi Concerning the implementation of Access 
to Government Procurement Opportunities (AGPO) in the County Government of Nakuru 
-  Committee on Finance .  
8.  Statement requested by Hon. John Macharia Gachiri  concerning the management of 
NAWASCO Njoro sewerage T reatment P lant -  Committee on Environment, Energy, Water 
and Natural Resources .  
9.  Statement requested by Hon. Phillip Wanjohi concerning the database of Health workers 
in Nakuru Count y -  Committee on Health Services .  
10.  S tatement requested by Hon. Phillip Wanjohi concerning the revenue generated from c ess 
collection -  Committee on Finance .  
11.  Statement concerning effluents being discharged into Molo River by Daima Dairy Plant -  
Committee on Energy, Environment, Water and Natural Resources .  
12.  Statement requested by Hon. Wathiai Macharia concerning the status of annual leave days 
for staff under th e D epartment of Finance - Revenue S ection -  Committee on Labo u r, 
Gender, Youth and Social Welfare .  
13.  Statement requested by Hon. Elijah Murage concerning the status of the D epartment 
preparedness in dealing with crop pests and invasion in various parts of Naku ru County -  
Committee on Agriculture .  
14.  Statement requested by Hon. Anne Wamaitha concerning the prevalence of HIV/AIDS 
among the Youth in the County -  Committee on Health Services .  
Hono u rable Members, it  is also important to note that we are at a very criti cal time in terms of the 
Budget  C ycle .  The  Budget Estimates Paper was laid before the House  and committed to  Budget 
and all Sectoral Committees . This is very critical to the residents of Nakuru. Members are therefore 
urged to take key issues raised by the public during public participation and ensure their views are 
incorporated in the final document  
Hono u rable M embers , I  take this opportunity to once again welcome you back for the second part 
of the S econd S ession and wish you a fruitful, engaging and vibrant S ession ahead.  Clerk next 
order.  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ALTERATION OF THE HOUSE CALENDAR.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Jos eph Ngware):  W e  have a P rocedural M otion from the L eader of 
M ajority.  
The Leader of  Majority (Hon. Alex Langat):  Thank you Hono u rable  Deputy Speake r for this 
opportunity and sorry for technology  hitch  of the microphones. I also take this opportunity to 
welcome Members  back after the L ong R ecess which we have had. I rise to move a Procedural 
Motion that notwithstanding the provision of Standing Order  49  (Notices of Motion ), this House  
resolves to consider a proposed Motion  on the alteration of this House Calendar . Thank you 
Hono u rable Deputy Speaker.   
The Deputy Speaker ( Hon . Joseph Ngware ):  Thank you the L eader of Majority . Clerk next order.  
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Alex Langat):  I request  m y brother Hon .  Wanjohi to second Mr. 
Deputy Speaker before we go to the next order .  Thank you sir.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  Hono u rable Wanjohi.  
The Minority Leader (Hon. Phillip Wanjohi):  Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker,  I  wish to second 
the P rocedural M otion to proceed as presented by the M ajority L eader. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I beg 
that you put the question so that we proceed with the P rocedural M otion. Thank you  Deputy  Mr. 
Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  Thank you honorable M embers.  I want to put to 
question that notwithstanding the provision of S tanding O rder 49 ,  N otices of M otion, this H ouse 
resolves to consider proposed M otion on the alteration of the H ouse C alendar.  
(Question put  and agreed to)  
The Majority Leader (Hon. Alex Lang ’ at):  Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir, I actually rise to 
move a M otion.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, i n your opening remarks, I clearly heard you talk about a lot 
of pending B usinesses before this H ouse. There are a lot of pending S tatements which are touching 
various C ommittees of this H ouse Mr. Deputy Speaker .  
We are in consideration to the interaction of these various R eports which this H ouse needs, because 
it is like the Cy c le that we are entering  in the activities of this H ouse is quite busy Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. T here are various conclusions that actually need to be done.  
When we consider a B udget Cycle where we are at this particular time Mr. Deputy Speaker ,  the 
Budget Cyc le touches on us and touches on the activit ies  not only of this H ouse, but also of the 
entire C ounty. T hings to deal with monies, the projects that are pending and are ongoing, and we 
really need to have enough  time to do good interaction on it, so that we  can bring result s here that 
are  acceptable a nd that will end well . And I think the R ecess that we had Mr. Deputy Speaker took 
a lot of time because we had to go back to Wanjiku  to interact with them and look at the various 
projects that have been ongoing within the C ounty.  
So in view of the above Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we need some little bit more time to be able 
to interact and the C ommittees to be able to do the R eports that they are going to bring to this 
honorable H ouse so that we can debate and be able to conclusively deal with it.  
So this morning Mr. Deputy Speaker ,  I rise to move this M otion that pursuant to the provision s  of 
S tanding O rder  No .  31(4) notwithstanding, this H ouse resolves to alter its C alendar on the 
resumption date. I know we were supposed to resume today Mr. Deputy Speaker but I request that 
the House move s  the resumption date to the 13th of June 2023. Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker ,  I 
submit.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  Tha nk  you Hon. M ajority L eader ,  let us get a 
seconder. Yes Hon. Palang’a.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a:  Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker , I j ust want to second the M otion, but of 
course with some amendments.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to second the M otion that indeed thes e Honourable Members need 
some time to look at the issues at their respective C ommittees. But before I get into the details, the 
amendment that I wish to mention is the date for returning back on 13 th  June 2023.  
Mr. Deputy  Speaker, I wish to say that these  M embers have always been available at any given 
time if they are called upon to appear here. So this date of 13 th  is dragging us to a specific period 
of time to resume.  
 I wish to seek for amendments that will leave it open. As we have remained loyal to t he call by 
the S peaker and any the other person to turn up, we will turn up at any given time we are called 
upon but that date of 13 th ,  I wish to move some amendments  that we do not gag ourselves to that 
specific date.  
(Applause)  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is timely and honorable M embers here  w e are keen to deliver the services 
in our respective C ommittees. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is worth noting  that after being away for a 
month or so, within our recess, we have not had time to really consider th e businesses of this 
particular house. And because we are only like requesting to prolong the time of recess, this again 
will give these honorable M embers time to now be within the assembly precincts to be looking at 
now specific issues, not unlike when we  have been on the ground with our Wanjiku.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will also be a good opportunity for us to reflect on what we have covered 
on the ground in terms of the pressure, in terms of even ventilating so that now the M embers can 
ventilate this in their respective C ommittees as well now come up with B usinesses of this H ouse.  
 Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are the few concerns that I have, I second with amendments in 
specifically on the issue of the date. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  Thank you. Hono u rable Palang’a. Yes. Honorable 
Kajwang .  
Hon. Peter Kajwang:  Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker. I stand to also support the M otion. I stand 
to be corrected, I think  we  let you first put the question so that we can contribute to the M otion. 
Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  Okay ,  I stand guided but what we are supposed to 
do first  is  I am supposed to open the debate ; a nd the M otion is open for debate  s o  that in the course 
of the debate, now we can bring the amendments. So the M otion is open for debate. You debate 
then afterwards we are going to move the amendments as you people propose.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker for the guidance. I stand to support this 
M otion, of course with amendments. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Hono u rable Palang’a has spoken well, 
but I also want to put more flesh into it. O ne of the main reasons that we have to adjourn this H ouse 
Sine Die  is that we as Nakuru C ounty A ssembly today are standing in solidarity with all the other 
47 County A ssemblies  s o that we implement the resolution s  that we all agreed upon at KICC.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, all M embers are aware that a decision was made and issues to do with 
M embers w elfare were raised. And we have given the necessary authorities ample time to look 
into our issues  B ut Mr. Deputy Speaker as we speak today, we are still on our first 14 ; n o any 
significant progress has been made. And now apart from making B usiness for this H ouse, we want 
to make business for ourselves.  
So Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would propose that when we adjourn, we leave it open without a date to 
capture the meaning of adjo ining Sine Die.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are going to reconvene through 
the advice or consultation by the M embers and through you Mr. Deputy Speaker anytime that our 
issues have been ironed out. Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker ,  I support.  
The Deputy Speaker (Ho n. Joseph Ngware):  Thank  you ;  Hono u rable Njuguna .  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:   Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise to support the M otion  b ut also Mr. Deputy 
Speaker to also interpret what the Hono u rable M ember Kajwang ha s  said. And  also Mr. Deputy 
Speaker to request the M embers when we adjourn Sine Die ,  i t means that the House ha s  dissolved 
itself completely. And we ought to go back to the elections Mr. Deputy Speaker .  T hat is the 
meaning of Sine Die . The  H ouse has ceased to be ing.   Mr. Deputy Speak er  w hat we are requesting 
for is a R ecess ;  extended R ecess Mr. Deputy Speaker .  
T hat is because all the 47 County Assemblies had a resolution and they did pass their resolutions 
to various stakeholders who are very critical. Therefore, what I would wish to  request is an 
extension of Recess until when the outcry of the Members will be adhered to.  
Therefore, when the Members rise to amend it, we would wish to amend it and I wish to say that 
there is no Member who can invoke a certain Order that the Speaker m ust be informed 3 hours 
before the Motion was tabled. This is a Motion of the Whole House and the Members are here to 
vote for this amendment to take effect.  
A Motion of this nature is a Motion that looks like a Bill. In the Second Reading, any Member can 
move an amendment so that it can be effective. Therefore, we are requesting this House to be 
considerate of what we have said and also to vote in favour so that the County Assembly cannot 
be demeaned or can be looked down at by other stakeholders.  
We have  been carried out like primary school kids. Nobody would respect the resolutions of the 
County Assemblies but a time would come for us to say we are a Parliament like any other 
Parliament. Not once have I said that a group of baboons are called a Parliamen t. Other Houses 
and other individuals have mistaken us to be baboons and a time has come for us to show that we 
have the power and we have been donated that power by the citizens of this Republic.  
The 2010 Constitution of Kenya gave us to be taken care of like any other Legislators. There are 
3 or 4 Legislation Bodies that govern our region. The first one is East African Assembly. If you 
look at the welfare of those Members, you will wonder whether we are the same Legislators. If 
you go to the National Asse mblies, the same applies. Their welfare and support that they have 
been given is immense.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang’: Point of Information.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Yes, Hon. Kajwang’  
Hon. Peter Kajwang’: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. I just w ant to correct my colleague. I 
was just looking at real definition of Sine Die  which I think has been captured in this Motion. 
Adjournment Sine Die  is the conclusion of a meeting by deliberative Assembly such as a 
Legislature or Organisational Board without setting a day to reconvene.  
The Assembly can reconvene either in its present form or a reconstitution form if the preexisting 
laws and rules prov ide for this. Until the situation changes, we are going to adjourn Sine Die.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Yes Hon. Palang’a  
Hon. Peter Palang’a: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. I have another point of information.  
It is worth noting that last  term, the Assemblies of this Republic adjourned Sine D ie.  We all 
participated in that adjournment. Nothing happened, no resolution was done. We reconvened after 
our issues and the issues that had raised. So, there is nothing new that is coming up.  
I want to re - emphasise. Adjourning Sine Die  means you are adjourning without giving a definite 
date for you to reconvene.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Mr. Deputy Speaker sir, I was still on the floor and I am happy because 
the Honourable Members are using English Dictio nary but I was using our Standing Orders. 
Therefore, if the Members mean want to interpret it as per the dictionary, I take no offence and I 
agree with them but I was interpreting it as per our Standing Order which we will still agree at the 
end.  
I wish to  request the Members to look at our Standing Orders on the issues of adjourning Sine Die.  
That is what I meant and I wanted that interpretation as per the Standing Orders but now for the 
purpose of the Debate, I believe that the Senior Member and also Hon.  Kajwang’ have put it in 
order and I agree with them.  
If you look at the National Assembly, those Members are gods and goddesses of this Country. 
They are the ones who hold the knife to the welfare of the Members and of the citizens. Their 
welfare is take n care of by the Parliamentary Service Commission. They are treated as State 
Officers. When it comes to the County Assemblies, we are treated as Civil Servants. My question 
is, the powers donated to us and the interpretation of the Constitution as far as P arliaments are 
concerned, where did it go?  
Therefore, I request these Members to consider passing this Motion and they should not feel guilty 
because it is their rightful time to stamp their authority and also for them to be heard by the 
stakeholders and I believe we are going to resume once our demands have been taken care of. I 
beg to support.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Hon. Njuguna. Hon. Muraya.  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Thank You Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. This is also to support the Mot ion as 
our Majority Leader has said that the time that we are supposed to look into budget matters but I 
want to ask our Majority Leader that we must look into our welfare first before we look into other 
things.  
As our Senior has said that we adjourn Sine Die  because you have powers as the Speaker to call 
us. We are just around here. If any need be, you can just use your powers and also the Standing 
Orders to call us because we are much available in this Nakuru City.  
I rise to support that each one of us w e agree and we do according to what we shall all pass in this 
Assembly. I beg to support.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Hon. Stanley Karanja.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir, may I first of all take this early 
opportunity to thank these Honourable Members. If there are people who have really carried 
themselves high, it is Members of the County Assembly of Nakuru? Ninawavulia kofia.   
If I jog your mind a little bit, we had a meeting that we went to KICC. These Members facilitated 
themselves both physically, mentally and spiritually. They all went there and when we met there, 
we made some resolutions which I really like to retaliate.  
Before I go to that, let Members know that revolutions are not carried out by cowards. F or us to 
be in, somebody had to suffer. My mother had to suffer pain for me to be born and therefore, some 
of these things, one has to struggle.  
Secondly, Members must kn ow that cowards die many times. A nd for those who read the scriptures 
know very well t hat cowards will never see the Kingdom of Heaven. The other thing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker is that nobody will stand for you. This is a revolution and Members you have to decide, 
even those people who preach have to go for crusades for them to convert somebody.  You have to 
fast, even Jesus went for forty days without eating. You have only been asked to sacrifice some 
two days yet you are crying and you still claim that you want to see the kingdom of heaven; you 
will never see anything.  
Therefore Mr. Deputy Speaker let me put it in white and black. One, Members of the County 
Assembly ought to be heard, need to be heard and should be heard. It is either now or never. The 
reason why I am saying this is because I am getting a communication h ere that Mandera County 
closed. Right now the Salaries and Remuneration Commission is in Mandera because their 
Governor talked on their behalf if you remember. The Country is looking up to us so that we 
continue with what we started. Ukitoa nguo lazima uog e. Na  si mlitoa nguo ?  S asa unataka kutoka 
nje na uchafu?   
Number two of what we want to say is that there are five demands that ought to be captured that 
we talked about. One is there ought to be Ward Fund and there must be affirmative action; we are 
not b egging but it is a must. Also, we must have autonomy of this House .These Assemblies will 
never remain as a captive of the Executive and it is you Members who must liberate this House or 
are you waiting for Jesus Christ to come liberate that? It is you. So  Mr. Deputy Speaker that has 
to be done.  
Thirdly, we are halting Business of the Assembly until the time when the cries of MCAs will be 
heard.  Therefore the term here is halting; we are putting to a stop. We are not going to do business 
as the way it has  been done. The halting of the Business is that these Members and I think Mr. 
Deputy Speaker you will take a calculator maybe your salary and mine do not marry. I have my 
pay slip  which I said I will be walking with this pay slip like my ID card; whenever  I carry my ID 
card I carry my pay slips .When  you calculate that you will  see that Members have thirty four 
thousand .  
Last week we went to Kiptororo and I really sympathised with the Member. He comes from a 
place where there are no roads and I even wo nder how he goes there. This one is crucial and I am 
still waiting for Mr. Deputy Speaker to have a pen, just have your pen. Thirty four thousand coming 
from Kiptororo to here. For you have to fuel your vehicle to come to this Assembly you will use 
Kshs 40 00 to Kshs 5000 if I am not wrong. I have my friend from Maai Mahiu who is also using 
Kshs 5 500. I use Kshs 3 500 and I do not eat breakfast.  Remember that I have not had anything 
to eat, I have only come. We are here on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday t herefore multiply 
by three; simple arithmetic. That is Kshs 15 000 and that only is for transport. Kshs 15 000 minus 
Kshs 34 000 or Kshs 35 000, how much are you left with? Now Mr. Deputy Speaker go to the 
cafeteria because I will not tell you to go to one  of those big hotels here because you cannot afford. 
Go to this cafeteria here, have lunch for Kshs 500 and that time no any other Member is asking 
you for food you are only buying it for yourself. Your only stomach.   
Hon. John Maritim : Point of informati on.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : You can still inform me if at all I am wrong.  
Hon. John Maritim : I am informing you. You said Kshs 5 000 per day for three days in a week 
that is Kshs 15 000 and in a month we have four weeks so that is Kshs 60 000. You are less t hat 
by Kshs 34 000; you will have negative Kshs 26 000.  
(Laughter)  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : I could have been a lawyer, the only thing is that I did not do well in 
mathematics but I did well in History. Thank you. I wonder where John Mwangi was yet he is the  
one who claims that he is the expert in economics. If you take that simple calculation you will 
realise that Members are struggling to come to the Assembly. Mark you that nobody has asked 
you for anything, it is only transport and food.  These Members are  not living but they are 
surviving.  
Therefore Mr. Deputy Speaker what we are asking is somebody must listen to what we are saying 
and has to. I have told Members and this is simple unless you stand for yourself nobody will stand 
for you. Therefore what we  are saying is this, can we halt Business until our cries are heard? Do 
not struggle with big terminologies and big grammar. Kajwang do not struggle with what you 
cannot swallow, struggle with what you can swallow and that is we are halting the Business of  the 
Assembly. Nothing will go on even breathing in the Assembly is also a Business and we have 
halted it. You can only breathe from your home or from town not from the Assembly.  
What we are saying is that our five grievances must be heard; we cannot cont inue struggling . Kuna 
mtu alisema kuwa kuna watu wanakula kuku na sisi wanatufanya tule kama kuku  and that is why 
we are saying that we are not going to do that. As Members of the County Assemblies we agree 
and that is our stand. We are saying that the Sal aries and Remuneration Commission should use 
their head not for balancing but it should use its head the way the Constitution demands them to 
use their head. They make sure that everybody is not crying. You cannot lower the salary of the 
Member of County A ssembly and you leave the others. Hata kama wangekuwa na shida na sisi si 
basi wangetuita . So we are saying that we must be heard, they must listen to us and I do not think 
that there is any other debate; it is that we are halting and that is all. Do we re quire any other thing? 
Mr. Deputy Speaker what we are saying is simple; can you halt the Business of the Plenaries? 
Simple and clear, it does not require a dictionary, it does not require interpretation neither does it 
require any spiritual intervention.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Members. Is there a Member with a 
contrary opinion before I put it to question? Hon. Bor.  
Hon. Alex Bor : Thank you Hon. Speaker. Since all the other Hon. Members are in agreement that 
we support this Motio n with amendments, I just want to humbly request is that  you put to question 
so that we do as we said when we were at KICC. My request is that Hon. Deputy Speaker put it to 
question.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Hon. Members I would w ant we first 
make the amendments and through the wisdom of this panel we want it to read as follows  
That pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 31(4), this House resolves to alter its Calendar 
on the resumption date to a later date to be communicated upon consultation with the House 
Business Committee. Is that ok Members?  
Members : Yes.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Can I now proceed to put it to question? The 
Majority Leader.  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Langat): Thank you Mr. Deputy Speak er sir. I rise to support 
this Motion and I support it b ecause this is a House of law a nd order ,  and we have our guidance 
from the Standing Orders which is actually a bible and a compass that guides the Businesses of 
this House.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker I am ve ry privy of the mood of the House and also, I am very much aware 
about what we are all looking forward to and for sure, I am together with each of these Members 
because I am equally a Member of the County Assembly whereby we feel that our issues need to 
be  addressed.  
That one notwithstanding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our Standing Order 30 that on issues to do with 
Calendar sittings and adjournment of this Assembly talks of on sub section 3, talks of subject to 
paragraph one, the Assembly shall continue in sessi on and may adjourn for such number of days, 
we underline the issue of days as it may determine in its Calendar that is in subsection 3. No. 2. I 
would also want to bring and guide the House to our Standing Order 31 on the Calendar of our 
Assembly. We look at the subsection 3 again where it talks about on a day when the Assembly is 
scheduled to adjourn to a day other than the next normal sittings in accordance with the Assembly 
Calendar. I would not want to progress much but my main attention in terms of gui dance is that 
the issue of Sine Die  in terms of an Assembly that is living does not really apply.  
It is a day and these are guidelines; Standing Order 3 (3) talks of when we adjourn to a day; no 31 
talks of when we are adjourning on the Calendar to a day.  So, Mr. Deputy Speaker it is good to 
give guidance; we know the mood of the Country leave alone the House. Even the whole Country 
we know the mood and when we do an adjournment that is when you say no to Sine Die but to a 
day that is going to be communicated to us it is very palatable and it is legal and stands in 
accordance to our bible of the Assembly which is the Standing Order.  
So that it is not indefinite but to a day which is going to be communicated. Mr. De puty Speaker I 
arise to support that amendment because in your wise decision on how to rule, there is a paragraph 
to a day that will be communicated to this Assembly. So, I arise to support the Motion with 
amendment. Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
The Deput y Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Order Members! Hon Njuguna .  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am cognisant of Standing Order 33 
that the Majority Leader has invoked and as we said, we are not adjourning Sine Die  but adjourning 
to a later  date which means, that is self - explanatory. It means that the House Business Committee 
which is actually concerned with the calendar of the Assembly can just reconvene itself because 
we are not closing the Business of the Committees but we are closing the  Business of the Plenary. 
Therefore, it means that at a later date that is convenient with the House Business Committee and 
in consultation with the Whole House they can still recall us.  
Therefore, I wish to request the Hon. Members as amendments and also  in consideration of what 
Hon. Majority Leader has said, we proceed as you put the amendments so that we can adjourn. In 
any case, after interpretation and after the House Business Committee has sat down, we can decide 
because the normal business or legal effect of any resolution must take effect after 14 days; in any 
case, we can adjourn after 14 days but I believe that because the Committees are still running, we 
can still reconvene at the House Business Committee and can set a date and Members will be 
in formed prior when we can come back to discuss or to consider whether the other stakeholders 
that I was mentioning have adhered to our demand and they have actually made these Members 
feel as Honourable Members, not as small Hon. Members.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Hon. Kajwang  Hon. Peter Palang’a then…  
Hon. Peter Kajwang : Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker; I think we are just sugar - coating our 
intentions and I want to agree with Hon. Karanja tunafunga Bunge  indefinitely. This is our 
intenti on. T unafunga Bunge mpaka mahitaji yetu yatimizwe kulingana na vile tulikubaliana katika 
K ongamano l a  KICC and we are standing in solidarity with all other Assemblies in this move. 
Already as we speak today, there are 12 County Assemblies that have already adjourned Sine Die . 
Sine Die  just means we do not have a date when we are reconvening . Sasa kuweka h ii oh nani 
atakaa ndio turudi; hapana; sisi tutarudi hapa siku ile mahitaji yetu ya titimizwa. So  mimi nataka 
nitoe hiyo sukari ndio ijulikane Kenya  n zima.  
Hon Peter Palang’a : I was on the floor Mr. Deputy Speaker; with your permission.  
The Deputy Speaker  ( Hon. Joseph Ngware): Order Members! What is it Hon. Member?  
Hon .  Stanley Karanja : Mr. Deputy Speaker; I am just saying we have really concluded this 
debate. You know one force enough with terminology; you keep on smoothing it and therefore it 
has the same meaning and same as what we have said. What we have resolved and the Majority 
Leader has said and I feel that we do not need to go back. We have already fallen in love with the 
Motion. The only thing is now we go ahead with the marriage.  
( Laughter )  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Hon. Palang’a.  
Hon Peter Palang’a : Mr. Deputy Speaker in one minute; you put the question to the amendments 
so that we get the resolutions of the Members, the second bit of it; is you put resolution to the 
entire Motion  then we are done.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Hon. Members I want to start with the amendments 
proposed. The Motion was reading that pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 341 (iv), this 
House resolves to alter its Calendar on the resum ption date to 13 th  June, 2023. We want to amend 
that Motion to read as follows:  
( Question proposed; That pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 31(iv), this House 
resolves to alter its calendar on the resumption date to a later date to be communicated  upon 
consultation with the House Business Committee ).  
( Question put and agreed to .)  
Now I want to proceed to put to resolution as follows:  
( Question proposed; That pursuant to provision of standing order 31(iv), this House resolves to 
alter its calendar o n the resumption date to a later date to be communicated upon consultation 
with the House Business Committee ) .  
( Question put and agreed to ).  
ADJOURNMENT  
So Members the House stands adjourned.  
The House rose at  11.25am  
 
 
 
 
 
 