COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 2 1st  November 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:30 AM  
 [The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware) in the Chair]  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
MEMBERS FROM KAKAMEGA  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware ): Hono urable Members, I recogni se Members from 
County Assembly of Kakamega, Committee on Ward Based Projects, led by the Committee 
Chairperson, Hon. David Ikunza. I also recogni se staff from the County Assembly accompanying 
the Members.  
And also, i n our tradition of recognising and welcoming Members, I take this opportunity to 
welcome Hon. Duale to welcome these Members.  Honourable Duale, I am giving you this 
opportunity on behal f of the Count y Assembly of Nakuru to welcome  Members  from County 
Assembly of Kakamega.  
Hon. Hassan Ali: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker . First , I take this opportunity to welcome the 
Members of the County Assembly of Kakamega. Welcome to Nakuru.  Nakuru is a great City and 
we are the youngest City. This is the fourth City in this Country. Welcome.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker , I am happy to say that I have great friends in Kakamega , who are Members 
of the County Assembly. I kn ew them even before they were Members of County Assembly like 
me. We have Mheshimiwa Watito there, karibu sana hapa  Nakuru County Assembly; we have 
Mheshimiwa Niva. Karibuni hapa  Nakuru. I have known th em for many years.   
In Nakuru, we have many plac es to visit, even social places . You can visit there na mle, mnywe, 
lakini mlipe. Asanteni  sana .  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  Thank you.  Members w e can applaud them.  
(Applause)  
I also want to take this opportunity to thank all of you for the support that you gave me when I was 
had my thanksgiving. I hono ured and feel loved. Thanks  
MOTION  
WASTE DISPOSAL LEGISLATION  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  We are hav e a Motion from Hon. Rose Chepkoech, 
MCA Kiptagich Ward . THAT  now therefore, the County Government through the Department of 
Health Services to ensure strict compliance with stated Legislation and Regulations with regard to 
Disposal of Non-Infectious Waste, Infectious Waste and Highly Infectious Waste and Sharp 
Waste, and take necessary legal action where necessary on Institutions that fail to comply.  
I want to give this opportunity to Hon. Rose to take us through the Motion.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: Thank you M r. Deputy Speaker .  
Aware that Article 42 of the Constitution provides that every person has a right to clean and healthy 
environment which include s the right to have environment  protected for the benefit of present and 
future generation through Legislativ e and other Measures ; Noting that Health Activities protect  
and restore health and save lives, on the other hand, the amount of waste by -product generated 
through Health Services causes adverse environment impact ; Further noting that Medical Waste is 
categori sed into four categories; Non I nfectious Waste, Infectio us Waste, Highly Infectious Waste 
and Sharp Waste; Appreciating the p oor management of healthcare po ses risk of exposure  and 
subsequently , transmission of infection will result in pollution of air, water and land and 
significantly contribute to advance eff ects on Human and Animal Health ; Cogni sant that Kenya 
has enacted various Legislation s and Waste Management including Public Health Act, Chapter 
242 Law of Kenya, the Environmental Management and Coordination Act 1999 and its 
Regulation ; Acknowledging that there is Intentionally Accepted Principles which stipulated any 
other handling, managing hazardous substance and waste or related equipment in ethica lly 
responsible for using utmost care as possible ; Notwithstanding the clear cut legal provision on 
Disposal of Medical Waste, we have witnessed cases within the County where Medical Waste 
categori sed as Infectious Waste, Highly Infectious Waste and Sharp Waste,  disposed in a manner 
that is hazardous to persons especially children, animal s and environment generally,  
Now therefore, the County Government through the Department of Health Services to ensure strict 
compliance with stated Legislation, Regulation s with regard to disposal of Non Infectious W aste, 
Infectious Waste, Highly Infectious and Sharp Waste and take necessary l egal action where 
necessary on I nstitution s that fail to comply.  
I now call upon Hon. Grace Mwathi  to second the Motion.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker . I wish to welcome our colleagues and 
friends from Kakamega County. Feel welcome, feel at the right place and what you get here and 
what you find here, and go with it. Leave the worst a nd go with the best.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise to support this Motion that has been brought by Mheshimiwa Rose 
about Waste  Management. I want to support by saying that , we know that in Hospitals we have 
things that can be very harmful to our children and our animals. We know some animals are taken 
by the owners to feed outside and when they go there they get syringes, gloves, and everything 
that is thrown carelessly and it becomes harmful to them. Even our children get the gloves and all 
those things, use them to make a ball from it and start playing with it. They also use the syringes 
to harm their bodies.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to support the Motion that these harmful wastes from the 
Hospitals, the Infectious Waste, the Non Infectious Waste, the  Highly Infectious Waste and the 
Sharp Waste be put together and taken where it is supposed to be. They can recycle them and do 
the necessary things but not leave the waste for our children to play with, for our animals to feed 
on. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we k now a Healthy Nation is a Wealthy Nation and because we are here to 
maintain and keep our environment clean, we have to know that we must play a part as an 
Assembly and as a County to ensure that all those waste materials from the Hospitals are dumped 
well so that they do not harm our people. Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker I do support the Motion.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Hon. Member. The Motion has been 
properly moved and seconded and now it is open for debate. Hon. Alex.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to support 
this Motion and before I indulge in the Motion, let me welcome Members from Kakamega County 
to this Assembly. We move in the spirit of the Autonomy of the Assemblies tha t we can empower 
each other, we can learn from each other, we can make a better Nation and we can make Devolution 
the anchor of this Nation just as it was envisioned in the 1961 Constitution that never saw the light 
of the day.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a Me dic, I rise to support this Motion because products from Hospitals, 
just as stated by the mover of this Motion are very hazardous to the people. Recently, Nakuru was 
elevated to a City Status within the Republic. With that, many Multi -National Agencies wil l set 
their Businesses here.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen Hospitals being set up within this County. Whereas the County 
Government managed Hospitals have Incinerators that can take care of such products, we have 
many private Hospitals being set up wit hin the County, and in these Hospitals, they do not have 
any Incinerators. Recently Mr. Deputy Speaker we visited the Molo Sub -County Hospital and we 
were amazed that we did not even have proper Incinerators within that Facility. We have PGH 
here and the I ncinerators are better and Naivasha the same; but I am doubtful of any other Hospital 
within the Sub -County that has such Equipment.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, without such we find that most of these by -products are thrown either into 
the garbage or taken to sit es where garbage collection happens, like Giotto here in Nakuru. We 
have another one in Naivasha, and with such we must then look at how we can invest as a County 
on Waste Management because by far and large these products will be hazardous to us, and the 
future generation.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have most of these syringes, on the last day that people went collecting 
dirt from the rivers we could see from the media houses children collecting syringes from the bins. 
Recently we have seen cases of highly in fectious diseases within the County and more so to the 
children because they just take them as toys. There is a need for the Department of Health and 
Environment to activate the Nakuru waste management policy that can govern every person. If 
you have to se t up an industry, Hospital or anything within we must secure our people.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the population of Nakuru County is fast growing to 3 million plus people and 
that is at the voters’ status. We are talking about a population that is increasing at  a very high rate. 
We have Industrial Parks that are being set up within Nakuru County mainly in Naivasha of which 
the sub -County alone has a population of around 400,000 people according to the last census.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we do not come up with a  policy that can guide how waste is managed 
within our cities and our towns then Article 42 of the constitution of Kenya will be violated and 
we shall have a very sick nation. I am not willing to see that happen to our people so let us just 
follow the poli cy.  I support this Motion if the policy is not there one is urgently needed. Thank 
Mr. Deputy Speaker Sir.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Hon. Gathanwa.  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa : Thank Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish to follow suit with the previous 
Hon. Members by first welcoming our visitors Hon. Members from Kakamega County and what 
Hon. Alex has said, that we can borrow from each other. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have heard that 
this Committee, I do not remember the name fully but it is dealing with Ward matters and Projects 
or something of the sort. There is something we can borrow from that.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the issue of Waste Management, we have the Nakuru County Waste 
Management Act of 2021. I want to borrow three points from it , where you talk about th e Principle 
of Waste Management. It talks about the Proximity Principle whereby waste should be managed 
closely to where it is being generated. So Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to echo and say that we need 
to have an Incinerator in every Sub -County or  wherever there is a Hospital and we can extend this 
to other Industrial Waste and not only Waste from Health Facilities.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another part that is within the Principle of Waste Management from the Act 
of 2021 is public participation in Was te Management. It is required by the Act that the public 
should be involved and there should be public participation in Waste Management. So, we are 
expecting that these Institutions are going to call for public participation in order for the citizens 
around those areas to be engaged in how the waste should be managed.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other part I would also want to borrow is the one that Hon. Alex also 
touched on in terms of having a designation and here, it says very clearly that Intergenerationa l 
Equity, which implies that waste should not be managed in a way that bequeathed legacy problem 
to subsequent generations. I believe what Hon. Rose said that the waste that is being disposed of 
in her area poses a risk to generations to come.  
So Mr. Depu ty Speaker, I wish to support the Motion but also make a recommendation to have a 
Sub-Committee that would be reporting every quarter on how waste has been managed from all 
the Sub -Counties, and not only the Health Waste but also other Industrial Waste. I support Mr. 
Deputy Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Hon. Gathanwa. Hon. Sakwa  
Hon. Neto Sakwa : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker. First I welcome Honourable Members from 
Kakamega County which is my home County and my roots. Within the  same Kakamega County, 
I am being served from my home area of Chakalini Ward by the MCA of that area. Within the 
same Kakamega County I have my aunt, Gladys Mukongolo serving as the MCA and mow for the 
MCAs who have paid us a visit in this great city of Na kuru, I have my friend Niver Olichiri who 
we have been working closely and he was once my competitor in Kivumbini politics some years 
back, but since he has connections within ANC, he is now a nominated MCA in Sabati, Kakamega 
County.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, now back to the Motion; I do support this Motion for the reasons that we 
have received numerous Reports from different Hospitals by the Committee of Health. We had a 
Report from Bondeni Hospital, Langa Langa Hospital, and Naivasha and from our main Hospita l 
here, PGH. Mr. Deputy Speaker, all we find is that we have a lot of challenges when it comes to 
Waste Management.  
So Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe in our final submissions, we may engage the Implementation 
Committee which some of the Reports’ have recommend ed should be followed to the latter so that 
Implementation is done by all the concerned Departments. So I support the Motion fully but after 
all that has been said, the Implementation part of it should be followed to the latter. Thank you  Mr. 
Deputy Speake r. 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Hon. Member. Any other Member? Hon. 
Kamau, do you have anything to say or to add?  
Hon. Eliud Kamau : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker for giving me this chance.  I would like to 
echo my colleagues because a s we said yesterday, we had a Report from the Health Committee on 
Molo Hospital and we said clearly that a Healthy Nation is a Wealthy Nation. Some of these waste 
products from our Hospitals are very dangerous and we need proper ways and methods of 
disposi ng of them.  
So Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do support that we get Incinerators in every Sub -County and if possible, 
in every Level Four Hospital we should have such facilities. By doing so, I think we will be in a 
good position. Thank you,  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do support the Motion.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Hon. Member. Having heard from you 
and having gotten your ventilation into Motion, I want to put it to question.  
(Question proposed that the County Government through the Department of Health Services 
ensure strict compliance with stated legislation and regulation s regarding the disposal of non -
infectious waste, infectious waste, highly infectious waste and sharp waste and take necessary 
legal actions  where nece ssary  on Institutions  that fail to comply ). 
Question put and agreed to  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable Members, the House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 9.30 AM.  
The House rose at  3:45 PM  
 
 