COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 15th November , 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House Met At 11.20 AM  
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai) In the Chair]  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION(S) FROM THE CHAIR  
GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM (GIS ) DAY  CELEBRATION  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): There is a Communication from the Chairperson 
for the Committee on Lands, Housing, Physical Planning and Urban Development of County 
Assembly of Nakuru.  
The reference is an invitation to the Nakuru County Geographical Information System (GIS ) Day  
Celebration: Reference is made to the above matter; you are invited to attend the above meeting 
tomorrow Wednesday 15th November, 2023 at Nyayo Gardens at 9.00 am. Pl ease invite other 
Members of the County Assembly . Kind regards from Hon. John Kihagi, County Executive 
Member Lands, Physical Planning, Housing and Urban Development Nakuru County.  
COMMUNICATION(S) FROM THE CHAIR  
 PENDING  BUSINESSES    
The Temporary Speake r (Hon. William Mutai): Honorable  Members, there is yet another 
Communication . Hon. Members While appreciating the critical role played by Committees  in 
spearheading the Legislative  Agenda of the Assembly, it  is worth  noting that several Businesses 
are pending before Committees . This has translated to the slow generation of Business from the 
House.  
The following Bills were read the first time and committed to the relevant Committees; pursuant 
to Standing Order 123. Fur ther, the  Committees must bring Committee Reports on the Bills within 
20 C alendar days. These Bills are as follows;  
1. Committee on Finance  
The Nakuru County Finance Bill (No. 3) of 2023 sponsored by Hon. John Maritim . 
2. Committee on Sports and Culture . 
The Nakuru County Sports Management Bill (No. 3) Bill of 2023 sponsored by Hon. Hon. 
Abdi Hassan . 
3. Committee on Budget & Appropriation s 
The Nakuru County Revenue Allocation (Amendment) Bill (No. 2) of 2023 sponsored by 
Hon. Hon. Alex Mbugua . 
4. Committee on Lands , Housing and Physical Planning.  
1.The Nakuru County Valuation and Rating Bill No. 10 of 2019 sponsored by Hon. Peter 
Kajwang'  
2. The  Nakuru County Housing, Estates Tenancy, and Management Bill No. 4 of 2019 
sponsored by Hon. Peter Palang ’a. 
I wish to bring to your attention various Petitions that were communicated and are pending before 
various Committees , pursuant to Standing Order 20 5. The respective Committees are  expected to 
respond to the petitioner by way of a Report in not more than 60  Calendar Days. These Petitions 
include;  
PENDING PETITIONS  
1. Petition by Mr. Joseph Ngugi seeking review of Revenue Allocation of Lare Ward to match 
the population and Geographical size capturing Lare and Naishi Wards which were merged 
to form Lare Ward - Budget and Appropriation s Committee  
2. Petition by the displaced  person s living in Parkview Sub -Location, Mwariki Barut Ward, 
(Bordering Lake Nakuru National Park) due to rising water levels caused by Climate 
Change which was committed to the Committee on Environment , Energy , Water and 
Natural Resources.  
3. Petition by Jo seph Lagat, Moses Noor, Philes Nyabeni, Ruth Sibelenge, and Kipkorir 
Langat; Enforcement Officers concerning getting appointment letters - Committee on 
Labour  
4. Petition by Daniel Murugu concerning failure by the County Executive Department of 
Sports to honor /recogni se/appreciate World Record Holder of 5  000 Metres  and 1500  
Metres  top Kenya Athlete Faith Kipyegon , as it happened in 2015 - Committee on Sports . 
5. Petition by Peter Njuguna on behalf of the Residents of Kinungi concerning Encroachment 
and illegal acquisition of plots No.74875 within Kinungi Township that were originally 
earmarked for Early Childhood Development & Education (ECDE) and Dumping Site by 
the Catholic Church at Kinungi to the detriment of the residents of Kinugi – Committee on 
Land s, Housing, Physical Planning and Urban Development . 
Pursuant to Standing Order 47  (2), several Request s for  Statements were made to various 
Chairpersons. I wish to urge the respecti ve Chairpersons  to expedite the Pending Business within 
two weeks to enhance the seamless operations of the House and ensure adherence to the timeliness 
provided for in the Standing Orders.  
1. The Chairperson Committee on Roads and Public Works to issue a Statement  requested by 
Hon. George Nene Concerning poor workmanship on the Tee -Gashuma and Muthaita 
roads in Elementaita Ward.  
2. The Chairperson Committee on Lands Housing and Physical Planning to issue a Statement  
requested by Hon. George Nene Concerning the p urchase of a piece of Land at Mbombo 
for the construction of ECDE Classrooms.  
3. The Chairperson Committee on Environment, Water and Natural Resources to issue a 
Statement  requested by Hon. Elijah Muraga Concerning Tree Planting activities along 
Hajji River b y Comply Limited, Waseges Ward.  
4. The Chairperson Committee on Implementation to issue a Statement  requested by Hon. 
Joseph Muraya Concerning the Implementation Status of all House Resolutions since the 
inception of Devolution.  
5. The Chairperson Committee on L ands, Housing, and Physical Planning to issue a 
Statement  requested by Hon. Jane Gituku Concerning the allocation of plots and 
procedures of repossession in Maiella Ward.  
6. The Chairperson Committee on Implementation to issue a Statement  requested by Hon. 
Stanley Karanja Concerning the Implementation status of Karai Fish Market Fence, 
Naivasha East Ward.  
7. The Chairperson Committee on Land s, Housing, and Physical Planning to issue a 
Statement  requested by Hon. Anthony Kanyere Concerning the construction of Affo rdable 
Houses at selected County Estates. Next order?  
The Minority Leader  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Sorry Mr. Temporary Speaker; before we proceed, 
on the Communication  you just made on the Pending Businesses of this House, there was a Petition 
that was made from my Ward  and this is a Petition  that was made by petitioner Joseph Ngugi 
seeking the Review of Revenue Allocation for Lare was merging with Naishi. I wish to report that 
one has already been done and it  should be withdrawn from that list.  
Madam Temporary Speaker that  was the communication done by the Chairperson for Budget and 
that should be withdrawn because it has already been answered.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Thank you; well noted . Next Order.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable  Members, this House stands adjourned until today in the afternoon, 2.30 PM. 
The House rose at 12.30 PM 