COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 3 rd  October , 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10 :00  AM  
[ The  Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
VISITING MEMBERS  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable Members, I recognis e Members from Kisumu County 
Assembly, Committee on Welfare and Equal Opportunities led by the Committee Chairperson 
Honorable  Mildred Ajumbo and the following Members;  
1.  Hon. Eunice Alando  
2.  Hon. Emily Oginga  
3.  Hon. Anne Ochola  
4.  Hon. Tom Onditi  
5.  Hon. Caroline Lawino  
6.  Hon. Carren Odhiambo  
 I also  recogni s e members of sta ff  from the County Assembly  of Kisumu  accompanying the 
Members ,  namely;  
1.  Ben Abuodha  
2.  Jessica Otieno  
3.  Risper Waywa  
4.  David Ayieko  
PAPER(S)  
COUNTY SECRETARY VETTING  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Paper  to be laid by  honorable  Leader of Majority 
Party.  
Hon. Alex Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. With your permission before I lay the Paper, 
allow me to welcome the Honorable Members from Kisumu. Welcome to Nakuru and feel at home. 
We feel honored that you came to benchmark and to visit this great Assembly of Nakuru.  
Mr. Speaker, I have a Report  on the vetting of the Nominee  for the position of the County 
Secretary. I wish to lay th e  Report  before this Honorable House. Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Leader of Majority Party.  
NOTICE(S) OF MOTION  
VETTING REPORT  
Hon. Alex Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Pursuant to Section 44 of the County Government 
Act No.  17 ,  2021, Section 9 of the Public Appointment s  and County Approvals Act of 2017 and 
the Standing Orders 48(4) of this House, this House adapts the Report  of the Committee on 
Appointment s  o n the vetting of Mr. Samuel Mwangi Mwaura for the appointment of the position 
of the County Secretary and Head of Public Service to the County Government of Nakuru.  
I wish to give the N otice of Motion. Thank you.  
PROCEDURAL  MOTION  
VETTING REPORT DEBATE  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Procedural Motion by Hon. Alex Lang’at, Leader of 
Majority Party.  
Hon. Alex Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to move a Procedural Motion that Pursuant 
to Section 44 of this County Government Act No.  17 of 2012, Notwithstanding  the provision of 
the Standing Orders, 49  (5) ( b ),  this House resolves to debate the Report  of the Committee on 
Appointmen t s  on the vetting of Mr. Samuel Mwangi Mwaura  for the appointment to the position 
of County Secretary and head of Public Service of the County Government of Nakuru.  
I wish to request Mheshimiwa Peter Maina to second this Procedural Motion.  
Hon. Peter Maina: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I second the Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Procedural Motion is that notwithstanding the 
provision of Standing Order 49(5)  (b) , this House resolves to Debate the Report  of the Committee 
on Appointment s  on the vetting of Mr. Samuel Mwangi Mwaura for the appointment to the 
position of County Secretary and Head of Public Service of the County Government of Nakuru. 
The Motion is open for Debate.  
Sorry Members. We take responsibility for the challenges that we are having with the system. 
Mheshimiwa Member for Viwandani.  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I wish to welcome Honorable Members from 
County Assembly  of  Kisumu. Feel much welcome here in Nakuru. It is the home of many 
opportunities.  After the Motion has been moved, I can see that Mr. Samuel Mwangi Mwaura went 
through a Committee on Appointment s  and he was …  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Member for Naivasha East?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Maybe you give direction because the 
Honorable Member has jumped to the Report  and we have not gone to the P rocedural. We are 
debating a Procedural Motion. I think the Member is quite ahead of time.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The business before the floor of the House is the Procedural  
Motion. We are debating the reasons why we need to move and support or not this Procedural  
Motion so that in the morning, we will table the Report  and now we proceed to debate the main 
Report . Before the House is a Procedural  Motion as to wh y  we are going to shorten the time that 
is ordinarily used for a Debate to take place.  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Mr. Speaker sir, I do not know why the Honorable Member rushed to 
judge me. I do not know whether he read my mind on what I was going to say but it is good that 
you have given direction. Thank you.  
Mr. Speaker, I support that we Debate on the Report . I was not on the Motion to say what we 
should do or what you should not do but the Honorable Member went ahead. Nashukuru,  we can 
have time to debate the Report .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you.  The Honorable Leader of Minority Party.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Listening to the Member for Viwandani Ward, 
the mood of the House is that we proceed with the Procedural  Motion because the Members are 
anxious. This County has stayed without a County Secretary for almost one year. I support the 
Procedural  Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Leader of Minority Party. He has just said there 
is a mood of the House. I do not know if there is that mood or it is his observation and his opinion.  
( Question proposed that notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order 49(5) b , this House 
resolves to debate the Report  of the Committee on Appointmen t on the vetting of Mr. Samuel 
Mwangi Mwaura for the appointment to the position of County Secretary and the Head of Public 
Service of the County Government of Nakuru. )  
( Question put and agreed to. )  
MOTION  
APPOINTMENT OF  COUNTY  SECRETARY  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Motion by the Honorable Leader of Majority Party.  
Hon. Alex Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Speaker . Th ank you the House for allowing us to move on 
with the Motion. Mr. Speaker, the  Motion rotates around the Report  which I want to lay before 
thi s House. You remember very well when the names were brought before this House, you 
committed the name to the Appointment s  Committee so that they c ould  do the vetting of Dr. 
Mwaura.  
Mr. Speaker, t he select Committee on Appointment s  is established under the Standing Order  187 
of the County Assembly of Nakuru Standing Orders. Its mandate is well stipulated therein.  
Mr. Speaker, i t is also important at this point to mention the names of the Committee which 
comprised of;  
1.  Hon. Joel Karuri             Chairperson  
2.  Hon. Alex Lang’at    
3.  Hon. Philip Ndiritu  
4.  Hon. Isabella Makori  
5.  Hon. Peter Palang’a  
6.  Hon. Rose Chepkoech  
Mr. Speaker, i n this, we are reminding ourselves that Pursuant to the Provision  of Section 44 of 
the County Government Act of 2012 and Section 6 (1) o f  the Public Appointment s  of the County 
Assemblies Approval Act (2017), the Governor forwarded the name of Dr. Samuel Mwaura 
Mwangi for the position of the County Secretary on the 19 th  of September, 2023. This was in 
accordance to  Standing Order  48  (2) of the County Assembly of Nakuru Standing Order s .  
Mr. Speaker, t he Nomination, Appointment s  and Procedure s are found in Section 44 of the County 
Government Act of 2012. The procedures provide for the Nominatio n and the Appointme nt of the 
County Secretary. I say so because it should be understood that what we are doing is well laid 
before this Honorable  House.  
COMMITTEE’S PROCEEDINGS  
Mr. Speaker, d uring the approval and hearing, the Committee held sittings to examine and to 
review the Nominee ’s  Certificates  and the Testimonials  and they went ahead to do the vetting.  
At  this point  Mr. Speaker , allow me to acknowledge the Members of this Committee for their input 
and their valuable contributions during the vetting process, which was a very tough and very 
v igorous exercise.  
Mr. Speaker, t he Committee wishes to also  thank the Office of the Speaker and the Clerk of the 
Assembly for the logistical support accorded to it during the vetting exercise. Further, the 
Committee is also thankful to the Media  for its coverage. The vetting was open and was in the  
public and the Media  came in large numbers. The advocates of the weak and the meek voices also 
came and the G allery was wide open for all of them. They followed the proceedings as the vetting 
was going on.  
Mr. Speaker, o n behalf of the Select Committee on Appointment s  and pursuant to Section 44 of 
this County Government Act 2012 Section 9 of the Public Appointments,  County Approval Act 
2017 and Standing Order 48  (4) of the County Assembly of Nakuru Standing Orders, it is my 
pleasant duty to have t able d  the Report  of the Committee on vetting of Mr. Samuel Mwangi 
Mwaura and as we table d , there are many things that we looked at.  
Mr. Speaker, w e went to the background Information . We looked at the Legal Framework of the 
whole exercise on the appointment of the position of the County Secretary. As I have said  Mr. 
Speaker , it is well and legally constituted.  
Mr. Speaker, t he Public Appointment s  of County Assemblies Act No.  5 of 2017 , Section 8 of the 
Public Appointment, County Assemblies Approval Act number 5 of 2017, it provides issues which 
the County Assembly is supposed to have considered in relation to any Nominee. This Mr. Speaker 
includes the procedures used to arrive at the Nominee , any C onstitutional and S tatutory 
requirements relating to the O ffice of the County Secretary and the suitability of the Nominee for 
the appointment proposed, having regarded to whether the Nominee ’s ability, experience and 
qualities met the needs of the B ody to which the nomination is b eing made.  
 
Mr. Speaker, t he Schedul e of the Public Appointment s  provides for a  criteria to guide the 
Committee. So Mr. Speaker, t he Committee was well guided and a few of these include the  
Education background, the  Employment of the  Nominee , Honors and  Awards that the Nominee  
may have achieved in the past Public Office, Political Activities and Affiliations, Differed Income 
or future benefits, sources of his or her Income , the Tax status and Statement s of the net worth . 
Also,  potential conflict that the Nominee  may have had, Pro Bono or Charity Works that the 
Nominee  may have been involved  in , whether the Nominee  has been charged in court and if there 
were any evidence; whether the Nominee  has adversely been mentioned in any I nvestigatory 
Report s of the County Assembly or any other C ommission of I nquiry.  
Mr. Speaker, w e considered  Chapter 6 of the  Constitution  on matters L eadership and Integrity . We 
were also able to consider  Leadership and Integrity ’s  Act of 2012. We were also able to look at 
Article 232  of the Constitution on Values and the Principles of  the Public Service .  Pursuant to 
Section 8  (1) (a)  and 44 of the County Government Act of 2012, Section 7 of the Public 
Appointment s of the County Assemblies Mr. Speaker, the Nominee was  properly notified 
according to the law.  
Mr. Speaker, t here w ere  Requests for Memorandum s  which we able to carry out and it is good to 
mention here  that in accordance to the provisions of Section 7 (10) of the Public Appointments  of 
County Assemblies , the Clerk of the County Assembly placed an advertisement  in the Print Media , 
that was done on 21 st  September , 2023 , inviting the public to submit a memorandum  by way of 
written statements  on oath; that is sworn affidavits  on the suitability of this  Nominee .  
Mr. Speaker, on the submissions of the memorandum, the Committee received a Petition, but the 
Petition Mr. Speaker  was in line and in support of the Nominee  for the Nakuru Public Opinion 
Consultative Initiative .  
Mr. Speaker, on the Approvals and the Hearings  in conducting the vetting exercise ,  the Committee 
was well guided  by the laws that we had mentioned earlier. There were are a few things that we 
were able to note and it is good to mention a few for the sake of the House . That this Nominee is 
actually a Kenyan citizen  who was born somewhere in Kiambu.   
Mr. Speaker, on h is academic and professional qualifications ,  the Nominee  is currently 
undertaking a PhD  in Strategic Management at Kabarak University . The Nominee already holds a 
Master’s Degree in Strategic Management from Laikipia University and Bachelor ’ s in Pharmacy  
from Dr. MGR  Medical University in India.  
Mr. Speaker, the Nominee is currently the Acting Secretary and the Head of Public Service at  
Nakuru County.  Mr. Speaker, the Nominee has some Honours or  Rewards . That the Nominee has 
never been charged in a court of law  and he has been involved in several charit able  work s , which 
include paying school fees for the needy . The Nominee is a bonafide Member of the  
Pharmaceuticals Society of Kenya and in terms of Publications, the Nominee has published his 
Master’s  Thesis, and the Thesis Mr. Speaker is on Effects of Quality , Improvements, Str ategies on 
Customer Satisfaction ; and this one Mr. Speaker, he did it at the Naivasha Hospital.   
Mr. Speaker, the Nominee was vetted  on the following Thematic ;  
a)  Suitability of the Nominee for the position of the County Secretary  
b)  The County preparedness on the upcoming El Nino rains  
c)  He was vetted on roles  of the County Secretary  in implementing the Governor’s 
manifesto; of course to find out if the Nominee was well versed with the Office he is 
about to occupy Mr. Speaker.  
d)  He was also vetted on the roles of the County Government in addressing matters 
insecurity  Mr. Speaker, considering at that time as a County we had had an incident 
where a young girl was sexually assaulted and killed and it was a  matter of County 
importance and brought before  the floor of this House and we wanted to know how 
safe we are as a County , a nd  how vast the Nominee was acquainted with issues o f  
security.  
e)  Mr.  Speaker, we talked about ways of curbing traffic menace  within the County of 
Nakuru  as we have always had others  wanting to be in the town centre  while others 
would want the public transport stages to be outside the town centre . We wanted the 
Nominee to give us his experience  and the plans that he has put in place  for this County 
for the sake of orderly flow of traffic, inside and outside this great County.  
f)  Mr. Speaker, we also considered about the harmony between the  County Executive and 
the County Assembly. Mr.  Speaker, you realise that these are two Bodies that  must work 
together in s ynergy with the other one for the benefit of Wanjiku  who brought us to this 
House.  
g)  The Nominee, while a ppreciating the distinct roles of the two Arms of the Government , 
emphasised  on the interdependence in execution of their mandate  and he  committed  to 
ensuring timely  responses to the Inquiries a nd Invitations by the County Assembly  
Committees. Additionally, he also stated that  his Office had a Liaison  Officer  to link us 
with the County Executive .  
h)  Mr. Speaker, on matters of Public Service, the Nominee was asked to explain how he 
would address corruption because it is a vice being experienced in our County , one  
example being the Doctors’ claims that were on social media. So we wanted to know 
how  he would address issues of corruption, nepotism, favouritism  when it comes to 
matters of promotions . Also tribalism, demoralised County Public Service  and rampant 
strikes, especially in the Health Department . On this Mr. Speaker, the Nominee 
mentioned that as a County Secretary, he is actually the Head of the County Public 
Service and exercises Supervisory powers over all the staff of the County Government 
through their respective  Chief Officers.  
Subsequently, he acknowledged that previously, the Government  lacked Human Resource 
Policies and Strategies. In order to address the challenges that were facing the Public 
Service in our County , the  Nominee outlined the following measures that he was going to 
take  if given the position of a  County Secretary : -  
i)  Formulation of Human Resource Policy  and Strategies through engagements  with 
various stakeholders which will ensure transparency and promote  
j)  D evelop a C ode of Conduct which the previous Management s  had  lacked  
k)  Promote dialogue with the various employees, Unions like Kenya Medical 
Practitioners Pharmaceuticals and Dentists Union (KMPPDU) , among others.  
l)  Have an Open Door Policy  and C onsultations , during his leadership.  
In conclusion Mr. Speaker, he intimated that Automation of the employees  through the Digital 
Registration, will lay the County in reducing the amounts of paper work  and promote  the much  
needed transparency in Public Service.  
Mr. Speaker, went ahead to look at  the Centralised Procurements  of Goods and Services . We know 
that matters procurement have remained a hot potato  and embedded in some cloudiness and a 
source of the  honourable Members los ing  value for money on various projects at their Wards . The 
Nominee was tasked to explain  the Government’s Policy in Procurement of Essential Goods .  
He stated that, in the past there was lack of accountabi lity in various Departments, specifically in 
the consumption of fuel which was previously in a mess Mr. Speaker.  
In view of this, the Government entered into a Partnership with Vivo Energy to regulate and restrict 
fuel  consumption to authorised consumers. Vivo Energy  has a system of monitoring their fuel to 
ensure it conforms to distances that each vehicle covers.  I think it was a good thing to borrow from 
this great organisation . The Office of the County Secretary receives regular updates from Vivo, on 
the fuel consumption by  the various Departments  within the County of Nakuru.  
COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATION S  AND FINDINGS  
Mr. Speaker, t he Nominee  in the view of the Committee satisfied the requirements of Chapter Six 
of the Constitution ,  on matters Leadership and Integrity .  
That the Nominee also demonstrated vast knowledge and experience in Public Service 
Governance .  
Mr. Speaker, h aving conducted an approval hearing of the Nominee  pursuant to Section 58( a ) of 
the County Government Act (2012) , the County Assembly Approval Act (2017 ), the Committe e 
recommends as follows;  
1.  Having considered the suitability, capability and integrity of the Nominee  pursuant to 
Section 44 of the County Government Act (2012) on Public Appointment s ; that is the  
County Assembly Approvals Act of 2017,  the  Committee recommends that the County 
Assembly approves the nomination of Dr. Samuel Mwaura to the position of County 
Secretary.  
I wish to rest my case at that point. Thank you, Mr. Speaker .  
I want to request the Leader of Minority Party to second this Motion.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think the House was keen listening to the Report  
that was tabled by the Appointment s  Committee and which has been eloquently presented by the 
Leader of Majority.  
Mr. Speaker, I wish to second what he has said as a Member of Appointments Committee. The 
whole process of coming out with the County Secretary, there is a lot of anxiety in the House 
because this County of Nakuru has stayed with an acting County Secretary for a period  of more 
than one year and therefore, the Members of the Assembly, the whole County of Nakuru to getting 
a County Secretary that will be approved by this House today.  
The whole process began with H.E  the  Governor floating 5 Name s to this Assembly to come up 
with what was called the selection Committee. You read the Names  in the Assembly and the names 
were presented to the Appointments Committee and then they were brought to this House and the 
Members passed the Names. After that was done, the Selection Committee went ahead and was 
sworn in and then they made publicly those who were interested in applying for the position of the 
County Secretary. I am not sure but I think  18 Members applied of which 12 were shortlisted, 
which included the name of Dr. Mwaura which we are discussing today.  
After they did their work, vetting was done in public and Members were present; everybody was 
involved. The Panel came up with two  names which they forwarded  to H.E Governor. The 
Governor received the most suitable candidate and this was Dr. Mwaura. The name was again 
forwarded to this Assembly two weeks back and you committed that name to the Appointment 
Committee. The Committee is now giving a Report .  
On Thursday last week, we did the Vetting  in public. Like the Honorable Majority Leader has said, 
the Members of the public were involved, the  Media was involved and any other person who was 
interested knowing what was going on.  
Therefore, today I am happy to say that us  the Appointment Committee which you Chair, we have 
no objection and we vote in and we accept that Dr. Mwaura was  the most suitable County Secretary 
of Nakuru. He takes over that position as the third County Secretary of the County Government of 
Nakuru. Therefore, I second the Report . Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Motion i s properly now before the House. And 
the Motion is  THAT Pursuant to Section 44 of the County Government Act N o . 17 of 2012, Section 
9 of the Public Appointments that deals with County Approval Acts of 2017 and Standing Order 
48 (4) ,  this House adopts the Report of the Committee on Appointment s  on the vetting of Dr. 
Samuel Mwangi Mwaura for the appointment of the position of County Secretary and the Head of 
the Public Service in  the County Government of Nakuru.  
 (Question  proposed .)  
The Motion is open for debate. The Hon. Member for Ma h i Mahiu.  
Hon. Eliud Kamau : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me thi s chance. M r.  Speaker, i t is very 
clear and everybody who is  in  th is  County of Nakuru knows very well that during our first time 
here we were delayed for like four m onth s by  issues  of  Petitions. We wasted almost three to four 
m onth s .   
And  now Mr. Speaker, here comes a chance where we want to confirm or verify whether somebody 
who acted during that time until  to  date is suitable or not. We are discussing somebody whom we 
have worked with as an A cting County Secretary for one year plus. This is somebody who m  at 
least ,  we have  information or knowledge about him. Mr. Speaker, t his guy by the name Mwaura, 
if you look at other Counties  we have heard from other sources that there is a lot of conflict and 
this guy has played a clear role by being a bridge between the Assembly and the Executive. Mr. 
Speaker, I came to know about Mwaura one time when I listened to him when he was in a certain 
local  Media H ouse .  I took my time to listen to him and to understand who Mwaura is. And 
a ccording to how he articulated issues  Mr. Speaker,  I can  confirm to this House that D r. Mwaura 
strongly holds the agenda and the Manifesto of the Governo r and he knows the direction that this 
County  is heading.  
Mr. Speaker, w hen we look at Dr. Mwaura’s Curriculum  Vitae , we understand tha t this guy is not 
new in Nakuru.  He  has worked as a C hief Officer (CO) for  Health  and he  worked in Naivasha 
District Hospital. These are clear indications that Dr. Mwaura knows Nakuru very well. If we 
today make a bl u nder of giving this position to someone new then I think we are going to delay 
for another three m onth s for  that guy to catch up Mr. Speaker. S o as Nakuru we have no other 
option; if  we want  to move our  County ahead then we need to confirm Dr . Mwaura and give him 
a chance to lead and guide us with the Agend a and the Manifesto  of our Governo r  to the next level . 
Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon Hassan.  
Hon. Ali Hassan : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker for catching your eye . Mr. Speaker, a llow 
me to welcome the Hon orable Members from Kisumu to Nakuru ,  and as the Chair of the  Security  
C ommittee , make sure that I know of your whereabouts. When you get lost here in Nakuru just 
call the Chairperson  of Security and your s afety  is going to be guaranteed.  
Mr. Speaker ,  allow me to  thank you and the Appointment s  Committee for coming up with this 
Report . When your O ffice gazzetted the Special Sitting on Friday, some of us who are very loyal 
to our Party  were confused on  what to do because we were supposed to go to the National 
Governing Council Meeting. As a NEC M ember, I could not afford to miss that meeting so I was 
confused and I thank your O ffice for allowing us to go. I want to say that the  Meeting was very 
fruitful and ….  
The speaker  (Hon. Joel Kauri): The Hon. Member, kindly proceed with the Report  on the floor 
of the House  
Hon. Ali Hassan : Thank you for your guidance Mr. Speaker. As I said earlier allow me to thank 
you and the Committee on Appointment s  for this wonderful Report . I want to say that having heard 
the Majority Leader from the Report , I can say that for the first time in Nakuru County 
Government , we have a Liaison Office that is a link between the Assembly and the County 
Executive which is very important. In any Public Service Office , you only need a link between the 
Executive and the Assembly .  Tha t is very import ant and we want  to thank the then - acting County 
Secretary for the wonderful job he did. The second thing is the streamlining issues of fuel.  
M r. Speaker, for m any of us who we re in the Public Service , we  know the theft that happens  in  
some of these small vehicles. There is a lot of theft and fuel is always lost .  S o  Mr. Speaker ,  we  
want to thank the Office  of the County Secretary for streamlining the issues of f uel. Mr. Speaker, 
th ere is also the  issue o f  the Human Resource P olicy that the County Government came up with 
under the stewardship of the County Secretary and Mr. Speaker, the issue s of  ghost workers will  
no longer be experienced  in Nakuru.  
Mr. Speaker, w e thank the County Secretary for coming up with such regulations. As I conclude 
my submissions, we have a saying, “ Mambo  Ni Matatu” so ,  put it to question.  Thank  you  Mr. 
Speaker, I support.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Lake View and the Hon. 
Doreen then we are going to proceed from there.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Mr. Speaker let me take this opportunity to first appreciate and welcome 
Members from Kisumu County to this great County, the C ity that came after Kisumu City. I will 
refer to this gentleman Mwaura and as you can look at the mood within the House, we can say in 
medical terms ,  that the House is very pregnant and  ready to deliver the next baby which is the 
County Secretary of Nakuru  County.  
Mr. Speaker, I can onl y compare this gentleman to  Henry  Kis singer ,  who served under President  
Richard  Nixon because of his connections and how he deals with issues. When I interact with most 
Members of this House, the reference point on how they refer to this gentleman Mwaura is that he 
is a gentleman who cares for the people, cares how the G overnment works and I do not see another 
person who could have worked with her Excellency the  Governor in delivering the Manifest o and 
the things that we promised the p eople.  
Mr. Speaker, the  House is full and as you can see even our acting  Clerk is here. We have people 
who have not been in this House and that shows how great this man is, how great the debate of 
this day is. You should not even waste more time Mr. Speaker. You should just put it to question 
and let us bring this gentleman here. Tha nk you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Before we proceed, Honorable Member now that you have 
submitted your views, you now want to put it to question ;  what about other Members?  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Mr. Speaker ,  because you have asked that question, last time I said that I 
always speak for the devil and the ayes have it.  
( Laughter! )  
The Speaker ( Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Doreen.  
Hon. Doreen Korir : Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. Being the Chairperson  of W elfare and 
L ibrary S ervices, I want…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What  is it Hon. Member for Kiptagich?  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech : Mr. Speaker sir, I just want to hear more about what Hon. Alex has talked 
about because here we are Christians and I heard something like a devil so I do not understand 
that.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Alex you said that you speak for the devil so put it into 
context.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Mr. Speaker anyone who has gone through a Literature Clas s should know 
how to put into context whatever is being inferred. If I can take you through a bit of L iterature, 
when you talk about “ speaking for the devil ” ,  it does not mean the real devil but i t does mean that 
you speak for someone who already knows. Most of the time we say that the devil is to be blamed 
for everything but in this case, the devil has just decided to speak goodness .   
( Laughter )  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech : Mr. Speaker let him withdraw.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Allow the Hon. Member for Lake View to substantiate so that 
we can proceed.  
Hon. Mercy Kilel : Mr. Speaker point of information.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Any new information on that?  
Hon. Mercy Kilel:  Yes Mr. Speaker. When you talk about the devil in this House, you understand 
that you made a prayer before the House began and you said A lmighty God who in Y our W isdom 
and it goes like that.  When we speak like that and then go ahead to say that some of us are devil’s 
advocates ,  then it beats the understanding and the knowledge of God we have in the House. He 
should withdraw and apologi s e.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Proceed Hon. Member for a Lake View.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Mr. Speaker let me withdraw the word “ speaking for the devil ”  and instead 
say that I speak for the “ gods ” . Thank you very much.  
Hon. Doreen Korir : Thank you so much Mr. Speaker. Before the interruption by the “ gods ”  I 
was saying that I want to take this opportunity to welcome the County Assembly of Kisumu, and 
being the Chairperson  of the Committee  on Welfare, I want to welcome you. Last week we had 
the County Assembly of Kiambu benchmarking with the same Committee on Welfare and Library 
Services so this tells you that we are much ahead.  
Mr. Speaker,  I want to support this particular Motion which is the approval of the County 
Secretary. Dr. Mwaura is a man that most of us have already interacted with as  the acting County 
Secretary. He has been able to coordinate most of the activities of the County  and more so help 
the Governor  in undertaking her duties for the last one year that the  Governor has been in O ffice.  
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Mwaura has proven beyond reasonable doubt that he is up to the task, has a lot 
of experience and has already made Nakuru shine. I have personally interacted with him and I can 
s ay that he is a very honest man, just like our Deputy President . He has acted as a bridge between 
the Executive and the Assembly. I do know that he has experience and qualifications and we  will 
be able to achieve more as Nakuru County.  
Mr. Speaker,  I noticed that Mwaura can articulate issues very well and during the strike at  the 
Naivasha Sub - County Hospital, he was able to articulate the  issues to  the Media very well. He is 
a very sober guy, very good, and especially how he answers questions even in the Media. As I 
wind up, the County Secretary must be a strong person. He is a very important person because he 
takes care of Human Resource and also the leadership of Nakuru.  
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Mwaura is an all - rounded person who will take our County to the next level. I 
beg to support the Motion because he has all it takes for Nakuru. Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Doreen. There is an assurance I want to 
make ,  that every Member will give their input .  S o ,  I am going to allow one minute to the Hon orable  
Member for Keringet then I cross over to my left so that I am not accused of favoring my right.  
Hon. William Mutai : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. Mine is very simple, better the devil 
you know than the angel you do not know. I think I have some characteristics that I want to put 
across concerning Mr.…  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : [On a Point of information ] Mr. Speaker ,  we  just spoke about the issue of 
the “ devil ”  here and the Hon orable  Member has just withdrawn so who is this other Hon orable  
Member referring to?  I know the Bible  only says that we are sons of the Most High . If we continue 
mentioning the “ devil ”  then we will get misled so let Hon. Mutai explain about the devil he is 
talking about ,  the one he knows then he can proceed.  
The Speaker ( Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Mutai proceed.  
Hon. William Mutai : Mr. Speaker without much ado, in this context the devil means weakness. 
Weakness stands for the weakness and I do not want to paraphrase it but that is a common saying. 
I have a few characteristics about Dr. Mwaura, one  is that he is a very shrewd man. Secondly, he 
has a listening ear. In most cases, we kept bothering him especially when we had some 
Procurement  issues and he had a listening ear. We kept calling and he used to come, listen to us 
and I think if he is going to continue with  this trait,  then definitely we will have one of the best 
County Secretaries we have ever had before.  
Mr. Speaker, a nother thing about Dr. Mwaura is that he is very dynamic. Whe neve r you discuss 
any issue with him he has various approaches and allows you to choose the best option. I have also 
engaged with him and I must say that he is equipped with Manageria l skills. He can manage the 
Executive very well that is the CECs and COs.  In many instances when he had some meetings, he 
did  not hesitate but went straight to the C hief Officer (CO)  or the Committee E xecutive M ember 
( C EC)  concerned with an issue that was on the table. I want to support him by supporting this 
Motion. Thank you  Mr.Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you ,  we are going to go to my left. Hon orable  Member 
for Naivasha East and then the Hon orable  Member for Soin in that order.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Firstly, let me thank the Committee that you lead 
which is the Committee  on Appointment s for what you have come up with. It is suicidal, 
dangerous, and treasonable to have a County Secretary who cannot expound, explain or interpret 
the Manifesto . I listened keenly to the Majority Leader when he was reading through, and I have 
also gone through the Report  and I am sure that you did a good job. I fell in love with some issues 
in the Report  that I want to explain.  
Mr. Speaker, o ne, it is dangerous to have somebody who has nothing, a pauper, somebody living 
below the poverty line as a County Secretary. In the actual sense, it is a spice that can lead to the 
raping of Chapter Six which talks about E thics. Therefore,  when I saw somebody with Kshs 25 
Million …  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Karanja, you are confusing this House. Chapter Six does 
not talk of what you are saying, specifically about someone’s worth or net worth that they cannot 
be considered for Public Service . Is that what you were driv ing at?  
Hon Stanley Karanja : Mr. Speaker, poverty is a catalyst for robbing. You do not steal when you 
have. What are you stealing for? Chapter Six talks about Ethics . It is dangerous and suicidal to 
have a p auper in the name of a County Secretary. Secondly, I went through the experience of Dr. 
Mwaura and I found that there are issues that we will also need to address. This is somebody who 
has led Health Department and when he was there, it was functional. When he was the A cting 
County Secretary we did not have pro blems.  
Mr. Speaker, t his is a man when called he comes. He listens when you have any issues. That is a 
trait that we also need to follow. When I was reading through the Report ,  I saw that they have 
introduced the “Liaison”  that is the Executive and the Assembly to work in tandem.  What has 
been happening before is we had people in the name of the County Secretary who had an Inferiority 
Complex , who were suffering from what we call Academic Inferiority and with such people ,  their 
main business was the fear of the u nknown. It is good to have someone who is very learned because 
they  will be able to expound on some issues. I listened to the Governor’s Manifesto and you know 
that it is somehow complex and I found some people floating.  
Mr. Speaker, i t would have been very dangerous to have somebody who cannot expound the 
C ounty Integrated D evelopment P lan (CIDP)  and the Manifesto . I will finish by saying that we 
have been here and we had a County Secretary who was a puppet of Power  and Cartel s .  So,  we 
need somebody who can expound and express issues. Being in a  County that is a C ity and has a 
County Secretary who cannot explain issues would have been dangerous. We have a County 
Secretary who is a D octor. This shows that education is good.  
Mr. Speaker, l astly, when I was going through the Report  I found that he has participated in Pro 
Bono issues, and Education . Do you know that we have County Secretaries who are very mean 
even to themselves? Feeding themselves is also difficult ;  so we can now say that we do have a 
County Secretary and I urge Members through the Majority Leader that some of the issues we 
have had can now be solved through the O ffice of the County Secretary.  
Mr. Speaker, I dare say that there was nobody who was against  Dr.  Mwaura because there were 
people  somewhere who were also professors of creating division. We dare say and maybe that is 
why the devil phrase has been occurring, no one has been against Dr.  Mwaura because we know 
that he is capable, visionary and will take this County far. I do support the Report  and it ought to 
be adopted. When we will be having the Swearing - In C eremony ,  the House should be involved.  
We be called, “ Kama ni clap tuclap na kama nikuomba tutaomba na hayo mambo yote 
yatafanyika ” . I rest my case and I support it.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Point of Order Mr. Speaker!  
The Speaker ( Hon. Joel Karuri): What order?  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura :  [On a Point of Order] Mr. Speaker, I rise on  Standing Order No.96 about 
the limitation of debate. As you can see all Members should be participating in this Motion and if  
you are not going to limit the time that a Member is repeating and repeating the same philosophy ,  
then we will be wasting time.  
Mr. Speaker,  I wish to draw your attention to that Order  to give direction to the House and limit 
us from being repetitive. It is tiresome, a waste of resources including electricity and we will be 
here for nothing. Kindly limit the Members and if possible,  Mr. Speaker let us vote. There is no 
time. I wish that you put it to question but if it is not possible ,  then evoke O rder 96.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Njuguna. There was an Order before which 
Members would give their views and participate in the debate and the Hon orable  Member for Soin 
was to be on the floor.  
Hon. Degaulle Naburuki : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to welcome our 
colleagues from Kisumu City to Nakuru City because we are in that status at this moment. For 
today’s debate, I want to concur with my colleagues and the Appointment s  Committee for giving 
us Dr. Samuel Mwaura as the most suitable person to be our County Secretary.  
Mr. Speaker,  I do agree with them and I also want to say for the few times we have met with 
Mwaura, I can confirm that he is equal to the task. He has been able to run this County  for the last 
one year with all the challenges that have been there and he has been able to take control .  S o ,  I 
hereby stand and support the Motion. Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang : Point of Order Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the point of Order?  
Hon. Peter Kajwang : I still rise on the same point of Order 96, limitation of time but looking at 
the mood of the House you may only rule that whoever is not supporting the Motion is the one 
who should talk. Everybody is saying good things about the County Secretary. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon orable  Member for Kaptembwo. Hon orable  
Member for Eburu Mbaruk. The Hon orable  Member for Menengai West, Hon .  Rottok and then I 
will give another round then after that, we can put it  to question.  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Dr. Samuel Mwaura is my Wanjiku  and when 
I was campaigning I promised my Wanjiku  that I would try and seek job opportunities for them. It 
will be very unfortunate if I miss on this opportunity. I will not take a lot of time. I am not talking 
about Dr. Mwaura because he is the devil I know. I know of no devil, I am not talking about him 
because I speak for the devil, I do not speak for the devil. I have interacted with the gentleman and 
I resonate and relate with his passion for servic e delivery. I have seen him in O ffice and out of 
office and in action. I can tell that he is not just qualified but he is an experienced person.  
Mr. Speaker, h e is not just prompt but he is calculative. He is not just accessible but he is also 
approachable. He is not just a gentleman but he is a cool guy. Borrowing from the Bible, the story 
of Jacob, he wanted to marry Rachel and he was made to work for some time and just when he 
was about to be given Rachel, he was given a different older  w oman by the name Leah. The County 
Secretary has worked for one year, I think it is time for us to give him his Rachel and not exchange 
it with Leah. Thank you  Mr .  Speaker.    
 Hon. Isaac Ruttok : Asante sana Bwana Sp i k a . K wa ki fupi tu ningependa kuzungumzia na 
kukubaliana na M jadala  huu wa leo haswa kumpa  Daktari Mwaura  fursa kuwa  County Secretary 
wetu. Kwa hakika amefanya kazi kwa mwaka mmoja na ni  mvumilivu, mnyenyekevu na mwenye  
bidii. Kando na hayo yote nakubaliana kwamba pia yeye hupokea simu hata kwa wakati ambao 
haufahi kupiga simu. Nikimalizia, katika Tamthilia na Fani  za Kiswahili, kuna k itabu  kiliandikwa 
na Ibrahim Hussein,  Mtanzania mwaka wa 1971.   Aliandika kitabu kinaitwa “ Mashetani ” . Wale 
ambao walifanya Tamthilia  mwaka wa 1994  na 1995  wanaelewa kwamba wanaposema Mashetani 
wanamaanisha mbeberu au mnyaynyasaji ama mtu ambaye m i enendo yake ha i fai katika jamii. 
Wacha tumpitishe Daktari Mwaura kama M alaika wetu ambaye tunam jua . Asante  Bwana Spika .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Asante. The Hon orable  Member for Murindat, the Hon orable  
Member for Kamara, the Hon orable  Member from Kuresoi North Mercy Kilel and the Hon orable  
Member for Olkaria in that order. One minute would be enough for each Member.  
Hon. Peter Maina : Mr. Speaker the person in question has obviously demonstrated vast 
knowledge and experience in Public Service and Governance . A nd this  one  is very clear, having 
looked at his work experience in the last 15 years; h aving served in the three previous  
Governments.  
Mr. Speake r ,  the person in question has also deliberately strived to create harmony between the 
two A rms of Government, that is the Legislature and the Executive and many times when we had 
a political crisis, he has rushed to provide a so lution and also give guidance.  
Mr. Speaker, i n many ways, the person in question has also proven to be the engine of the County 
and you may be a very excellent d river  and have a good v ehicle  but without an engine, that v ehicle  
may not move and therefore in my considered opinion, this gentleman may be the e ngine  to move 
the County.  
Mr. Speaker, l ast  but not least , I want to thank a small group from the slopes of Mount Longonot ,  
from the bottom of my heart;  this group previously held a contrary opinion but did not give 
alternatives but I am happy to say that they have given in and stood up for the common good.  
( Applause )  
So, to the small devilish …  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Point of Order Mr. Speaker  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon orable  Member for Murindat ,  what is the group from 
the slopes of Mount Longonot?  
Hon. Peter Maina : Mr. Speaker, let me withdraw; thank you .  
( Laughter )  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon Member for Kamara .  
Hon. John Maritim:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I also rise to support the  Motion in two statements. 
I think Members  here are consulting loudly.  
( Members subsequently paid attention ).  
Okay, Mr. Speaker, I want to support in two forms in that ,  on the issue of Academic Qualification s , 
I believe  Teachers are in this House and in any Academic  giants and Academic  dwarfs; this  
gentleman is an Academic  giant and I have seen that he is doing some PHD  in  Strategic 
Management at Kabarak University. He is earning more knowledge for the purpose of Nakuru 
County.  
Secondly  Mr. Speaker,  Dr.  Mwaura has passion and I believe that great Men  and Women  have 
passion which propels humanity towards achieving a certain goal. So what D r. Mwaura is doing 
is a great passion.  
Finally  Mr. Speaker , he is a very punctual ma n ; there was a time when Mr. Speaker I was attending 
Baptist Church , nowadays I am a devoted Christian and I passed by his Office  only to find him in  
the Office  at 6 am . That shows how punctual he is and this is a gentleman we want to move and 
work together.  With.  Finally Members ,  we will desist from mentioning the word devil. Devils are 
losers ;  when you mention that name it is like you are inviting him to confuse and lie to you. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Olkaria and then then th e Hon. Member 
seated over there.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a:  Thank you  Mr.  Speaker, I will be very brief .  I just wish to support by saying 
that Dr. Mwaura  served as the C hief O fficer (CO)  for Health from 2013 - 2017. Mr. Speaker, I 
dr a w my experience from  him, since he has been in  O ffice .  H e was a committed person and h e is 
still a committed person.  
Mr. Speaker , I  want to also recall when the first list was presented to this House for the CECM s, 
the Mawaziri , 10 of them . H is name was among the list and there was hue  and cry in terms of  
Minorities being involved in that list .  The  list was changed and  D r. Mwaura ’s name  was omitted 
from that list , and I expected him to be part of the complainants or raise a lot of issues , but  he was 
comfortable and he is one person who has sacrificed a lot.  
Mr. Speaker, I want to end by saying that indeed for sure ,  if all the first - timers here have been 
planning in terms of  Njuris ,  if you so wish to be the Njuris ,  then you have no choice but to have 
Mwaura who would work tirelessly to make you happy.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Olkaria you are introducing terminologies 
in this House  
( Laughter )  
What are you driving at?  
Hon. Peter Palang’a : Mr. Speaker, I want to paraphrase it .  Of  course, when you see some of the 
Members  laughing, they have already gotten the context but I want to paraphrase it in a manner 
that is also clear probably to our guests. There is a general feeling that Hon orable  Speaker, for 
those who are  Second - timers or Third - timers like myself, it is a good platform, I am only putting 
a Claus e for those who have been privileged to be elected for the first time ,  I want to agree that 
almost 75 per cent of you  would be  the Njuris  to be elected the second time if only you have Dr .  
Mwaura because he is a person wh o works around the clo c k.  He  is a person who listens and 
endeavors  to deliver.  That  is what I meant  Mr. Speaker .  
Mr. Speaker, i n this case therefore as I rest my case, be proud to have  Dr.  Mwaura so that you have 
the  second term to be called the Njuris .  May God bless you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Palang’a .  It  is good to be clear because our 
Hansard is  not configured in a manner to understand the local dialect. So, it was good of you to be 
able to elaborate.  
Hon. Mercy Kilel:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity .  I take this moment to welcome 
the beautiful w omen  from Kisumu and to tell them that Nakuru is the best C ity to invest, work and 
live in. So, while working in Nakuru feel at Home.  
Mr. Speaker concerning the  Motion of the day, there is a proverb which says “ if you shake a 
Mugumo tree, it is only yo ur  behind that will shake ”  
( Laughter )  
Mr. Speaker, the personality of Dr Mwaura is beyond reproach and a person of great Integrity, 
i ntelligence , and a w orkaholic. I do not wish to repeat myself but I want to encourage Dr .  Mwaura 
and  tell him that he should walk shoulders high, to work with integrity and support the County 
Assembly of Nakuru in his workings and we will duly support him when called upon. We are 
going to support him to work in his new endeavors . Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I wish to urge the 
House which is evident to pass the name and to support the person of Dr. Mwaura. Thank you  Mr. 
Speaker. .  
Thank you.  The  Hon orable  Member for Elementaita and the Hon orable  Member for Kaptembw a  
in that order  
Hon. George Nene: Thank you Mr. Speaker, I want to join my colleagues in supporting the 
appointment of Dr. Mwaura because in the last year that he has been in office, he has portrayed a 
lot of professionalism because number one; Dr Mwaura has a lot of respect to the elected and 
nomin ated Leaders . Whenever we approach him with issues from our respective Wards , he is 
always ready to listen.  
Secondly  Mr. Speaker , Dr. Mwaura is very competent in the way he coordinates the Departments  
of this County. Therefore, I support the appointment of Dr Mwaura as t he County Secretary. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity, I want to welcome 
our  Sisters from Kisumu .  
Hon. Peter Palang’a : Mr. Speaker I just seek your indulgence  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it the Hon orable  Member for Olkaria ?  
Hon. Peter Palang’a:  I just wish to indulge my Hon orable  P eter K ajwang  that even as he is  
contributing, he should appreciate because we had closed that debate before .  So,  I think it is 
important that out of indulgence and your fairness, you extended the debate and that is why he is 
contributing. It is only wise that he also appreciates you that you extended to give him time to 
contribute.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Proceed the Hon. Kajwang .  
Hon. Peter Kajwang:  Hon orable  Palang’a ,  you want to gag me? I wanted to do a special welcome 
to my  s isters from Kisumu .  A s I am standing here, I am also from Kisumu and I  am representing 
here in Nakuru.  I have my s iste r there who is a Deputy Minority Party ,  s o  whenever you are here, 
just know that you are home.  
Mr. Speaker, I will not go into details ,  my senior b rothers have already advised me.  I just want to 
say that the Committee on Appointment s  has done a good job, they have given us somebody who 
is of integrity, somebody who is intelligent, has passion for  the job, who is pragmatic and 
somebody who has a lot of experience. Mr. Speaker your Committee  has brought to us somebody 
who is simply above reproach. On issue s  of pro  bono,  I think I am a continuous beneficiary of his 
pro  bono activities because we belong to the same B oys’ C lub “ ama ukitaka wazee wa mbuzi. ”  
( Laughter )  
Asante sana.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Leah Serem, Deputy Majority Whip.  
The Deputy Majority Whip  (Hon. Leah Serem): Asan te sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipa hii fursa. . 
Ni fursa njema ambapo nimesimama kuunga mkono Mjadala  wa siku ya leo. Nina wa pongeza sana 
the Appointment Committee  kwa kazi nzuri ambayo waliweza kufanya. Dr. Mwaura namjua kama 
mtu mchapa kazi, kijana mwaminifu na mtiifu na pia ni kiongozi na  hata siku z ijazo atakuwa mtu 
mkubwa zaidfi.   
Bwana Spika, n akumbuka wakati mwingine President  wetu ambaye wakati ule alikuwa Deputy 
President alipokuwa ametembelea upande huu wa Nakuru, CS  wakati huo  alikuwa amepewa fursa 
kujadili maneno ya A fya .  alipomaliza kuongea, President wetu alimpongeza sana na akapenda 
sana kujua huyo Mwaura.  
Bwana Spika, n ingependa pia kuwakumbusha wenzangu ambao tulikuwa pamoja  mwaka wa  2013 
kama vile M heshimiwa Palang’a  amesema pamoja na Virginia  ambao wakati huo tulikuwa 
pamoja, na pia nimkumbushe Spika wetu wakati huo pia alikuwa  MCA  na wakat i huu yeye ni  
Spika.  
Bwana Spika, p ia wakati huo Governor  wetu alikuwa Spika wa County Assembly in 2013  lakini 
mnaona hii dunia ni mviringo. Kwa hivyo hatujui letu kesho tutakuwa wapi? Leo tuko hapa 
wenzetu ambao wako hapa, kesho tuko katika Executive  na wengine pia wata enda ngazi za juu 
watakuwa katika National Assembly.  Kwa hivyo nawaombea baraka wenzangu hapa .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order!  
The Deputy Majority Whip  (Hon. Leah Serem): Mwenzangu yuko hapa ananichanganya kidogo, 
anacheka akinigu s a  m guu .  
( Laughter )  
Sijui ni nini? Pole  Bwana Spika. N ingependa pia …  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member, remember the Deputy Majority Whip would 
want to get a confirmation ;  you have  just made a very serious comment so, the Hon. Majority 
Whip did you disturb in a way to...   
( Laughter )  
What did you exactly do the Hon. Fadhili the Majority Whip?  
Deputy Majority Whip  (Hon. Leah Serem): Mheshimiwa Spika wacha nimsamehe halafu 
baadaye tutaonana kando. Nilikuwa na agenda  kwamba hao W aheshimiwa wenzangu walipokuwa 
wanazunguka kuomba V iti  kwa  Wanjiku, kuna agenda amba z o waliweza kuwaambia na vile vile 
Governor wetu aliweza kutaja ya kwamba A fya itakuwa kipao mbele pamoja na Kilimo  na pia 
Masomo  na kupata Maji  masafi.  Tunajua kwamba CS wetu alikuwa CO  wetu wa A fya katika 
County  yetu ya Nakuru  na hatutakuwa tumekosea na  hata Governor  hajakosea kabisa kwa sababu 
atakuwa akisukuma gurudummu l a A fya katika N chi yetu ili tuweze kuendelea. Tutakapo pitisha 
CS  wetu, tutakuwa tumeongezea Governor wetu gurudumu  na kazi itaweza kusonga mbele. 
Asanteni sana.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; The Hon orable  Member for Viwandani then the 
Hon orable  Member for Subukia, the Hon orable  Member for Bahati in that order then you do 
another final round and then we put to question.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Asante sana Bwana  Spika kwa sababu ya fursa hii .  Kwanza  nipongeze 
Kamati  yako ambayo ni ya Appointment s .  Nikiweza kuzungumzia ni kana kwamba tunaongea 
maneno ambayo in your wisdom of the Committee  kana kwamba hamkufanya vetting  ili v yokuwa 
inafaa.  
Kwa sababu Bwana Spika, tunaposimama, tunaongea kuhusu mtu ambaye mliuliza maswali., 
mliona anafaa, ambaye kwa hekima yako kama Spika wetu  na kama kiongozi wa hii Committe e ,  
ya kwamba mliona ni vyema na mkatuletea. Mjadala huu sio kama ule wa mashamba ama kama 
mwingine bali ni wa jina la mtu ambaye kila mmoja hapa anamuenzi.  
Kwa hivyo Bwana  Spika, hata kama kila mtu a taweza kum zungumzia, tutarudia yale manen;  kila 
mtu atasema yale yale maneno tu. Kwa hivyo ningeomba Bwana  Spika kwa hekima yako, iweke 
kwa swali halafu sisi tutoke tukajadiliane hayo mengine kama  Wabunge kwa sababu haifai 
tushinde tukiongea kitu kimoja. Sio kwamba hawawezi sema lakini hakuna mwenye atasimama 
hapa kama vile M heshimiwa Kajwang alisema, kama ha t a simami kupinga ni wewe tu tungepatia 
nafasi lakini M heshimiwa Spika, tafadhali naomba tu uturuhusu twende tukajadilie mengine huko 
nje kama tunayo.  
Hon. Jane Gituku:  Point of information Mr. Speaker sir .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Maiella ,  I am going to save you; give your 
input.  
Hon. Jane Gituku:  [On a Point of Information] Thank you Mr. Speaker sir that  is what I was 
crying for because  Mheshimiwa  has already expressed  his mind, we should also be given that 
opportunity. The Standing Order  96 (3) say s that  this  Motion cannot be limited unless maybe it is 
adjoined. So, I think we are in the right track.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Mr.  Speaker that O rder does not have a C hapter 3 .  
Hon. Jane Gituku:  No, I have said Clause 3 , Mheshimiw a,  that one I had not seen. Mr. Speaker 
sir protect me.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Proceed  
Hon. Jane Gituku : Thank you, Mr.  Speaker, we welcome the team from Kisumu .  I believe this is 
a learning experience. We also want to thank the Committee  that sat down and gave us the name 
of Dr .  Mwaura. One thing that I can say is that Dr .  Mwaura is one person who is a hands - on man. 
Mr. Speaker, I remember during campaigns, most of us who were blessed to host the Governor, 
can remember very well that Dr. Mwaura was always at the site and therefore he is a well - versed 
man with the  Manifesto.  
Mr. Speaker, h e was ready to answer questions, was ready to take up on any issue raised by the 
public and I believe when we allow him to continue as the C ounty S ecretary  despite the fact that 
he has acted for one year, we will be giving ourselves, the Governor and the County Assembly and 
the elected MCA’s an opportunity to maybe achieve what we really promised Wanjiku.   
Mr. Speaker, o ne thing I would put forward as a request as I support this Motion  is when the 
M ajority L eader  was reading the profile of Dr .  Mwaura. He mentioned  something about 
Procurement ,  you know that most of the Hon orable  Members almost get H igh B lood P ressure 
because of the issues of P rocurement. Mr. Speaker, p lease put this as a very serious issue so that 
our C ounty S ecretary  will be able even if it means converging us somewhere and assure us that 
this issue of Procuremen t will be able to give the MCA’s an opportuni ty to deliver and even to 
utilis e the Ward s funds that they have promised  W anjiku .  
Mr. Speaker, most  of us have really failed on the issue of Ward  funds because of the Procuremen t 
issues and so I believe that being a t horn  in the f lesh , we shall revisit it; even after we have 
supported this Motion. Otherwise Mr.  Speaker ,  I support this Motion  100 per cent that we need 
Dr. Mwaura as our C ounty S ecretary  if we need to progress as a County  and as an Assembly. 
Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you .  There  was an order where we had lined Hon. Isabella, 
Hon orable  Member for Bahati in that order and then we are going to take another round and finally, 
the Leader of Majority is going to respond and then we will call it a day.  
Hon. Isabella Makori:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker, I can see some Members  are very jealous and 
selfish; they submit contributions and they want the  Motion to cease. The County Secretary is the 
H ead of the County  Public Service and is also the Secretary  to the County Executive Committee. 
As H ead of the Public Service , the  Office holder is responsible for the coordination and smooth 
operation of all County Departments .  
Mr. Speaker, Dr Mwaura having worked  in  A cting C apacity in that position for the last year ,  he 
h as the experience .  I was privileged to vet him  and  I can say without any contradictions to this 
House that he serves with dili gence and deserves the seat. So  I support  him, let us confirm him to 
give us the way forward and I know that Nakuru County will shine.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi:  Asante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii na pia nikaribishe kina 
dada z etu kutoka Kisumu  na wale mumekuja nao .  Mungu awabariki kwa kututembelea. Bwana 
Spika, n imesimama Kuunga mkono Mjadal a huu na kwanza kupongeza Kamat i  hii yako ya 
Appointment s  na pia kumpongeza sana Gavana wetu ambaye yeye ndiye P resident  wetu wa 
County  kwa kutuletea jina safi la mtu ambaye tunamjua na tunampenda.; ambaye  amekuwa 
a kifanya kazi pamoja nasi closely  na mtu ambaye anasikia  .  
Bwana Spika, Mheshimi wa Kalamit   amesema Bwana Mwaura  si mwepesi wa kunena, anasikiza 
na huo ni ukweli wa mambo.Bwana Mwaura haneni haraka na anasikiza sana kwa sababu 
K iongozi mzuri lazima akuzi kize na unasema nini. In short  nataka niseme naunga mkono Mjadal a 
huu maana tunajua ya kwamba C ounty S ecretary  katika Kaunti , yeye ni wa tatu katika hirachy  
kutoka kwa Gavana, Deputy Governor , tunakuja kwa C ounty S ecretary  ambaye ni lazimna awe 
anafanya kazi closely na Governor  wetu.  
Bwana Spika, t unampongeza kwa kazi a lio fanya mwaka mmoja na tunajua k wamba ataendelea 
kufanya kazi n a kutushikilia sisi viongozi wa Nakuru  tunapomshikil i a pia.  Bwana Mwaura ,  nataka 
kumsema kwa neno moja tu, yeye ni mpole wa maneno lakini mtendaji kazi kwa hali ya juu; mpole 
wa maneno na mwingi wa matendo . I support.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, now we need to bring this to a close ,  some of us have 
got...  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Point of O rder Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Kindly the Hon orable  Member for Elburgon, if you could save 
us so that we do not use anytime in the O rders ,  so that in the next five minutes we are done. You 
see now when the House L eadership stands or want s  to contribute, we are not able to just assume 
that. So, in that order, L eadership started with the Hon orable  Majority Whip, the Deputy Majority 
Leader and the Minority Whip in that order and then because we have to be clear on this, the Hon. 
Member for Waseges and the Hon orable  Leader of Majority Party will respond and the n we put it 
to question.  
The Majority Whip  (Hon. Fadhili Mzuri): Asante san a Bwana Spika. Y angu nitachukua muda 
mchache sana kushukuru  Kamati ambayo imefanya kazi hii nzuri kutuletea mtu ambaye ni mchapa 
kazi na  ni shujaa. Cha msingi ni kwam ba sisi tunafurahi kwamba sasa O fisi hii ya County 
Secretary  inapata mtu ambaye si A cting  tena  but  ni mtu ambaye ni confirmed.  
Bwana Spika, k wa sababu  mimi  ni mtu ambaye Mungu ali m pa kipaji ch a kutabiri nyota za watu;  
nataka nitabiri nyota ya Bw ana  Mwaura  ni K iongozi ambaye naona anaenda mbali na kuna nyota 
moja nimeona na sijui kama yeye ameiona nitazungumza na yeye baadaye . N aona nyota yake ya 
kisiasa ni nzuri. Na siku moja atakuja kuwa M bunge wa Gilgil na kwa hivyo ningetaka kumwambia 
pia aendelee kwa sababu  no man is limited; we have unlimited opportunities . Asante sana  Bwana 
Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon orable  Deputy Leader of Majority  Party.  
The Deputy Majority Leader  (Hon. Rose Njoroge): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I also want to join 
my colleagues in congratulating our C ounty S ecretary  for the way the Members  have really 
supported the Motion  and I say that my only experience with Dr.  Mwaura, the C ounty S ecretary  
is , he is a guy of his words.  Very  intelligence and he knows our Count y in and out. Having been 
in the first County Government, he did his job well and up to this moment, he really articulates the 
issues of the County well because he knows them like the back of his hand. So, I join my colleagues 
in supporting the  Motion and say tha t he deserves  the seat. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Minority Leader  (Hon. Virginia Wamaitha):   Thank you Mr. Speaker, for giving 
me this chance to contribute on the Motion .  First , I would like to appreciate Member s from Kisumu 
County who have come to benchmark with us. That means Nakuru we are doing well especially 
the Committee on Welfare  
( Applause )  
Mr. Speaker, n ext, I appreciate the Committee  for the work well done which you headed Mr. 
Speaker. Mine is very brie f on something I have seen here;  harmony between County Executive 
and County Assembly. Members as you are aware, sometimes you have issues when you want to 
invite various C ounty E xecutive Committees (CECMs)  and C hief O fficer s  (C O s) .  Here  the C ounty 
S ecretary  has assured us that whenever we need these people to come and answer questions that 
pertain s  to our Wards, to our County in every aspect,  he will make sure that these people come 
and we would be able to drive this County  to where we want it to be. Mr. Speaker I arise to support 
you; having known Dr .  Mwaura since he was a Pharmacist  in Naivasha  Level Four Hospital. Thank 
you  Mr. Speaker.  
T he Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the Hon orable  Member for Waseges and then the 
Leader of Majority.  
Hon. Elijah Murage:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I just have only three attributes for Dr .  Mwaura; 
Dr .  Mwaura is smart, he is eloquent and Dr .  Mwaura is a good listener. I arise to support the 
Motion and I say Yes. Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
( Applause )  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Leader of the Majority Party .  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang’at):  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I want to take this great 
opportunity going by the mood though I do not want to assume until the question is really put, for 
the great words that as  I was sitting, passionate  words  have been uttered by these great minds, men 
and women of honour .   
Mr. Speaker,  when  it comes to the decisive moment, where it really matters, the issue of C ounty 
S ecretary  Mr. Speaker, in my short stint as the Majority Leader in this House, has been very 
emotive. It is an issue that as an Assembly, the great unity that we have been building, the great 
walk that we have been working together, agreeing, talking to each other; doing many things 
together as an Assembly has not been easy.  
Mr. Speaker,  as we bring this debate to an end, I would wish that with the same strength, energy, 
and way we really took the appointment of this C ounty S ecretary  will act and foster and make us 
a great Assembly that will be more united than ever before. It is the  joy of any L eader that 
whenever you lead, whoever you are leading ,  we are able to move and we are able to work together, 
we are tied together; we have a time that we are sticking together for the next four years or so Mr. 
Speaker.  
M r . Speaker, a s I sat today and listened to the contributions of Members  and the way Member s 
have come in their numbers ,  I have no doubt Mr. Speaker as a L eader that whatever short stint of 
division that was there  is totally closed and we shall continue to move together as a great County 
Assembly of Nakuru, a n assembly that is full of people with divergent views but as an Assembly 
also  that do what they are supposed to do when the time to do it actually comes .  A nd I think the 
time for this great debate has come for us to be able to move forward.  
Mr. S peaker, i n conclusion, I am a believer that this House because it s its with  leaders ,  that any 
good L eader is not known much by the many things we have done before. We know we have our 
own responsibilities from our various Ward s and there are many project s that we are going to do 
but a  good L eader will be r emembered because of the L eaders that they made.  
Mr. Speaker, w e are here today and we want to make one more L eader by passing the name of Dr. 
Mwaura. Mr. Speaker, when we do that as an Assembly and as I humbly request the Assembly to 
assist the L eadership in passing the name of this great gentleman who has been described by many 
in an open manner in a daylight like today  that  he is competent .;  to sum up what the Members have 
said that  he fits in the position and he is a good listener.  
Mr. Speaker,  p ersonally , I always describe him as a small gentleman with a lot of brains; a guy 
who listens and as a L eader who has also had a lot of interactions with this great gentleman called 
Mwaura and as a link of this Assembly, if this great Assembly so desires to pass his name as a 
leader for the time I am, I think I have a great partner who will link the issues o f the Assembly 
directly to the Executive.  
So  Mr. Speaker , as I sit down, I say it is never done until it is done. It is my humble duty to request 
these great Members ,  they may support the Motion for this gentleman who worked tirelessly for 
Nakuru,  who has been there for a whole year in an Acting Capacity ; who has always had a listening 
ear; has always worked with us, who has always been there for you individually to listen to you; 
your needs, listen to the needs of Wanjiku on behalf , to make our works easier as MCAs to be able 
to link us to the CEC s and the C O s.  
Mr. Speaker, t hat man who has never shied away even for a minute . When  you call him, he leaves 
his glamour, in his good big A cting O ffice to come to this Assembly to listen to us .  That  you may 
give him an opportunity to be the County Secretary of this great County  of Nakuru. Mr. Speaker ,  
it  i s my duty to request the Members  that let them consider Dr .  Mwaura as our County Secretary. 
Mr. Speaker I wish to rest my case. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you I now want to put it to Question  
( Question proposed that Pursuan t to Section 44 of the County Government Act, No. 17 of 2012, 
Section 9 of the Public Appointment Act that deals with the County Approvals of 2017 and 
Standing 0rder 48 (4) this House adopts the Report  of the Committee on Appointment s  on the 
vetting of D r. Samuel Mwangi Mwaura for appointment to the position of County Secretary and 
the Head of Public Service of the County Government of Nakuru. )  
( Question put and agreed to )  
( Applause )  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honorable Members, this House stands adjourned to today 2.30  PM .  
The House rose at 11.50  AM  
 
 
 
 