FEBRUARY 22, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 22nd February, 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 2.50pm  
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui) in the Chair].  
PRAYERS  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui):  Clerk, what is the order of the day.  
MOTION  
HOUSE ADOPTS BUDGET COMMITTEE REPORT ON SUPPLEMENTARY 1 OF 2021/2022                           
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui):  Honorable chair for budget, Joel Maina Karuri.  
Hon. Joel Karuri:  Mr. Deputy Speaker sir, thank yo u for that opportunity to be able to move this 
Motion ;- 
THAT the House adopts the Budget and Appro priations Committee Report on The Nakuru County 
Supplementary Budget No.1 of 2021/2022 .  
In the morning we tabled the report of the Budget and Appropriations committee on 
Supplementary 1 for the financial year 2021/2022. Of importance is to look at the rationale for the 
Supplementary 1 for the financial year 2021/2022. Of significance is that this paper  was addressing 
an opportunity for the residents of this Co unty together with their representatives who are the 
Honorable Members of this House, to be able to make the changes that they will and the changes 
that they thought will suite them in response to their service and development needs.  
 It is important that also in the main budget, there were things that needed to be reallocated and 
departmental budget needed to be reallocated so that we can now have the desired amount of 
money to address the needs and expenditure projections. So, basically th ose were the main reasons 
for this supplementary and I think going forward when these projects will be implemented that 
will mean good for this county. It is also good to know that the department within the County 
Government of Nakuru, starting from page 10, the Office of the Governor, the Deputy Governor, 
the County Treasury and all the departments , there are slight changes here and there to be able to 
make the departments carry out their financial needs for the year ending.  
FEBRUARY 22, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 This being the first supplementary, we do not know whether in the future there will be another 
supplementary but as of now th ere were need for money for  development and other service 
delivery areas. It is good that the members had this report since morning and it circulated in good 
time and they have been able tom interact with the documents and ask questions here and there 
wher e there were issues. So, we go to the committee recommendations on page 21, that pursuant 
to the section 39 (8) of the PFM Act, that one regulates the County Government. The County is 
advised to desist from introducing new policy options and service delive ry initiatives in the 
supplementary as this should be in the annual budget estimates.  
That, is a very important aspect whereby, as a committee we agree that there are needs and some 
of these needs are not foreseen at the start of the budget making process for any financial year, 
although the main budget is being passed. But then, it is important to know that for a supplementary 
it is not an avenue for new projects , it is an avenue for reallocating and moving funds here and 
there across the department. But i t is important to know that there is no additional money for any 
development partners or from the National Treasury to fund the County Government of Nakuru 
and so, we feel that at times there are introductions of other new projects that really distracts th e 
committee and even other development projects and other development programs which is not 
encouraged.  
 
A major project or programs need to be introduced at the main budget level, we do not oppose 
continuation of any project that is not complete but intro duction of new project as a committee we 
stand firm and we really urge the treasury not to introduce new items in the budget.  The county is 
directed to upscale the mobilization of revenue collection. That is another area that we have gone 
on record now and  then and I want to really urge the chairman for Finance committee to look into 
the performance of the county in terms of meeting the target for the local revenue. It is good to 
give a hint that we are not in a good trajectory, which only serves developmen t deficits which 
again affects the part of the budget as far as the implementation of the budget and projects is 
concerned.  So, we urge the committee and the chair man to look into that.  
The other recommendation is that the committee, has noted that there h as been a deliberate 
omission for the  payment of the pending bills that the county owes the suppliers. It is known that 
a debt is the first charge and so there should be prudence or we allocate money to pay any debts 
or any pending bills. The c ommittee  is of the opinion that the first thing should be to pay the debts 
and the money should not be used to pay other upcoming issues or other emerging issues. So, that 
one is an issue because also the CS for National treasury has written to counties urging them to  
pay so that our suppliers can enjoy  business in these counties.  
The other recommendation, which is significant is that, accounting officers are directed to ensure 
expenditure commitments for goods and services is controlled against spending and procurement 
plans approved by the responsible accounting officer based on a llocations and allotments from the 
FEBRUARY 22, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 approved budgets and no projects or programs should be initiated without the requisite budgetary 
allocation. There are temptations to introduce recurrent that were not in the main budget and 
spending programs that were no t in the main program. So, as a committee we are against this and 
our recommendation is that accounting officers should not  introduce programs  that were not in the 
main budget or supported by the budget.  
The committee also noted that the allocation for per sonnel recruitment in the Department of Lands, 
Housing and Urban planning remained unutilized, despite the department lacking critical skills 
and competences in its even establishment. In this regard the department of Lands is directed 
forthwith to expedit e the replacement of critical cadres. It is important to note and even to bring 
this House into the know that should we require services from the department of Lands there are 
no workforce in this department, there are no sufficient surveyors, maybe one su rveyor is supposed 
to work on three sub counties. And the minimum 2 sub counties, which is not good for service 
delivery in that department is critical when it comes to matters development, because development 
happens from land. And so this is where the co mmittee has pushed for the recruitment of the said 
officers, because the budget is there.  
And it was funny and it was not funny at all, having a budget, and the Department of Lands has 
not gone ahead to recruit. And so, the committee we specifically and deliberately put this 
recommendation here. So that now the  Kshs  9.9 million can be utilized for employment of 
surveyors so that now our residents can get the services.  
 This supplementa ry, they are changing here and there. The annex on page 23. They are the projects 
that have been changed. And so, the members having gone through the document from  page 10 
they can see their projects what was changed and what was moved from this vote to the other, from 
one department to the other and so I want to invite Hon. Mbae from Kabazi who is a Member of 
this Committee to second . Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you, Chair for budget. Hon. Mbae  
Hon. Peter Mbae:  I Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to second. Thank you so much, Mr. 
Chairman budget. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have had a very important task, not very easy  to 
balance, what I would call the realistic view of this budget. The purpose of a supplementary is try 
to look at from where we are, how best we can move forward with the reality of what may have 
happened since we passed the last budget.  
I would want in m y short speech in supporting this, I would want to urge these members, that we 
have done our best as a Budget committee sitting many hours, to try to rationalize everything from 
the proposals from the executive and also from some very sensitive initiatives  that have come up 
from this House that wanted to strengthen and make sure they are …  
It is good to start with the with appreciation, when we pass the budget, we remember we came up 
and through this House, we passed a very ambitious program. The internshi p programs . And it's 
FEBRUARY 22, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 good to appreciate that today , 600 young people from this county have been able to be absorbed , 
about 290 of them degree holders , other diploma holders and certificate holders. For the first time 
since devolution, we are able to give hope to the young people from each ward.  
And is good to assure you that by the time we got to this we are able to call the board and they 
assured that  every ward has people who have been picked, I want to thank this Assembly, the 
second assembly of Nakuru for being so gracious and looking at that as a need.  
 Also, we passed some money  Kshs 86 million for CHVs. The community of volunteers, and it is 
good  to record that as we come to the supplementary that already 3620 community health 
volunteers across this county have been paid stipend from October . Each volunteer is paid  2000 
Kenya shillings. It is good to start with appreciating what this Assembly has been able to do. In its 
wisdom they were able to scale up the money like internship, the money that was less that was 
allocated we were able to scale up and also CHVs , the only thing you want to urge is that we had 
… budgets 300 ECD teachers up now , they will be recruited we want to urge and we have told the 
Department of Education. We have told the Public Service Board that 300 teachers, these are 
teachers who are supposed to go and alleviate the suffering of the parents who actually go with the 
most vulne rable children to the ECDs.  
 We want to urge again that within the next week or so, actually days we should have that advert. 
So, the people of Nakuru, the teachers who have been hired by parents can now get a chance to be 
able to be hired by the county go vernment.  
We were strong on health;  we were able to relocate money. We want to decongest PGH and so in 
consultation with the Health Department and in our wisdom as Budget commitment we were able 
to give money to other satellite hospitals like Langa Langa , Mithonge, Bahati, Upper Solai  that 
serves Solai  ward and upper Kabazi we do not want congestion in the city.  
We were strong on agriculture and we have added more money to hire extension officers for each 
ward to help in agriculture. Nakuru is an agricult ural County so we were able to balance and see 
what is it that mwananchi friendly? What is it that can touch Wanjiku? Because that is the purpose 
of the taxpayer’s money.  
My chairman has alluded to the fact that we do not have single valuer in this county as we speak, 
we have allocated  about Kshs  9 million to the Lands Department to hire staff so we have directors 
and other staff they need.  
 I would want to end by saying, on the issue of sports, this committee and they urge the House to 
support, in its wisd om have found it wise to allocate, we have our flagship, you know in Kuresoi 
we have the athletics area but you also need stadium, like Gilgil, Njoro, Molo, Kamukunji, St. 
Teresa, others allocated some money for social hall in Kabazi, Molo, Njoro so that w e can be able 
to move forward as a county. I beg to second.  
FEBRUARY 22, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui):  Thank you Hon. Mbae, it is my time to propose a 
question , 
(Question proposed  that this House adopt s the report of the Committee on Budget and 
Appropriation on the county government of Nakuru Supplementary  no.1 of 1 2021 /2022 tabled  
during this morning sitting )  
Now the Motion is open for debate, Hon.  Gathariki . 
Hon. Joseph Kamanu : Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker Sir. I take this opportunity to thank the 
chair and the committee members for thorough job and well done. I know it has not been an easy 
task to burn midnight oil to ensure that we come up with such a document that shall brid ge the gap 
in our budget.  
 I would like to concur with the Chair that a number of departments are affected by natural attrition. 
Some of the staffs are no longer there. Some are passed over some are retired and even some have 
gone for greener pastures. And  it is our task to ensure that we bridge the gap and no lacuna that is 
within the county so that we can ensure that services are there within core departments of the 
count y. 
 I know there are members who did a lot of input to also to inquire from our const ituents to ensure 
that everything that we had factored in the budget is implemented but unfortunately, due to the 
shortage of staffs within some departments, the budget has not been affected.  
So, within the proposals that have made this supplementary budg et, it is timely because we have 
also got a window to ensure that we also bridge some very needed cases within the wards. And it 
is we know that the executive to ensure that they implement the proposals and also to ensure that 
all departments that had been  allocated funds within a major budget the proposals are affected .  
As Mheshimiwa Daktari has alluded we are lagging behind, and we have set aside funds, some of 
these ECDs you can meet a class with over 50 or 100 pupils. But being handled by single teache r. 
we also need to equip some facilities that we have constructed through the county funds. and for 
our people to ensure that they get value for money. It is that time that executive takes these noble  
agenda with urgency it deserves to ensure that people g et what they need, because we have already 
set aside for the same. and I am sure as we progress, because you also have time constraints , it 
would be prudent to ensure that every proposal and every shilling is factored in the major budget 
and also in the su pplementary. I am sure some areas are facing some challenges down there. It is 
upon the Executive to hold the bull by the horn to ensure that what they have recommended we 
have adopted and I am sure we shall resolve and resolute they implement to ensure th at their people 
are also employed. At least this House has achieved a number of steps. We are far ahead than other 
County Assemblies within the Country. We have also set precedent that can be also be replicated 
in other Counties because we have already set  the pace. Without much ado, I do support and it is 
FEBRUARY 22, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 my humble request that the County Executive shall work with speed to ensure that we achieve the 
best within the time remaining. I support. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you. Ho n. Vice Chair for Budget.  
Hon. Anthony Rotich: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. I stand here to support the Motion and 
first, let me thank the entire Budget Committee, your office and that of the Clerk  for the support 
during this process. I entirely suppo rt the Motion especially on the side of health sector. In Kuresoi 
South, we have one Sub -County Hospital which is the referral hospital for Kuresoi South and 
North. The facility has been in a pathetic situation. We do not have a modern mortuary. Dead 
bodie s are being thrown on the floor. Recently, I attended a funeral in my Ward where a certain 
old man passed and when I was there with our able Deputy Governor, we were accused so much 
because the body of that old man was rotten and even the mourners were eve n restricted from 
viewing the body since the body was in a pathetic condition . I thank the Budget Committee for 
reallocating funds to purchase a modern refrigerator to assist in preserving the bod ie. We have 
been ferrying bodies from Kuresoi South from tha t end of Kiptagich, Keringet and those other 
sides of Nyota and Kiptororo to Molo for the preservation of the dead bodies. Reallocating the 
funds to the facility will assist us so much that we shall not be transporting bodies from Kuresoi 
South to Molo. I support this Motion and urge the entire House to support it. Thank you.  
The Deputy S peaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you Hon. Rotich. Hon. Wahome.  
Hon. Isaac Wahome: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. First of all, I want to appreciate our 
able Chair, the Vice Chair and our colleagues in the Committee. We have burned the mid -night oil 
and that is why we have this good document on our table this afternoon. Having sat on this 
document, I have no much to say because I agree totally with it. I would wish only to insist and 
put more emphasis on recommendation especially on recommendation number  2. It reads that the 
County is directed to upscale the mobilization of local revenue collection. I believe this is not a 
mandate of this Committee but the Committee on Finance and if the Committee of Finance in the 
County Assembly of Nakuru does its work quite well, I believe it will enhance revenue collection 
and this revenue collected will be useful in the subsequent annual or supplementary budget in 
future.  
The other recommendation is number 5 and this is very critical especially right now that we are 
counting months as we end our tenure. The Ward projects must be prioritized and fastracked to 
ensure that they are timely completion. Further, the County to undertake economic analysis of the 
need, sustainability of this project to ensure that only optimal  projects are undertaken. Going 
forward, the County is directed to operationalize and equip already completed projects. This is 
very critical because each and every Member of this House would wish that all the projects; those 
that are in the supplementary and the other documents especially the main budget should be 
fastracked. They  should be expedited in implementing them so that they are useful to the 
mwananch i because these projects do not serve the MCA, neither the County Assembly but they 
FEBRUARY 22, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 serve director ate and they usually identify them during public participation. Some are very critical 
and they need to be critically delivered. For instance,  bursaries. You will realize we have some 
cases whereby bursary has long delayed until even some students have com pleted form four and 
the cheques have not  been  disbursed. We would wish that the relevant department usually take 
first charge and ensure these projects are fastracked. The final one is on the Department of Lands. 
The Committee noted the allocation for per sonnel recruitment in the department of Lands, Housing 
and Urban Planning remained unutilized and the document has addressed the issue of the staffs. 
This Department has not utilized its funds. We would wish that they address this issue and make 
sure that after they do person nel recruitment, they absorb their funds. I wish to support. Thank 
you.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Alright. Let me give to Hon. Machembu and then I 
put question.  
Hon. Machembu Chege: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. I ri se to support the good work done 
by the Budget Committee led by the able Chair Hon. Joel Karuri. I am particularly impressed by 
the Department of Roads, Transport and Public Works because the Budget Committee has 
allocated Kshs  10 million to fuel the machi nes that we are having as a County. It has been a big 
problem but sometimes, the machines are not able to operate because there is no fuel. If these 
machines are put into proper use, then they can change the whole of this County in terms of roads 
infrastru cture. I am also impressed by some of the Members who have allocated some money from 
the Ward kitty and they have decided to put that money so that in case the headquarter money for 
fuel is exhausted, then that money can be used specifically for the Ward. I want to say categorically 
and even the  CECM to address the department of Roads Transport and Public Works to hear that 
any money that has been allocated from the Ward kitty, Mr. Deputy  Speaker sir we shall do our 
oversight and we press that that money wi ll have to go to the wards. There has been a problem that 
sometimes money has been allocated to the wards but when it comes to implementation,  we are 
not able to quantify clearly that this money was used in a particular ward. This time because we 
are in a final lap, we need to be very categorical that the department will have to listen carefully 
and do exactly that by allowing that money that has been allocated by various wards so that it is 
utilized for the intended purpose. Another area that probably we n eed also to recommend is that 
the KRD money, the road levy fund, that somehow it was conditional grant to the County 
Government but things are changing in that it is no longer conditional and therefore the department 
and the government will need to relook  that so that that money we shall know whether it will be 
going to roads directly or it can be used for other developments  for example in building hospitals, 
classrooms and so on because that money was conditional, it was supposed to go direct to the road s 
but now the tag of conditional has been removed and therefore the money looks a bit open and that 
is an area that we need to look. So originally that money we have been able to enhance from Kshs  
118 million from Kshs  102 million so that we are having qui te a lot of money around Kshs  220 
million that will go direct to the roads and out of that we have gotten some money for fuel and also 
for the casual workers.  
FEBRUARY 22, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Currently you will realize that the operators of those particular machines they have stayed for a bit 
of time without being paid their allowances. Therefore,  some of the money, I have noticed it has 
been allocated to clear the arrears of the casual workers who are in a bad shape. Therefore I want 
to applaud that decision to allocate money so that we can pay because they are doing some good 
work and without all ocating money probably they will not be paid but now with the passage of 
this supplementary budget then you will realize they will get their dues and they will continue with 
the good work they are doing. Otherwise Mr. Deputy  Speaker sir, I do support the r eport and the 
Motion.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you. Hon. Eddy  
Hon. Eddy Kiragu : Mr.  Deputy Speaker if you allow me only two seconds. I take this opportunity 
to appreciate the Budget Committee of which I am a member for the great work done. Basically,  I 
want to raise very important issues; I will take you to page 18 of the report. As the chairperson 
Sports Culture Gender committee in Nakuru County, I am so delighted that during the Second 
Assembly and this being our fifth year, we have been doing KI SA Games this is very instrumental 
because you are aware that majority of youth who have talents must be recognized. You see in that 
page 18 there is allocation of KISA games basically for both below aged 24 and it always happens 
nationally an d this time round it will be in Kajiado County. It will be so unfortunate if Budget 
Committee could not be in a position to allocate such amount and hence denying our youth such 
an opportunity. Again,  you will see we have various sub counties being capture d in regards to 
stadium. As you are aware, there is construction which is ongoing at Afraha stadium to modernize 
it. So, we need to ensure that other stadium within Nakuru County or Nakuru city are being 
developed to ensure that there is continuity. As I w ind up, I take you to page 23 where you see the 
summary of both the HQ and the wards  projects . In particular my issue on that page 23 onwards 
report is about assenting this document. It will be very unfortunate Mr. Deputy Speaker if we adopt 
this document today, it takes much time to be assented. I request the County Government of 
Nakuru so that we can give people what they desire service delivery. At this moment of time, we 
are in a critical time where as much as there are many things regarding politics , we were given an 
opportunity to serve the people with responsibility. We have all it takes and therefore I request the 
County Government to go on board and ensure that this document is assented as soon  as possible. 
Thank you and I support.  
The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you Hon. Eddy. I saw Hon. Virginia trying to 
raise something there. It’s your time.  
Hon. Virginia Wamaitha : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker.  First of all, I want to applaud the 
committee for a job well done and my concern is on n o. 3 on recommendations about debt service 
payments. There have been a lot of complains about payment of debts and suppliers and contractors 
being paid. It usually ta kes a lot of time and sometimes it requires the contractors and suppliers to 
get money fro m the bank and some of them end up being auctioned by the banks. So, because of 
this document, and now that we are going to adopt it, I would request the relevant department to 
FEBRUARY 22, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 get their suppliers and contractors paid on time so that we encourage contracto rs and suppliers in 
Nakuru County to continue working with the county. The other thing is that there has been delays 
in the procurement department. They were complaining of having shortage of staff and as at last 
month, they hired more staff and so we expe ct the projects which need to be procured be done 
before we start on another budgeting process for the year 2022/2023. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker . 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Hon George  
Hon. George Machoka:  Thank you very much Hon. Deputy Sp eaker I want to take this 
opportunity to applaud the Budget committee for the good work done …  
Hon Eddy Kiragu : Mr. Deputy Speaker this is a House of rules and order. One, Hon George Kiere 
is not in decorum  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): So, Hon. George Kiere  I think you are not in decorum 
and I wish you can go out and dress properly then you come  
[Hon George Machoka withdrew from  the chamber as ordered  by the Deputy Speaker]  
I think Hon. George is there somebody to h elp him with a tie if he wants to contribute but he is 
running away. Now I want to propose a question  
Question proposed that this House adopts the report of the Committee of the Budget and 
Appropriation on the County Government of Nakuru Supplementary no.1  of 2021/2022 laid 
during the morning sitting ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
This House is adjourned until tomorrow at 9.30 am  
(The House rose at 3.35pm ) 
 
   
           