COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 25 th  October , 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:00 AM  
 [The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYER  
MOTION  
HUMAN RIGHTS PROTECTION REPORT  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Motion  by the honorable Antony Kanyere, the 
Chairperson , Committee  on Justice and Legal Affairs.  
Hon.  Anthony Kanyere:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to move a Motion that this House adopts 
the Report  of the Committee  on Justice and Legal Affairs on the County Government of Nakuru 
on Human Rights Protection.  
Mr. Speaker, I stand on behalf of the Committee ,  and the Committee  derives its mandate from  the  
Standing Orders. The  Justice and Lega l  Affairs  Committee  is established pursuant to the provisions 
of the County Assembly of Nakuru Standing Order 194  (a).  The  Committee  is mandated to 
consider all m atters related to Constitutional A ffairs, the  Organization and  Administration of Law  
and Justice , including Election, Ethics, Integrity , and Anti - Corruption on Human Rights as well as 
Public  Petitions.  
 In our Committee  Mr. Speaker, we have twenty two Members .  I take this opportunity to thank 
Member s of the Committee  for their dedication and un wavering support during the Report  Writing  
exercise  and  on behalf of the Committee ,  i t is my pleasure and duty to present this Report  on the 
County Government's role in preserving and protecting Human Rights of its Citizens.  
Mr. Speaker , the  Committee  during its deliberation s  and in line with its mandate, observed that the 
County Government had embarked on plans to rehabilitate Street Families within the County, in 
line with the Governor' s A genda of upholding and protecting the Rights, Welfare, and Dignity  of 
Street Families.  
Mr. Speaker, t he Committee  observed that the County Government had partnered with NGOs with 
a view of establishing Rehabilitation Centers for Street Children in Nakuru City , for example, the 
Catholic Diocese of Nakuru, which had established two  Centers for rehabilitation of Street 
Children, Mwangaza and St . Francis Rehab Rehabilitation Centers.  
Mr. Speaker, i n 2020 ,  t he County Government was accused of allegedly rounding up Street Kids 
from the Streets  of Nakuru City at night and du m ping them in Chemasus u  Forest  in Baringo. This 
caused a Public  outcry in the manner in which the exercise was undertaken, and the violation of 
H uman R ights.  
Further Mr. Speaker, several Member s of the Committee  raised concern or numerous complaints 
received from m embers  of the p ublic  on harassment  and  violation of Human Rights by the County 
Enforcement Officers while undertaking their duties.  
 Mr. Speaker, in  view of the above, the Committee  unanimously resolved to invite the Department 
of Public  Service , Citizen Engagement, Disaster Management and  Humanitarian Assistance, 
among  other things  to -   
1.  Deliberate on the Framework put in place to ensure the humane rehabilitation of 
Street Families.  
2.  Measures put in place by the  Department to avert harassment of the Public  by the 
Enforcement Officers.  
Mr. Speaker, the County Executive Committee  Member (CECM) of Public  Service, Devolution, 
Citizen Engagement, Public  Participation, and Disaster Management , Madam Rosaline Mungai, 
the Chief Officer (CO) of Public  Participation and Citizen Engagement , Honorable David Gitau, 
appeared before the Committee  on  1 st  August ,  2023. Th e C E CM appreciated the critical role 
played by the County Assembly towards improvement of Service  Delivery . In view of these Mr. 
Speaker, sir, the Committee  zeroed in on three aspects, whereby we dealt mostly with the Humane 
Rehabilitation  of Street Families and the alleged Human Rights Violation by the County 
Enforcement Officers.  Also, there was an issue that came up about the Municipal Court Fines.  
In the first issue, Mr. Speaker, sir, on the Humane Rehabilitation of Street Families , it has come to 
a concern by the Public  that the menace of Street Families is not only in Nakuru town, but it is all 
over our Country . And that is why we invited the CECM and COs to shed some light on what 
Measures  the County Government has in place to address these issues. During our interrogation. 
Mr. Speaker, sir, they told us that they have some measures that are in place ,  whereby they are 
going to rehabilitate these S treet Families . And of the essence, it was noted that they gave us a 
figure of around 8000 Street Kids across the  County , but they told us only 300 Street Families or 
Street Kids are there permanently. But the rest they them are  D ay Scholars  whereby, they come in 
in the Morning, and in the Afternoon, they go back to their places.  
So  having mentioned the Chemasusu  issue that was there in 2020. Mr. Speaker , as  a Committee , 
we wanted to know, what measures we have as a G overnment to address this issue in a h umane  
way, whereby we understand these Street Families are also Human Beings , and they need to be 
treated with some decorum and even to be given the human dignity. So, during our deliberations, 
the CECM and COs said that there is a facility that the County Government is putting  up  in Njoro 
Area, and in the near future, they are going to settle some Street Families.  
 Also, we  mentioned collaborating with the NGOs especially, the Catholic Diocese of Nakuru to 
give it a human face, the  Church , and the larger Public  have to be brought into this issue, in a 
matter whereby as the government we are going to give it a like a Public  Private Partnership 
whereby even the Public  are going to be involved in this.  
 Mr. Speaker , during  the deliberation s  Mr. Gitau further stated that the circumstance in which  
Streets  Families  find themselves ,  are a perfect breeding ground for Juvenile Delinquency , 
Unlicensed Hawking, Illicit Alcohol Brewing , Soliciting, Criminal Activities, Drug Peddling , and 
general...  are some of the Crime Street Children  engage in. The  Street Children must hence make 
ends meet. While the older Children  can sometimes feed for themselves through more honest 
means such as Hawking, Cult Pooling, Touting , and doing Manual jobs.  
The  Society  mostly frowns on the idea of employing them. Further, Hawking requires a License  
which these Children  cannot afford. They do Report  on illegal  Hawking which often lands them 
on the wrong side of the Law , and in extreme cases, injured or killed in efforts to evade the  Law .  
 Most engage in illegal trade such as Drugs, Alcohol Brewing , and stealing  and  other  crime. The 
girls and sometimes boys find themselves at the mercy of sexual predators and often in the worst 
form of Child Labor or Sex Workers . It is not surprising that they are a big target of Child 
Traffickers,  
Mr. Speaker, we  observed the already tense relationship with the Society  as they are viewed as the 
major suspects of Looting and Vandalism. It has also been observed that there is an emerging trend 
of Juvenile  crimes majorly attributed to Street Children. It is worth noting that Law Enforcement 
Officials had in the past demonstrated brutal attitudes toward Street Families and exploited them 
with impunity. Street Families had reported  that they were often harassed and beaten by Police 
Officers and the Street  Girls Report ed being sexually  abused  by Polic e and County Officers  with 
brute force and with little regard for children's welfare.  
Honorable Gitau stated that to address this issue, there was a need to identify the challenges of 
particular groups of Street Families and design Strategies to alleviate their situations for example 
Psychosocial support to shun Drug Abuse , and Street Families Empowerment through Vocational 
Training  and  Talent developments. Additionally, the creation of employment opportunities should 
be factored into the Rehabilitation Service.  
Wit h regards to the Policy Framework in place. The CECM informed the Committee  that there 
was no Policy Framework both at the National  and Count y level on the rehabilitation of Street 
Families . However Mr. Speaker, the National Government had formulated a D raft National Policy 
on the R ehabilitation of Street Families seeking better conditions, rehabilitation, and reintegration 
of Street Families back into Society .  
The CCM further stated that one of the key Strategies  of the D raft of the National Policy on 
R ehabilitation of  Street Families was the mainstreaming of Street Family issues in all Policy Plans 
and Programs  in Ministry Departments and Agencies, Counties , and Non - State Actors.  
Mr. Speaker, s he further recogni s ed that the County Government through the Department of Social 
Service s  had embarked on plans to ensure humane rehabilitation of Street Families within the 
Urban Centers in the County. To achieve this ,  the  Department had engaged the Street Famil ies’  
Leadership Structure, through Sensitis ation F orums aimed at creating awareness of rehabilitation 
benefits through Reintegratio n ,  Vocational Training and Talent Development.  
 Further, Mr. Speaker, the County Government had engaged Social Workers to identify areas and 
Streets  within Nakuru where Street Children frequent or have established their B ase where they 
reside. She concluded by acknowledging that the Department of Youth ,  Sports and Social Service s  
is  working in collaboration with the various NGOs, the one I have mentioned, especially the 
Catholic Diocese of Nakuru, there is  GOMEC , and others to establish F acilities that will help 
remove the  Families from the Streets .  
Mr. Speaker ,  o n the second issue about the alleged Human Rights violation by the County 
Enforcement. Mr. Speaker, the CECM acknowledged that there were Report s of cases of 
harassment by the Enforcement Officers to M embers  of the P ublic  and similarly, cases of assault 
by the p ublic  against the Enforcement Officers. However Mr. Speaker, the number of r eport ed 
cases has significantly reduced recently compared to the past. This was attributed to the enactment 
of the Nakuru County Law Compliance and Enforcement Act  of 2018,  w hich mandated the County 
Governmen t to establish County Law s  Compliance and Enforcement Units.  
Mr. Speaker, this  was assented to on 21 st  October, 2021 and subsequently gazzeted  on 15 th  July ,  
2022 vide Kenya Gazette Supplementary Number 27 . The CCM highlighted that the objects of the 
Ac t were to:  
1.  To improve our  Framework and  Standards for the establishment and operation of the 
Nakuru County Inspectorate Service .  
2.  To regulate the conduct of County Law Enforcement and Compliance Officers.  
3.  To deliver an independent and effective Inspectorate Service within the County  that 
shall among others ensure compliance with County  Legislation  and Provisions  of the 
Constitution .  
4.  To establish By Laws under Article 185  (2)  of the  Constitution of Kenya an d  Inspection 
Mechanism  to ensure effective performance and exercise of powers conferred on the 
County Government under Part Two of the Fourth Schedule.  
5.   To give effect to the provision of Article 187 189 (1) (b) Section (iv)  of the County 
Law Enforcement Act of 2018 respectively.  
On the Implementation Status of the Act  Mr. Speaker, the CECM confirmed to the Committee  that 
the Departmen t had undertaken measures to ensure the implementation of the provision of the Act 
as follows.  
1.  The County Government has taken Measures to design a Rapid Results Initiative that 
will lead to the expedited development and approval of the Supportive County Laws 
for tabling to the County Assembly.  
2.  The Department had instituted radical reforms that would ensure a cultural change 
within the Inspectorate.  
3.  The Department has stepped up efforts to enhance improvements of the Inspectorate 
through:  
i.   Education and Training  
ii.   Positive Citizen Engagement,  
iii.  Weekly briefing and debriefing parades, and also there is  disciplinary 
Measure s and an Alternative Dispute Resolution Mechanism.  
So Mr. Speaker sir, in that issue of the County Askaris  harassing Wananchi ,  the  CECM told the 
Committee  that they are going to take measures so that disciplinary action can be taken against the 
rogue  Officers so that we can reduce that issue. Also, it was mentioned that even through Public  
Participation and Engagement, the Public  Should treat the Officers  with some decorum and 
respect, Mr. Speaker, sir, while the Officers  are doing that, they always take the offenders to Court.  
These Courts are established under the National Government Structure , whereby when people are 
fined by the County Government , we do not have any mechanism to fi nd that Mone y coming back 
to us. So, this issue was raised , it was a concern of the Committee .  
Mr. Speaker, with regard to the Revenue Sharing Formula , generated from the Court Fines 
imposed by the Municipal Courts, the CECM was categorical that all the  Revenue generated by 
the Municipal Court in terms of Fines  were deposited in the Judiciary Account, which  is a National 
Government Office. she regretted that despite the County Government Housing  the Municipal 
Courts, the County  does not benefit from the said  Revenue . This was attributed to the fact that 
there was a lack of clear guidance on the issue and concluded by stating that the matter was pending 
before the Council of Governors.  
So Mr. Speaker, during our engagement with the CECM and CO, we came across some challenges. 
Mr. Speaker, regardless of the above positive efforts, the CC E M stated that the Department  has 
faced perennial challenges that hindered the effective service delivery, which I can mention.  
One, it's Inadequate Resources . Just to highlight this issue, Mr. Speaker, she stated that there was 
a decline in the Budge t received by the D epartment in the last three Financial Years as follows. In 
the current Financial Year , the Department is receiv ing  Ksh s . 685  886  940. In the last Financial 
Year of 2022/2023, the Department received Kshs. 9  04 291  078 and in the subsequent previous 
year, which was 2021/22, the  Department had received  Kshs.  939  126  699. Going by that figure, 
Mr. Speaker, you can see th e decline from  Kshs. 939 Million to the current Kshs 685 .  So  there is 
inadequate resource s  to that Department. Mr. Speaker,  these declining Budget A llocations slowed 
down their Department 's efforts of equipping its  Officers with the appropriate working tools, 
conducting regular  Work  Training  and Capacity  Building for its Officer s, and organis ing 
Consultative Meetings with S takeholders.  
A nother issue that came across as a challenge was I nsecurity. As I have mentioned, the I nsecurity 
both to the Officers  and the members of public . In particular, a case was mentioned  f or instance, 
on 26th February ,  2023 Inspectorate Officers were attacked and harmed at Wakulima Market while 
enforcing Market By - Laws . Another incident was reported  on 23rd May ,  2023 where three other 
Inspectorate Officers were injured and two County Motor Vehicles were damaged along Geoffrey 
Kamau Highway while on routine operation within Nakuru City Central Business District.  
Mr. Speaker, a s much as we are saying our  Officers are treating the p ublic  in in humane way, it is 
also worth mentioning that they are human  beings  and they need to be protected by law s  and we 
need even to enhance them. If not giving them guns, let them work in collaboration with the Kenya 
Police.  
Mr. Speaker, a nother challenge that was highlighted was the lack of Regulations. The CECM noted 
that Section 30 of the Nakuru County Law, Compliance, and Enforcement Act of 2018 made 
provision for the formulation of Regulations .  It reads: -   
  The County Executive Committee  Member may, in consultation with the relevant 
Department and Committee s in the County Government, make Regulations;  
  Further, prescribe and regulate the conduct of the Inspectorate Enforcement Officers  
  Facilitate the implementation of the Act  
Mr. Speaker, s he also reported  that the Department had not yet formulated any regulation s  and 
gave  an undertaking on fast - tracking the enactment and submission of the  Regulations  to the 
County Assembly for approval.   
Mr. Speaker, a nother challenge that was highlighted by the Committee  was Inadequate Staffing . 
Although massive recruitment of Enforcement Officers was undertaken, the Committee  noted that 
the lack of a clear Succession Plan for replacing Officers  who had left office either through 
retirement, resignation, dismissal, or death had hampered optimal service delivery ,  and this is a 
critical issue that needs to be given attention whereby lack of Succession Policy hinders the 
implementation of major duties by the Officers.  
Mr. Speaker, t he last challenge that was highlighted was the lack of Clear Guidelines on  Revenue 
S haring. As stated above, the Committee  observed that the County Government did not have any 
guidelines on the Revenue Sharing Formula of revenue generated from the Court Fines by 
Municipal Courts.  
Having looked at the challenges, the Committee  came up with some Recommendations.  
1.  The County Treasury should increase Budgetary  allocation to the Department which 
will go a long way in facilitating the Department to undertake regular Capacity 
Building and Training  for its Officers  and Consultative Forums with the relevant 
Stakeholders  
2.  The Department of Public  Service to fast - track the formulation of Regulations as 
provided for in the Act to bridge the gap in Legislation. This will enhance the optimal 
implementation of the Act, especially in matters of enforcement.  
3.  The Office of the County Attorney through the F orum of County Attorneys should 
engage the Council of Governors on fast - tracking a Revenue - Sharing Formula between 
the County Government and the Judiciary.  
4.  The Department of Public  Service should formulate a clear Succession Plan for 
replacing Officers  who exit the service either through retirement, resignation, 
dismissal, or death to ensure a flawless transition.  
5.  The Department of Public  Service should spearhead sensiti s ation and Civil Education 
Campaigns in collaboration with grassroots leaders for the purpose of creating 
awareness of the County Legislation. This will be instrumental in not only creating 
awareness but also ensuring smooth implementation of the law.  
6.  The County Government through the Department of Youth, Gender, Culture, Sports 
and Social Service should fast - track the formulation of a Policy  on the protection of 
vulnerable groups including Street Families in adherence to International Conventions 
such as the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child  and the Children Act 
of 2011.  
Mr. Speaker, w ith that submission, I would like to thank the Members of the Committee  for that 
job that was well done. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Someone to second.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Thank you Mr. Spea ker, . I call upon Hon. Bernard  Kariuki to second.  
Hon. Bernard  Kariuki:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir. I take this opportunity to affirm that we 
were able to sit as a Committee  and these are the deliberations that we were able to come up with. 
We were able to go through the Report . There are other things that we were able to engage in. I 
rise to support the Motion.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Motion is that this House adopts the  Report  of the 
Committee  on Justice and Legal Affairs on the  Nakuru  County Government Human Rights 
Protection laid on the table of the Assembly on Tuesday 24th May ,  2023 during the Morning 
Sitting . The Motion is open for Debate.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honorable Member for London, you want to debate?  
Hon. Bernard Kariuki:  Yes, Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Proceed.  
Hon. Bernard Kariuki:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker, I take this opportunity to applaud the 
Committee , led by our Chairperson ;  I am part of the Committee  and  I believe if this House ad o pts 
this Report  and  the recommendation s  that we were able to come up with, I believe they will  fill all 
the gaps. Like in number o ne , if there is a possibility that these Officers  will be taken through 
Training  and Education  sessions so  that they can  realis e or understand how to deal with the p ublic  
so that service delivery to the people can be of a higher standard.  
Also  Mr. Speaker,  w eekly  briefing and debriefing I believe is a good way of encouraging operation 
within the entities. Like the majority of the Companies  in this Country, I believe that they have 
sessions to sit down and have Kamukunjis  or ways on how to engage so that they can eliminate 
issues or things that are arising within the Company  before they b uild up.  
The other thing Mr. Speaker, is the application of Alternative Dispute Resolution . It is not a must 
that if our people are arrested by the  Officers they be  taken to jail or to be taken to Council Cells . 
I believe there is a formula that they can use as to engage our people so that the  people can  reali s e 
what they are supposed to do and the mandate around the operation of the Officers so that to some 
extent, it can lessen having quagmires in between the p ublic  and the Officers.  
Mr. Speaker, i f all these can be taken into consideration and if the Department  can  ensure that 
these are operationali s ed, I believe we will be able to fill all the gaps that emanate from the said 
environment. I take this opportunity to thank you for this opportunity and to support the Motion. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Member for Kiptororo Ward .  
Hon. Alex Bor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the able 
Chairperson of this Committee  for this job well done. Being part of the  Committee , I want to say 
that this Report  is worth adopting by this Honorable House and I want to specifically stress the  
Recommendation of the Committee  on Number 6 ; t hat the County Government through the 
Department of Youth, Gender, Culture, Sports and Social Services should fast - track the 
formulation of a Polic y on the protection of V ulnerable G roups ,  including Street Families in 
adherence to the International Conventions such as the United Nations Convention on the Rights  
of the Childre n and the Children Act of 2011.  
Mr. Speaker, when  you look at that, we need to fast - track on this so that the rights of these Street 
Children can be observed. Just as the Chairperson had indicated earlier, that very many cases were 
reported  earlier but due to several trainings that these Officers  have undertaken, the cases have 
dropped. However, to our surprise that the Department when being allocated the monies for the 
job , it  has been reducing. It is also one of the challenges that the concerned Departmen t has been 
facing.  
Mr. Speaker, when  you look at how the money has been decreasing, it is shocking  when in fact, it  
should be increasing year in and year out but in this case, it has been dropping. I just want to say 
that those are the two main challenges. All the challenges are of importance and need to be looked 
into it. I just want to say that if the  m oney can be increased, I am very sure and I am very certain 
that the Department will be in a position to look into these challenges well. Otherwise, I stand to 
support the Mo tion . Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you . Hon. Alex then  Hon. Francis.  
Hon. Francis Kuria:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. First, I would like to commend the good job done 
by the Committee . In this Report , there is the issue of rehabilitating the Street Children. If you 
look at our Cities, you find that the number of Street Children has reduced and they have been 
taken to Rehabilitation Centers . It is very good because it reduces the issue s  of i nsecurity. In 
collaboration with other Stakeholders , we find that we need to look for more Stakeholders  such 
that the issue of Insecurity  can be enhanced.  
Mr. Speaker, i t was observed that we have Law Enforcers and if you look at the major Towns, you 
will find that it is being manned by City Council Askaris. Sometimes, people break the Law  and 
when one breaks the Law , you have to face the consequences and once they are taken to Court, we 
find there are f ines  that are being charged. However, it is like there are conflicts because you find 
the f ines  are taken to National Courts whe n  it is  supposed  to benefit our  County. If the Governors 
will be able to win what  is happening, that  Revenue will be to our benefit. I commend the good 
job and I rise to support the Motion. Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you.  The Honorable Majority Whip.  
Majority Whip ( Hon. Fadhili Msuri ) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. As I stand to commend the 
Committee  for the work they have done, mine is to encourage the Committee  that this is just ‘Part 
A ’  of the work. What is left to be done is that, they need to be active, especially in following up 
on those Recommendations  and especially on Timelines  because you have seen at times, 
Recommendations  come but when it comes to actual implementation, it is another story. I would 
urge, through the able Chairperson, that the energy that they displayed during this process should 
transfer to ensure that those Recommendatio ns  captured in this Report  are worked on according to 
the Timelines  that they agreed together with the Department . Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honorable Member for Soin Ward.  
Hon. Degaule Naburuki:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker. I stand to commend the good work done by 
the Chairperson and his Committee . My major concern today is that the Street Children , it seems 
it is not in Nakuru Town only. It has gone to all the Centers  we have in our areas. This  Morning 
while I was having my tea at the Cafeteria , I received a call that some residents of Rafiki, which 
is near Kampi Ya Moto, are complaining that their properties are at risk  because most of the 
c hildren  from Kampi Ya Moto, which is in Visoi Ward do not go to school during the day. Instead, 
they come to Rafiki Cent re  and the residents are worried. Rafiki is in my Ward and the Children 
bringing  the menace are from Visoi Ward.  
Mr. Speaker, I hereby want to say that we shall talk with my colleague so that we see a  way of 
trying to make those  c hildren go back to School . It is because of the p overty level in that area ,  
wh e re  p arents are not able to  take care of their c hildren to go to s chool  because maybe  they  lack  
uniforms , and other needs and so chose to  go all the way to Rafiki.  
Mr. Speaker, during  the day time, most of the people living there go to their businesses and others 
go to work, and by the end of the day, these Street Children , break into houses and it is alarming. 
They have called me and I have promised them to have a meeting on Monday to discuss the issue. 
Mr. Speaker, i t is very serious when I hear this Committee  say that we are in total support of this 
Motion.  The other issue which I want to say is that we need to protect our Enforce ment Office rs. 
When they are on duty, at times , they are at risk from the Wananchi because, at times, they are 
very rude, especially the Bodaboda  m en and the Matatu people.  
I stand to support this Motion. Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon orable  Member for Soin Ward. Before I allow 
the Members, who are upstanding, the Honorable Member for Visoi Ward, Hon. Hellen Chemutai, 
after the Members, your Ward has been mentioned that c hildren  from your Ward are causing havoc 
on the side of the Honorable Member for Soin Ward at Rafiki Trading Cent r e. That is a serious 
s tatemen t. Later, you will have an opportunity to comment and give  a s tatement on that.  The 
Honorable Member for Keringet Ward and then the Honorable Member from Rongai, Hon. 
Hassan.  
Hon. William Mutai:  Thank you much Mr. Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity to 
appreciate what the Committee  has done. It is a very good Report  and an eye - opener in addressing 
one of the menaces in our  County and also in the  Country . Mr. Speaker, s incerely speaking ,  when 
you get into the root course of the Street Children, you will get to know the reason why they come 
to the Street s  is because possibly they lack food, accommodation, and care. They do not have  
p arents who care for them. They come to th e Street s  where there are many people so that they can 
get support, food and can as well get shelter, and so forth.  
Mr. Speaker, t he Committee  has also mentioned that the Enforcement  Officers  must be more 
serious on this. Even if you arm the Enforcement, you give them all the regalia that is required 
without providing another solution it will still be futile because they will still come to the Stree ts.  
After all, they need food. According to me  Mr. Speaker , I have a feeling that if we can get a lasting 
solution of providing Shelte r and Food for these  Children then there is a possibility that they will 
not come to the str eets anymore because they have what they want.  
Mr. Speaker, i n addition to the  Recommendations that the Committee  has given ,  I have a feeling 
that if the Government Lands that are available like the ADC Farms  that used to be very productive 
can be utili s ed ,  in that these c hildren and their p arents  are connected and then taken back to such 
resourceful  and potential lands, there can be some production and they are going to get shelter and 
space to stay and food as well.  
Mr. Speaker, t his could also help solve the problem that is prevailing ,  because day in and day out 
the Street Children are increasing in number even in small C enters li ke Keringet where I come 
from, w e already have them. Thank you Mr. Speaker .  
Hon. Ali Hassan : Thank you Mr.  Speaker, allow me to join other colleagues to thank the Justice 
and Legal Affairs Committee  for the wonderful Report  that they did. Two issues have caught my 
eye, one being the issue of the Municipal Court that is housed in the Office  of the  Governor .   
Mr. Speaker, i t is very important to know that we now have a Municipalit y and the r e are Municipal 
Courts . It is very wrong to hear that some of the m oney  generated or rather the Revenu e generated 
from this Court is being taken to the Judiciary Account . As a County, we should also have a share 
of these Revenues  because it is collected from this  County and from the Department of Trade 
which is devolved .  
Mr. Speaker, I wish to ask the Committee  to make sure that they follow up with the Council of 
Governors so that we can get guidelines or rather have a clear guideline on how this m oney  is 
going to be collected and how it is going to be helpful to this County. Mr. Speaker, a t the end of 
the day, we need r evenu e so that we can support the developments in the County Government of 
Nakuru.  
Last but not least Mr. Speaker, is the issue of harassment. As much as some of our people are 
complaining that the Office rs are being harassed, even the  p ublic  is  being harassed by these law 
Enforcement Officers . These m embers of the Enforcement Team must be trained and taught how 
to handle the p ublic  because so many of us receive calls about how the Enforcement Team harasses 
the m embers of the p ublic . When the  p ublic  see these Enforcement Team in their Unifor m they 
tend to run away ;  so they should be trained on how to handle these people because at the end of 
the day, these are citizens of th is Country and they have nowhere else to go. Thank you  Mr. 
Speaker, I support the Report .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Kamara and the Hon. Member 
for Kaptembwo in that order.  
Hon. John Maritim : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I also rise to support this Justice and Legal 
Committee  Motion and to commend the Committee  for the good job they did. All these Street 
Children do have  p arents and moreso  m others  who have given birth  to them . For a kid to grow 
well there is something we call Immunis ation  for one to two years and the majority of these Street 
Children are in good condition. They are healthy but they look like they have been neglected by 
their p arents . In the Bible , in Damascus and a place called Jericho, there were b eggars  and s treet 
c hildren  and  w e heard that Jesus could sometimes say they  are b eggars ;  and these are Street 
Children so some People who are bound to stay in the Street s  and some are bound to stay in the 
house. The only way we can do this is to use the m oney , the Kshs  680 Millio n we had allocated ;  
to trace the originality of these people because I believe they have p arents. Mr. Speaker, s ome can 
be taken to s chool  and some can be educate d on how to manage a business.  
Mr. Speaker, t he second thing is to urge the  Inspectorate and the County Law Enforcers to be a bit 
lenient to these people or they can take them to a given corner and tell them that this place is meant 
for you guys because yo u cannot get rid of all of them.  People are giving birth and in Nakuru 
County, we have a lot of food so people must give birth.  Some will go to the Street s  and others 
will go to different places. The best thing we can do with the m oney  is to subject it to A udit so that 
any appropriatio n done be utili s ed to the last coin and this  m oney  should save them.  
 Mr. Speaker, a t times we could have some figures like Kshs 685 Million , or Kshs 700 Million and 
we still see the same Street Children there and no change has been made. I want to urge that in 
future they come with a C omprehensive Report ,  like we have allocated Kshs 200 Million , we 
bought some H omes for them, we have taken some  to  s chool and I think that will be great. I stand 
to support the Committee .  Thank you Mr. Speaker  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Kaptembwo.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this 
Motion. I stand to support this Motion and to congratulate the Committee  for having done this job 
well ,  but I would want to give my contribution in this manner. Before we start talking about Street 
Families , we need to understand how we grade them. We have Women  who live in the Street s , we 
have Children  and we have Street Workers , we have our Ladies  who are in the Street s  and we also 
have “Scavengers” ,  who are see king the services of those who are in the Streets.  
Mr. Speaker, w hat I would have expected from the Committee  is to give us a statistic of how many  
p eople are in the Street s, w ho are these  Families in the Streets, what the ir  age groups are, and what 
is the motivation for them to be on the Street s . Mr. Speaker, w e first understand where the problem 
is coming from and the magnitude of the problem  so that when we now ask for financing on 
P rograms that may assist this…  
The speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member ,  the  Chairperson if I am right said that for  the time ,  
we have like 8 000  Street Families .  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Thank you Mr. Speaker, let me stand to give some figures. I said 8000 
people are living in the Street including c hildren,  and let us say the  Street Famil ies,  but the total 
number is 8000. I also said that out of the 8000, it has been found that only 300 of them are 
permanent residents of the Street s  and the rest are Day Scholars . They come in the  Morning and 
in the Evening, they  go back to where they came from. Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I stand guided by that information. When we talk 
of 8000 Street Families, those are individuals who are on the Street . We need to grade them on 
how many of them are of age between 3 and 8, between 8 -  16, and how many are adults because 
all of them have different unique needs for them to be rehabilitated well back into Society . It is 
also very unfortunate that the CECM for Public  Service , Devolution , and Citizen Engagement 
when asked about the challenges that they are facing, s he is only able to mention the Inadequate 
Financing of the Enforcement Officers .  
Mr. Speaker, I thought s he would come out and say that we need to finance P rogram s that should 
initiate the s e  Street Famil ies  back to gainful engagement rather than kuongezea K anjo pesa . They 
are talking about the training of County Law Enforcement Officers . If you are a Law Enforcement 
Officer you need basic  training even before you are deployed. Polisi  wetu wanaenda Kiganjo 
wanatrainiwa ,  so when they come to the field they exactly know what they need to do and how to 
protect basic H uman R ights but, in our  situation  here,  people are first employed and then they are 
given job training.  
Mr. Speaker, i n future, we need to change and maybe develop a  College for training County Law 
Enforcers so that wale wamepita vizuri kwa shule wakuwe  absorbed kama Law Enforcement 
Officers . I am happy that this conversation has gotten to a point where  the  Chief Justice Koome 
has  proposed a B ill to decriminali s e  Prostitution . A number of these people who are being 
apprehended by County Law Enforcers , especially at night are just our ‘ Smart Ladies ’  who are in 
the Street s trying to provide for their f amilies . Mr. Speaker, as  we also stand for the support of this 
Amendment Bill in the Penal Code 2023 to be passed ,  w e should come up with proper statistics of 
our ‘ Smart Ladies ’  in the Streets  and also the m en  who buy these services so that we know, 
categori s e, and say that they need to be registered…  
( Laughter! )  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Kajwang you can take the numbers for the ‘ Smart Ladies ’ . 
How do you take for the buyers of the services?  
Hon. Peter Kajwang : We need to generate this because a ‘ Smart Lady ’  will always tell you that 
she hangs around with a few clients maybe four or five and if there are 4000 ‘ Smart Ladies ’,  you 
might know that the clients are even more. All these people need help…  
Hon. Fadhili Msuri : Point of Order Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): W hat order the Majority whip?  
Majority whip ( Hon. Fadhili Msuri ) :  I am a bit lost and I am now trying to find myself in this 
conversation. I happen to represent an urban area and it has a lot of shops called  ‘ Smart ’ . We have 
Smart Classic Wear , Smart Boutiques , Smart Uniforms , and Smart Restaurants ,  so when I hear 
‘Smart L adies ’,  and the term ‘ service ’ ,  I do not understand.  I am trying to construct that ‘service’  
so that I can understand and since we are on record, what services is Hon. Kajwang talking about 
and if he is a regular partaker of those services.  Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Kajwang.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang : Mr. Speaker I am not a partaker of this service but ‘ Smart Ladies ’  are our 
Street Workers who give services to willing buyer and willing seller. We cannot sanction them 
and assume that they are not part of this Society . Mr. Speaker, w e are in this H onorable  House to 
make life better for everyone in this County. Hon. Fadhili, you being the T own Member of the 
County Assembly ,  I know that you get several votes from ‘ Smart Ladies ’,  and you need to stand 
up and fight for their rights. Mr. Spe aker, t hat is going to be a conversation for another day because 
once this is done ,  we need proper chronological documentation of these people and their age 
group s  so that we identify what is needed to help them salvage their situations.  
Mr. Speaker, w e are also talking about the County Law Enforcement Officers .  I think they are Law 
Enforcers and w e need to have a distinguished line that separates the role of the Law Enforcers 
and the role of the R egular Police. If for example I am walking along  the S treets of Kenyatta 
Avenue and somebody robs my phone, who is then responsible for arresting that person ;  is it the 
County Law Enforcers  or the Police? If it is a clear offence against the Bylaws  of the Cit y ,  then it 
should be prosecuted in the Municipal Courts ,  and anything that goes to the Municipal Court , the 
proceeds or the revenue therefore should be channeled to the County Accounts rather than the 
Judicial Accounts.  Zile kesi zinaenda Kortin i ziende kwa  Judicial Account ,  halafu zile zinaenda 
kwa  Korti za M unicipal ziende kwa  County Accounts . Thank you for that opportunity  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. On that, there is an issue that kept coming up even 
as the Council  of Governor s are  waiting for an express P olicy on how the Municipal Courts are 
going to be governed and even how justice is going to be served. As it is now ,  what happens in 
other Cities  like Kisumu, Nairobi, Mombasa , and the other Towns  that is just about to be a  City ? 
What happens in Eldoret? Does it mean that when the County Law Enforcers arraign the 
lawbreakers before that i t is an exercise in t rying to raise the revenues for the National 
Government ?   As we wait for the Council of Governors to come up with a clearer  Policy , the 
Chairperson for Finance Committee , the Chairperson for  Budget Committee , and the  Chairperson 
Justice and Legal Committee , you ma y  have to find out what happens in other Counties .  To  see 
whether such Counties are  benefiting from the proceeds of Municipal Courts.  Hon. Chemutai .  
Hon. Hellen Megek : Thank you Mr.  Speaker  for this opportunity .  First , I want to comment on the 
job done by the Committee  o n Justice and Legal Affairs and since the Street Children are all over, 
I want to request Hon. Degaulle who is my neighbour to withdraw that s tatemen t that Street 
Children are roaming from Visoi Ward to Soin Ward.  Mr. Speaker, t hese  Street Children are all 
over Kenya or County of Nakuru. So, it seems that the people of Soin are rich e r than the people of 
Visoi. That statement Hon. Degaulle, I humbly request that you withdraw that statement.  
Mr. Speaker, I support that Motion  by the Chairperson of the Committee  on Justice and Legal 
Affairs, that the Street Children be  embraced. Since the Department of Disaster Management and 
Humanitarian Services is here in the County  of Nakuru, it should assist them with Clothing, Food 
and  Shelter wher e it is possible. So, I support, and that Hon. Degaulle withdraw that s tatement  
because it is very hurtful. Thank you Mr. Speaker, sir.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Chemutai for putting more light on that issue. 
The Hon orable  Dega ul l e  has just stepped out; now how is he going to withdraw that? So ,  if he 
does not come when this debate is still ongoing, the matter comes to rest and it shall not be repeated 
anymore ,  but if he comes before the end of this session, then he will be able to be notified that he 
needs to withdraw that if he has reasons not to believe that these kids are coming from Visoi. The 
Hon. Member from Lakeview.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I have followed the debate on the Street Families 
that we have .  Many  people are referring to them as Street Children . Mr. Speaker these are Street 
Families because most of them are not c hildren. You will find that in areas like Naivasha, you find 
that most of us have embraced them as Casual Workers in the Departmen t of Environment. They 
are the same people who are trying to clean the Town  at the moment. Mr. Speaker, t here is a need 
for the County Government to come up with plans to integrate these people into the  Society  
because most of them have not known any  other home.  
Mr. Speaker, t hey know the jungle rules of the Towns  where they just survive and one rule that 
they survive with  is the ‘ Survival  for the Fittest ’ . Nakuru has been promoted to the status of a  City 
and I remember there was a quagmire when the former Governor, under the former Government, 
took some of the  Children away from the City  to some other Centres  that were alleged to have 
been taken ,  which the entire World, the Senate the National Government castigated as inhumane 
at that time. However, we remain sile nt at the moment and do not do anything , and instead  we are 
doing worse than the people who tried to do something at that moment.  
Mr. Speaker, we should come out as a Society  and look for ways .  If  you visit the City  of Arizona 
in the US, you find so many Safe Houses for these people whereby the County  establishes H ouses 
and Centres,  where these people can share the Shelter . We are talking about a disaster that is about 
to occur in the Country , the  El - Nino rains , yet we are not considering where these people be 
staying.  
Mr. Speaker, w hen you look at the humanitarian aspect ,  you will find that most of these f amilies  
have no permanent structures, have no homes that they can be welcomed to ,  apart from  corners of  
s hops , b usinesses  that have been abandoned or houses that are vacant and that tells us if we do  not  
curb this within the next few years, we might have gangs that will rise from these people because 
all they have known is taking something, begging and when they beg and not get what they want, 
we shall have a catastrophe within the County.  
So  Mr. Speaker,  I would urge Members  of this Assembly to come up with a  Framework  and I 
know our Governor has a listening ear where we can work ,  that each Sub - County within this 
R egion can have a S afe H ouse for such people so that even when we tell them to get out of the 
s treets , there is somewhere we are directing them  to . Within the Safe Houses, let us have Training 
Program s  that can help these people integrate into the real Society  whereby the rule of  l aw prevails. 
I support this  Motion and I congratulat e this Assembly and the Committee  more importantly for 
coming up with such a Motion  which is of great importance to the people who are less privileged 
within  the  Society . Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you .  The  Hon orable  Member for Maiella and then the 
Chairperson  will respond.  
Hon. Jane Gituku:  Thank you Mr. Speaker .  A lthough just on a light note that the documents have 
just disappeared, I think we should have something like a backup either through a Hard Copy . I 
wanted to refer to the Committee  on  Justice and Legal Affairs Report  to s ection ( e )  which 
highlighted the need for the Department of Public  Health activities within the County  to remove 
‘ illegal touts ’  from our Bus Parks . It should be noted that the Matatu Industry is one that is very 
complicated and if we intend to do anything about the t outs  or the businesses, we should have a 
Framework of how we are going to identify the ‘ illegal  t outs ’  from genuine ones. So ,  ‘ illegal  t outs ’  
should be amended ,  so that they give us a comprehensive way of identifying them  from the legal 
ones . Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Chair person .  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Thank you Mr. Speaker . L et me take this opportunity first to thank 
Members of this Hon orable  House for giving their positive contribution on this issue. Allow me 
Mr.  Speaker to respond to issues that have come up .  Hon. Fadhili from Biashara Ward has tasked 
our Committee  to follow  on  the implementation of this Report .  
Mr. Speaker, I like to stand guided saying that one of the mandates of the Committee  is not on the 
implementation of the Motions  but we are going to work hand in hand with the  Committee  on 
Implementation  to see that this issue has been brought to practice. Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Degaulle 
when he was giving his views, he talked about Street Families and indeed I would like to concur 
with him that this issue is not only in the C ity or Nakuru Town, but has escalated to other major 
Centres ;  he mentioned his plac e. A common man might think that is ‘ Mashambani ’  but we have 
this iss ue even in our small towns ,  or our small business areas.  
So  Mr. Speaker,  we need to focus and let us have synergy to address the issue of Street Kids 
because this is an issue that shows how a Society  is. Mr. Speaker, a nother Member  from Keringet 
has said that it is a true reflection of our Society  and  we ca nnot  hide the fact that now the cost of 
living is up, there is no food for people and so some of the issues that are driving the f amilies  to 
the street is lack of food ,  a nd I would like to thank the Hon. Member from Keringet because he 
provided a solution whereby he said about the ADC Farms .  Mr. Speaker, l et  the County 
Government come up with a strategy to address the issue of Food Security  by even empowering 
our f armer s and ensuri ng the ADC Fa rms are utili s ed to provide food.  
Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Duale on his contribution talked about an issue which was echoed by you 
Mr. Speaker sir, about the Sharing Formula of the funds that are gotten from the Judiciary. Indeed, 
you have given us a task together with the Budget Committee  Chairperson  and the Finance 
Committee  Chairperson .  I think this Hon orable  House is going to facilitate us to go around  all the 
Cities  to see how they are sharing that and indeed we are going to table a Report  once we have 
gone all round and give our Report  back.  
Mr.  Speaker sir ,  on the harassment by County Askaris  from  Hon. Duale , I would like to say that 
this issue of harassment has two faces whereby the County Enforcement Officers , are also human 
beings  and  as they underta ke  their duties, they need also to be protected. Mr. Speaker, l et us not 
condemn them while they are doing their duties because, in my Report , I highlighted some issues 
whereby several County Askaris were beaten by the Member s of the Public  and we as Membe rs 
of this House  need  to come up with  a  Legislation  to protect our County Askaris .  
Hon. Maritim , I think you got it wrong when I was giving the figures on the amount of Money 
allocated to the Department .  That  m one y was not only meant for the Street Families but was the 
Money  for the whole Department. So, you can see that there is a very small amount of m one y 
allocated to the whole  Department and the  Department has many issues to deal with among others 
including the Street Families ’  issues. I think we should get that right and I want to thank Hon. 
Kajwang who highlighted the issue which is controversial about the so  called … ?  
Hon. Peter Kaj w ang:  ‘Smart Ladies ’ .  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Yes, ‘ Smart Ladies ’  or ‘ Smart Vendors ’.  I am being guided by the 
Hon…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it the Hon. Majority Leader?  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang’at): Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to urge the Hon orable  
Member who is on the floor to address the Chair , Mr. Speaker, because he seems to be directly 
engaging Members and forgetting there is a Chair  in the House .  
( Laughter )  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang’at): Mr. Speaker. Mine is this is a House of Order ,  could 
he kindly address the  Chair to  avoid confrontation? Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you ,  Hon  Chairperson address the  Chair .  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  I stand guided ,  and let me say through the Speaker ,  I would like to 
acknowledge the sentiments of Hon. Kajwang when he mentioned the ‘Smart Ladies’ , I think that 
is an issue of another day whereby I understand there is an amendment at the National Assembly .  
The Majority Whip (Hon. Hamisi Fadhili) : Point of O rder Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon Majority Whip .   
The Majority Whip (Hon. Hamisi Fadhili):  [On a point of Order]  It has come to my attention that 
there is a Membe r in the House who is not in decorum, the Member  for Elementaita, Mheshimiwa 
Nene.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Elementaita, Hon. Nene be upstanding, 
are you in decorum?  
Hon. George Nene:  Sorry Mr. Speaker I forgot my tie after a long weekend .  
( Laughter )  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member for Elementaita you know about the decorum of 
this House. Kindly leave with  speed ,  get properly dressed and come back .  
( Laughter )  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Proceed Hon. Chair .  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, as I was responding to Hon. Kajwang, I want 
to acknowledge his sentiments about the ‘ Smart Ladies ’,  and I want to tell him that I know there 
are some amendments which were brought to the National Parliament by Hon. Gikaria on matters 
to do with Penal Code  on  th e  issue of ‘ Smart Ladies ’,  that has been highlighted and I think it is 
going to address the issue of H uman R ights whereby we are going to protect them using a 
Legislation.  
Also  Mr. Speaker , Hon. Kajwang highlighted in my Report , it had three issues ,  it had to do with 
the H uman R ights V iolation of the County Askaris ,  there was the Street Families ,  and there was 
also another aspect of sharing of revenues.  
Mr. Speaker , I just wanted to say that I did not only talk about the Street Families but al so other 
issues.  Mr. Speaker , I want to acknowledge the Membe r from Naivasha, Hon. Alex when he said 
we need to have the  Department integrate  these people into Society  and he has given a practical 
solution where he suggests that let us have a Safe House in each Sub - County, and I think this is 
the way to go because the so  called Street Families , are h uman  beings and we need to give them a 
face and recogni s e them as pa rt of this  Society . Mr. Speaker, I just want to echo that and say we 
need to support that and when it comes to  Budget A llocation, let us consider those people.  
Mr. Speaker,  the last Member  who said “ Kamageras”  the t outs, Hon. Jane ,  if you go around our 
Stages , you will find those small  k ids harassing people and that is why we are calling them ‘ illegal 
t outs ’  but if you go for example at Mololine Matatu Stage, you will find the  t outs , they are well - 
dressed ,  dressed  in a way that you feel welcomed. Those are the people we are saying even the 
County Askaris  need to address that issue of the  t outs and we call them in Nakuru Town, 
“ Kamageras ”  and I think last Monday, together with the area MCA for Biashara Ward  and Nakuru 
Town East Member of Parliament we went round we addressed that issue and I think through the 
Cha ir, I think that is an issue that needs to be given a lot of attention because it is escalating and 
as we approach the festive season, I think we need to address that issue of illegal Touts . Let me 
take this opportunity to thank each one of you, the  Members that have contributed and say that as 
a House, we need to support this Repor t  so that the implementation of it can see the light of the 
day. Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, Hon orable  Chair person ; I now proceed to put it into 
question .  
( Question put and agreed to )  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members, this Hous e is adjourned to today at 2.30 PM  
The House rose at 11.20 PM  
 
 
 
 