COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday 15th February 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House Met At 02:55 PM  
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  William Mutai): In the Chair].  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
CONSULTATIVE MEETING  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon William Mutai) : There will be a Consultative  Meeting  between 
the Department of Roads, Transport and Public Works and all Members of the Assembly on 
Thursday 16th February 2023 at 03: 00 pm. The agenda of the meeting shall be to discuss the 
implementation of the Rural and Urban Roads Maintenance Programme (RUMP) previously 
known  as Boresha Barabara Programme.  
MOTION  
APPROVAL OF THE ASSEMBLY CALENDAR 2023  
The Minority Leader  (Hon Philip Wanjohi ): Thank Standing Order 31, this House approves the 
Assembly Calendar for 2023 (Regular Sessions) as attached.  
CALENDAR FOR THE YEAR 2023  
CALENDAR OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY FOR 2023 (REGULAR SESSIONS)  
PERIODS  DAYS  
  FIRST PART:  
 
A. Sitting Days  
Tuesday, 14th Feb- Wednesday , 15th 
March,2023    
Tuesday(morning and afternoon 
),Wednesday(morning and afternoon)  
B. Short Recess  
Thursday 16th March - Monday 3rd April, 
2023   
C. Sitting Days  
Tuesday, 4th April -Wednesday , 3rd May, 
2023  Tuesday(morning and afternoon 
),Wednesday(morning and afternoon)  
D. Long Recess  
Thursday 4th May  - Monday, 5th  
June,2023   
      SECOND PART  
 
E. Sitting Days  
Tuesday 6th June –Wednesday, 12th July 2023  Tuesday(morning and afternoon 
),Wednesday(morning and afternoon))  
F. Short Recess  
Thursday, 13th    July-Monday 24th  
July,2023   
G. Sitting days  
Tuesday 25th July- Wednesday  23th 
August,2023  Tuesday(morning and afternoon 
),Wednesday(morning and afternoon))  
H. Long Recess  
Thursday 24th  August – Monday, 18th   
September,2023   
 THIRD PART  
 
I. Sitting  Days  
Tuesday, 19th September –Wednesday,25th  
October,2023  Tuesday(morning and afternoon 
),Wednesday(morning and afternoon)  
J. Short Recess  
Thursday, 26th October – Monday 6th 
November, 2023    
K. Sitting Days  
Tuesday,7th November - Wednesday, 6th  
,December,2023  Tuesday(morning and afternoon 
),Wednesday(morning and afternoon)  
L. Long Recess  
Thursday 7th  December –Monday, 12th  
February,2024    
 
That is the Motion I have before  the House and I want to request the Hon. Simon Kamau from 
Kihin go to second. Thank  you. 
Hon.  Simon Kamau : Thank yo u Mr. Temporary Speaker. I do second the M otion.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . William Mutai): T hank you very much the Minority Leader and 
Honourable  Kamau for seconding the Motion.  
I now propose the question that p ursuant  to the provisions of Standing Order 31, this House 
approves the Assembly Calendar for 2023. These are the Regular S essions as attached with copies 
that were given in the First Session.  
(Question proposed)  
I therefore open the Motion  for debate .Hon ourable  Francis Kuria.  
    
 
Hon. Francis Kuria:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion. As I 
observe the table here it has been  subdivided int o four parts and as well stated, we are  headed to 
procurement and we need to go back to the village to observe how the contractors are doing the 
work. So  it is good  that we have this  Short Recess  from mid of March to April.Thankyou.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon . William Mutai):  Thank you. Honorable  John Maritim.  
Hon. John Maritim: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion. I believe 
these days are well planned and we shall have a mple  time to look at the developments that are 
happening. But also I thought that there is a part where we are supposed to have games. Is it 
reflecting here  or games is different from what has been planned because games is part of us and 
it is part of the working days. I do not see the games program here. We also need to be busy in a 
manner that, we can either take contractors to the ground or anyone who is i nterested  in doing the 
job. Thank you.  
The Temporary  Speaker (Hon . William Mutai ): Thank  you. Hon ourable  from Sirikwa. 
Welcome.  
Hon. Emmanuel Lang’at:  Thank you very much Mr. Temporary Speaker . I rise in support of this 
Motion that has been laid before the floor of the House. May I start by congratulating the House 
Business Committee for the good work that they have done  by coming up with this Calendar that 
will guide us in all activities that partakes this Honorable House. Having gone through it, I find 
that the order is very nice and it will give a good time to debate on the very many things that we 
have before us. I am in support of the Motion. Thank you.  
The Temporary  Speaker (Hon . William Mutai ): Hon. James Mwangi.   
Hon. James  Mwangi : Thank you Mr. Temporary  Speaker . I rise to support the Motion on basis 
that we have some  activities on the ground . It is good we come here for theory then go back to the 
practical part of it. Secondly, bearing in mind that  this  is our first time ,I think it will be like a 
pilot so that in the coming years we shall have to review or correct  the Calendar of the year 2023 - 
2024. I rest my case.  
The Temporary  Speaker (Hon  William Mutai):  Thank you very much. From the  House  body 
language, it appears that I can put a question. Hon ourable Ruto  
Hon. Robert Ruto : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker , I rise to support the Motion putting  into 
consideration the fact that our projects are about to start in our various Wards. The Short Recess 
beginning on Thursday March to A pril will give us enough time to supervise or rather to do our 
role of oversight in our Wards. Thank  you. 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon  William Mutai): T hank you Hon. Ruto. Hon. Rose  
Hon. Rose  Chepkoech : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker  sir and also the Committ ee of the 
House Business for the good work that you have done. As we just came from the Recess, we have 
a lot to do. We have a lot of Bills, Statements  and Committees to deal with. Thank  you. 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
  ADJOURNMENT  
 House stands adjourned until Tuesday next week at 09: 30 A M. 
House rose at 15:08 P M. 
 
 