OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Thursday, 13ST October 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 11: 30 am 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
Third Assembly -First Session  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  There is a procedural Motion by the Leader of Majority Party.  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO COMMITEES  
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Alex Langat ): As the Leader of Majority Party , I wish to move a 
Procedural Motion  that notwithstanding the provis ions of the Standing Order 49 (Notices of  
Motion ), this House resolves to debate the Motion  on appointment of Member s to the following 
Committees : 
a) House Business Committee  
b) Committee on Selection  
c) Committee o n Appointment  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  The Leader of Majority Party you can call a Membe r to second 
the Motion.  
A Member:  Hono urable Speaker I stand to second the Motion  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  Members there is a Motion that notwithstanding the provision 
of Standing Order 49 ( Notices of Motion ), this Hous e resolves to debate the Motion on 
Appointments  of Members  to the following Committees. The Motion is now open for debate. 
Honorable Macharia  from Rhonda.  
Hon. John Macharia : Thank you honorable Speaker, I rise to debate about the Motion . We are 
so grateful  the way we are doing  as a House and because of time, we are so late on deliberating on 
the issues that are before us , I rise to support that the names that are in the House Business 
Committee and Selection Committee and in the Appointment Committee may go through. I rise to 
support  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  Honorable Jane Wanjiru Gituku from Maiella Ward.  
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Jan e Gituku: Honorable Speaker and this honorable House , thank God for this morning. 
You have just prayed about faithful and the just governance of our  Assembly and thank God. I 
would like to have a clarification because when you look on the House Business Committee , the 
Committee  on Selection  and the Committee  on Appointment most Members  are reported twice 
and this House has more than 70 Members . If you look at honorable Members  in the Hous e 
Business the same is repeated in the Committee  on Selection.  
It is not that because my name is not there that’s why I am complaining , because for me am 
comfortable  but I think it is only fair being in a House of fairness  that each Member be allowed to 
seat in any of the Committees. I do not know whether  we are following , is it our academic 
qualification or it because may be we are knew and we do not know exactly what happens. I would 
like the  Speaker to shade some light on it and then we c an proceed. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  Honorable Jane Gituku , for clarity there is a Procedural Motion . 
When  we have,  a Notice of Motio n we need seven  days so that after that, we can be able to debate 
on the Motion but because of the issues and where we are as an Assembly, we need the three  
Committees  to be in place so that now the Assembly Business can be fast tracked and expedited.  
The first Motion  is whether members are in agreement that we reduce the debate time from seven 
days to one day , so that later should the Motion  go through, then we are going to order number 
nine for the substantive Motion . The first Motion is that we debate the Procedural  Motion whether 
we use one day or seven days. That is, it Hono urable Jane. What is it Honorable Palang ’a 
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: I am rising to catch your eye Honorable Speaker so that I also contribute to 
the procedural Motion. It is good that you have explained to Members what it means. If  you look 
at the order of Moti on, for this case I want to contribute that it does not necessarily means that 
Motio n should be discussed here or there and then.  
Therefore,  the purpose of this  Motion is for us to agree on the need to ventilate and have the Motion  
discussed. I wa nt to take members to Standing Order number 182 (2) that reads that - the Committee  
on Selection  shall nominate Members to serve in Committees  safe for the Membershi p of the 
Committee on House Business and Committee on Appointments.  
When we are told that safe for, for example on the  Committee on House Business Committee . 
what it means is that we as a  House we do not deliberate on who are the Members of the House 
Business Committee  and the Committee on Appointments because as we adopt this the  Committee 
on Selectio n is supposed to place Member s into respective Sectorial Committees to discharge the 
duties of this particular House.  
For this reason, the law provides that the consultation of the respective Parties, the Majority Part y 
and Minority  and for that case I want to believe that has been thoroughly done and that is why we 
need to agree that we need to have this Committees in place to serve this House.  
Honorable Speaker , I am aware yesterday we received her Excellency  the Governo r who officially 
opened the Assembly. We want to applaud her for opening this House  and enumerating some of  
the k ey areas she will want us to address. We cannot discharge those duties without having 
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Members in respective Committees . In her speech and I quote “... Soon or latter she should be 
presenting the names  for the Chief Executive Committee Members (CECMs ) and the Committee 
Members should assist her in running this  Assembly or this County.”  
It is for this reason  that I think therefore that in your consultations with the Members  and 
Stakeholders , you saw it fit that you therefore agree that we need to have the Appointment 
Committee,  which  shall subsequently vet the Members for respective Dockets who should be 
hitting the ground running in undertaking the mandate of this particular County . Without much 
ado, I want to beseech Members that until we have these Members  in place and the Committees , 
it is when the respective Members are put into r espective Committee s to undertake this.  
Reiterating what Honorable Jane Gituku who is my neighbor, I t hink it is too early, let cross the 
bridge when allocating Member to the Committees . As to where you belong or any other Member 
belong, it is important Members  that we allow the proposed Committee  on Selection , so that it is 
upon them after which one can complain if any Member of this House will not have been placed 
in any of the Committees.  
This is just meant to kick-start the program  of assigning Members  to respective Committees. I urge 
all the Members  to learn out of this experience but let us hold our horses and adopt the names for 
the sake of this Motion. I hereby support the Procedural Motion that hereby all of us agree that we 
really discuss it today and allow for the formation of the Committe es to allow us go forward.  
Other Counties  have hit the ground running;  we have a lot of work that has to be done. The 
Governo r requires some of the officers who will assist her in undertaking the mandate of the 
County . We can only do that if we have assigned Members and approve the Members in the 
respective Committees  to pave way  for other duties. Thank you and to Members  for li stening very 
passionately and I thin k you agree on that.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  Hono urable Kajwang.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang: Thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute on the Procedural 
Motion.  I stand here to oppose this Procedural Motion . My reasoning is in line with what 
Honorable Jane has talked about. You reali se that we have seven days delegated to this  House to 
form these special Committees, which  are the Committees  on House Business, Com mittee on 
Appointment  and Committee  on Selection. Actually,  for the Committee  on Selection and 
Appointment s. We even have ten days as opposed to seven days.  
Hono urable Speaker, I want to say thi s because traditionally when these  committees are being 
formed , it is a consultation within Parties or Coalitions . In this particular one , me as a Member of  
the Azimio Coalition , I am not aware of any consultation that was done within my Party or within 
my Coalition to select the Members that have been selected  to represen t us in these crucial 
Committees.  
I do not see the hurry, the Standing Orders give us enough days to do this and if for example it will 
be very important then we could only look at House Business Committee . I do not see any hurry 
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 to deal with the Select and the Committee  on Appointments . I stand here to oppose this Procedural 
Motion and ask the House  and different Parties in the House to go and make through Consultations.  
I am a very senio r Member of my Coalition being here for my second term in this Assembly  and 
this kind of consultation could not go on my back  and I have consulted so many Members of my 
Coalition, they are saying they were not aware. This is a decision that was made without their 
consultation. We are not  going to burn out. If we say, let's rec tify this, make proper consultation 
and come here next week. And then we proceed with this Motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Mheshimiwa William Mutai and  then lat er Mheshimiwa Kamau 
from Mai Mahiu.  
Hon. Willliam Mutai:  Mr. Speake sir, I stand to support this Procedural Motion on the following 
grounds ; 
1. In terms of the distribution of names, I think I have no problem as long as these people are 
going to do thier work  that is actually assigned to them. So the issue of appearing in the 
House Committee, or even in the Committee on Selection , if your name appears twice, I 
think I have no problem unless we are not trusting each other.  
2. I am not even appearing in any but I want to believe that my colleagues are going to perform  
to their best.  
3. I want to believe that a lot of consultation was done when coming up with these names . I 
can see the name of the Majority Leader, the Minority Leader, Majority Whip, Minority  
Whip , and  even some of the names from the Independent Party are also appearing, meaning 
that there must have been some thorough consultation s.  
So I want to believe that if these people can be given time, and we use the most minimal time 
to ensure that they actuall y do their work, we shall be able to go by the request of the Governor, 
that she made during the opening of this House. So, I support this Motion. Thank you.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a:   Mr. Speaker, just a point of order.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Which Order?  
Hon. Peter Palang’a:  No. 182 on S election Committee,  where hono urable Member, the law 
provides for the Selection Committee shall consult…  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honourable Palang’a. It is a point of order, did it arise from the 
Member who just sat or you r point of order is necessitated by what?  
 Hon. Peter Palang’a:  By sentiment s of Honourable Ka jwang that he was not consulted when this 
House yesterday adopted the Leadership of the Coalitions…  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   Order! Order!  
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Peter Palang’a:  And I did not see any kind of contravention as to opposing the Leader of 
Majority nor Leader of  Minoity . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   Order Mheshimiwa! Yo u are responding to an issue that was 
raised by M heshimiwa and the L eadership from the various Assembly Parties. So thank you for 
that. So that is specifically for Mheshimiwa Kajwang.  
So I want us to go in this order , I am going to give it to Mheshimiwa Kamau from Mai Mahiu, 
then Minority Leader, then the mover Mheshimiwa Majority Le ader will summari se on that so that 
we can proceed.  
Hon. Kamau:  thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to oppose the Motion.  
One, it is an i ssue that I want to raise in this House, that we should all be aware that we are all 
equal despite that we cannot ignore the experience with some Members. But I think the mandate 
that we are given by our people is equal . I do not have any problem with the Leadership of the 
House, but on my side I was not aware. I was not at all informed about these Committees. But I 
think it is in order Mr . Speaker bel ieving that anything that will be happening in this House, despite 
whether we are new in this House, let us  have some  consultation. Because one, we need to push 
this House to a level of a City being aware that our County now is a City, let us lay the standard 
of the House.  
Let us consult each other at any time, because we want to go ahead without any confrontat ions. 
So, in the fact that I did not know and also require some time to understand these Members, I stand 
to oppose the Motion. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   Thank you ; Mheshimiwa Minority Leader.  
The Minority Leader (Hon. Phillip Wanjohi):   I wish to thank the Members of my Coalition for 
having faith and confidence in me that I represent the issues of the Party in this House. Secondly , 
I wish to confirm to the Members of my Party the Azimio Coalition that yes, indeed we are 
consult ed unless the honorable Member Kajwang has an issue with the naming because Mr. 
Speaker, if you look at the House Business Committee, his name is appearing. So therefore Mr. 
Speaker on the list is number 15.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang:  Point of Order  Mr. Speaker!  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   Which number?  
Hon. Peter Kajwang:  I am standing on point of Order number 181. Mr. Speaker, I want to say 
that we were contributing to this Procedural Motion. And when we air our views, we are airing 
our views considering o ur interests and the entire interest of all Members. So the fact that my name 
is appearing in the list of House Business Committee, I would be quite worried because actually I 
was not even consulted whether I wanted to be in that Committee. So I am saying for all other 
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Members also, and also for my interest. That is not the issue. I did not stand here to agitate for my 
own interest s, but for the interest of so many Members who did not have a say on how their names 
came in, or did not feature in this Committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
Hon. Njuguna  Mwaura : Point of information, Mr. Speaker.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   Yes. 
Hon. Njuguna  Mwaura : Allow me to invite the H ouse in Article 109 of our Constitution. Mr. 
Speaker, the issues of consultation do not appear here, but the issues of precedent, when the 
Speaker, Majority Leader and the Minority Leader sat and they consult among themselves, the 
business is deemed fit for the House. And therefore, I wish to request the House to allow us to 
proceed wi th the business before us without actually vesting our interests into the list in the 
preceding order.  
I would like to request the Members to desist from putting the cart before the horse. What we are 
doing, we are just putting the horse before the cart a nd that we know generally that the cart cannot 
actually push the horse. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am requesting the Members to hold their horses. 
We agree whether we proceed with the Motion or not, without looking at that order. And if the 
House will conce ntrate itself into the Procedural Motion, I therefore believe that we are going to 
move forward.  
 Also, to encourage the new Members , I would wish to tell them that in my father's House which 
is this House, because we have opened with the pr ayers, t here is  a lot of work, but few workers . 
Therefore , if they believe, that there is something that is to come, I believe that we still have the 
chance to ventilate when we will be coming to Order No. 9 but let us proceed with the Motion, as 
stated by the Majority Leader. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   Thank you Mheshimiwa Njuguna. Mheshimiwa Minority 
Leader you will give your remarks  whether we proceed with Procedural Motion, the n we move  in 
that order, Mheshimiwa Majority Leader.  
The Minority Leader (Hon. Phillip Wanjohi):  Thank you, before t he honorable Kajwang 
intervened and Honorable Njuguna,  I wish to confirm y es Mr. Speaker you consulted. We had a 
meeting with the Majority Le ader and myself and the various Party Whips,  and for those of us who 
have the doubt or the names are missing like H onorable Njuguna has said we still have space for 
everybody. And some of these Committees like apart from the House Business Committee, the 
other two Committees, will lapse once we are done with the appointments, and therefore like the 
honorable Njuguna ha s said, let us hold our horses and proceed with the Procedural Motion. And 
if the Members have any contributions to make, then as we proceed to Order No. 9 then they can 
proceed now with the Motion and give their views Mr. Speaker, I support the  Procedural Motion.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang:  Hon. Speaker…  
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   Order Hon. Kajwang ! That is more than enough . You had more 
than two chances to submit the points of your debate. So kindly allow other Members to get some 
time Also to be able to raise their points.  
Hon Alex Lang’at : Thank you  Mr. Speaker  sir. And thank you honorable Members, the 
Committees that are actually before the House. As we have all seen are Committees that are going 
to help us operationali se our issues in this part icular House.  
As it stands now, the County Assembly of Nakuru, there are many things that are stagnating . We 
do not have the CECMs in place, we do not have the CEOs in place, we do not have much that we 
are able to do, including the very recently offices f or the Members of this honorable House We do 
not even  have our own offices . We have not even been able to hire our own staff  and Members. 
We realis e that for these things to be able to move for the County Assembly to be alive  we need 
all these being put together.  
And the only option for us to be able to do this is of course by enabling these Committees and 
setting them to be in place. So honorable Members, you also reali se according to the procedures 
and the Standing Orders, we have a time b ound, we have a limit of putting some of these 
Committees and some of these positions in place.  
I want to thank the Leadership and also to thank all Members for accepting and giving us an 
opportunity to be your leaders. Because of that, it is only prudent that we trust without having to 
look over our shoulders that what the Leadership is going to do will be for the benefit and the good 
of this great House.  
And as somebody has even quoted, there are many other things that are going to be done. There 
are many more other Committees that you would find yourself being placed and there will be 
uniformity. There is going to be a position for everybody. And all cons ideration including our 
professionalism, including where we come from, regional balance and issues like that. So I urge 
Members, we allow this Procedural  Motion to move on, so that the activities of this great House 
can start moving ; time has really gone. We have spent quite some few mon ths since the time we 
came out f rom elections  and I am sure we would not want to keep on spending more time to debate 
and to think of who did what. I want to believe the leadership has done what it has done in good 
faith and  we believe that everyone will feel represented. I beg to urge this House to allow us move 
this procedural Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Majority Leader.  
(Question put that notwithstanding the provisions of standing order number 49, the House 
resolves the Motion on appointment of Members to the following Committees ; 
1. House Business Committee  
2. Committee on Selection  
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 3. Committee on appointment.  
(Question proposed ) 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
MOTION  
HOUSE APPROVES APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO HOUSE BUSINESS, SELECTION AND 
APPOINTMENT COMMITTEES  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Leader of Majority.  
Hon. Alex Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I stand to move this M otion ; 
THAT  pursuant to the provision of standing orders 181,182 and 187; this House approves the 
appointment of the following Members to the respective Committees as follows;  
a. House Business Committee  
1. Hon. Joel Karuri Maina           Chairperson  
2. Hon. John Ngware Ngan ga       
3. Hon. Alex Langat  
4. Hon. Philip Wanjohi  
5. Hon. Fadhili Msuri  
6. Hon. Virginia Wamaitha  
7. Hon. Robert Kipyegon Lagat  
8. Hon. Joseph Mwangi Muraya  
9. Hon. Michael Ngugi Gathanwa  
10. Hon. Peter Njoroge Maina  
11. Hon. John Maritim  
12. Hon. Grace Mwathi  
13. Hon. Wilson Wachira  
14. Hon. John Mwangi Macharia  
15. Hon. Peter Kajwang’  
16. Hon. Wilson Morogo  
17. Hon. Peter Mwaura Njuguna  
18. Hon. Neto Sakwa Aluksa  
19. Hon. Moses Ngeny Koros  
20. Hon. Ndung’u Mbugua  
21. Hon. Benard Kirui  
22. Hon. Francis Mungai Kuria  
23. Hon. George Cheruiyot Talam  
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 24. Hon. Anthony Kamau Kanyere  
25. Hon. Mercy Chepkirui Kilel  
 
On the Committee of Selection, I would wish to request this Honorable House to approve the 
following  Members;  
1. Hon. Joel Karuri Maina  
2. Hon. Joseph Ngware Ng’ang’a  
3. Hon. Alex Kipkoech Lang’at  
4. Hon. Philip Wanjohi Ndiritu  
5. Hon. Fadhili  Msuri Hamisi  
6. Hon. Virginia Wamaitha Gichanga  
7. Hon. Alex Ndung’u Mbugua  
8. Hon. Anthony Kamau Kanyere  
9. Hon. Robert Kipyegon Lang’at  
10. Hon. Isabella Kerubo  
11. Hon. Alex Bor  
12. Hon. Peter Njoroge Maina  
13. Hon. Stanley Karanja  
14. Hon. Francis Kuria Mungai  
15. Hon. Grace Wambui Mwathi  
16. Hon. Rose Chepkoech  
17. Hon. Peter Palang’a  
18. Hon. Wilson Wachira Mwangi  
19. Hon. John Macharia  
20. Hon. Hezy Kung’u Kariuki  
21. Hon. Ali Hassan Abdi  
22. Hon. Doreen Chebiwot Korir  
23. Hon. Wesley Kipkirui Lang’at  
On Committee of Appointment;  
1. Hon. Joel Karuri Maina  
2. Hon. Alex Lang’at  
3. Hon. Philip Wanjohi  
4. Hon. Isabella Makori  
5. Hon. Rose Chepkoech  
6. Hon. Peter Palang’a  
I wish to request this House to be able to approve these Committees. I beg to submit. Thank you.  
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. A seconder.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I second.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Motion is that pursuant to the provisions of standing orders 
181,182 and 187, this House approves the appointment of the following to the respective 
Committees as was read by the mover.  
The Motion is open for Debate.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support the report that has been 
tabled here by the Majority Leader and request the House to be considerate of time because other 
Counties, when we were going for induction, other Counties like Trans Nzoia Count y were there 
for Committee inductions. This means there are Counties that are ahead of us. Currently, there is 
no business that is being transacted in this County because currently, we are being h eld at ransom 
because of the technicality. I am requesting t he Members to consider these Committees being 
approved so that we can move on with the business of the House. There is no business that can be 
brought to this House without the inception of the House Business Committee. There is no CEC 
that can be vetted w ithout the Appointment Committee. There is no CO that can be vetted without 
the Appointment Committee.  
Therefore, the business of the day is a critical business that will determine the business of this 
County. Yesterday, we had our Governor who was here wi th us and she pleaded with the House 
that this House expedites the process of vetting those people when they will be brought here. I 
believe the Executive is ready to bring them here but as a House, we are not yet prepared. I am 
requesting the House to be considerate, we pass this Motion, we set these Committees to go on 
with their mandate, they expedite their processes or making sure we have Committees that are 
running. An Assembly is not an Assembly without organs. Those who come from the field of 
Health,  a body is not a body without organs. A body that does not have head and the tail is not a 
complete body. That is why I am requesting this Honorable House to be considerate and be 
conscious on time because without time, we are going to be doomed.  
However,  I would like to request that we be considerate of independent candidates because we are 
the moderators. Next time, we want to see the face of Independent Leaders in the House being 
prioritised and being given a law because the ruling Party and also the op position as per the 
Constitution. If these people will not be there to moderate things, this House can burn. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Kajwang’  
Hon. Peter Kajwang’: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support this Motion with a mendment. 
I support the House Business Committee but I rise to oppose the approval of the Selection 
Committee.  
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a point of order. The point of order addresses the House 
on the way amendments could be done and what ef fects it can have. Standing order number 156(2) 
states that whenever a Motion of approval of a list under paragraph 1 is moved in the Assembly, 
no objection against the proposed membership of a Member in a Select Committee shall be 
permitted and objections  if any, shall be formulated against the proposed membership as whole. 
Mheshimiwa Kajwang, if you are moving an amendment, then it would be to the question of 
whether you support the whole list or you oppose the whole list.  
Hon. Peter Kajwang’: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I stand guided.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa Minority Leader.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. What we are discussing in this House  is the 
three Committees jointly and there is no way you can remove one Committ ee. If you are removing 
one, you remove the whole list.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): He is guided. Mheshimiwa Minority Leader, you had the floor. 
I did not hear you supporting or maybe you needed some time for debating or something?  
Hon. Philip Wanjoh i: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I have already expressed my views and I am 
in support that we proceed on with the Debate. I support the procedural Motion and I support the 
Motion that the three Committees proceed. I support.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Hon. Mwangi Muraya.  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to urge the House. Unless Members 
are not receiving calls from our electorates, that we can lag here in discussing issues that are very 
important. I beg the House that we  all approve the names, we set the Committees and we continue. 
Also, we shall avoid the time other Members are having in looking for sympathies from other 
quarters and we shall be guided and we shall move on. If …   
Hon. Elijah Murage:  I am allowed to urge all Members that we support the Committees then  
move on because we have  to supplement students at home, others are to seat for KCSE and KCPE 
and Mr. speaker, they are disturbing us because they want bursaries and many other things. So I 
rise to support t hat we move on.  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri ): Hon Peter Palang’a, you have had much chances to speak, but 
maybe because of your seniority, there is a precedence to that effect. You will have two minutes 
on this one, but then from this side we are done and  the eyes of the Speaker are going to concentrate 
on the right.  
Hon Peter Palang’a : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I believe you also appreciate my seniority even to 
yourself, but again you being my Speaker I pledge my allegiance to you. I just wanted to echo the 
need to have these Committees up and running. Yesterday in her Excellency Governor ’s speech, 
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 she indicated the number of issues that she wishes to be undertaken on behalf of the residents of 
Nakuru. Amongst the key arears is the issue of County Integrated Development Plan (CIPD), 
Members will have to be interpreted for on what CIDP mean s, but what it means is the Strategic 
Planning of what we need to do. It is very critical because it is a five years term plan and we are 
already eating into the five years without this plan in place. We require it like yesterday. On the 
issue of bursaries  I am aware because  honourable M embers have been consulting me  as a S enior 
Counsel on how to go about this.  
The S peaker (Hon Joel Karuri):  Order!  Are you a Counse l? As a senior Member you do not 
mislead the House.  
Hon peter Palang’a : I stand guided Mr. Spe aker sir. Therefore what I am saying is, forms are 
already out there having been distributed for bursary disbursement. In her Statement the Governor 
said she has to uphold or wait a little bit. We cannot undertake such a crucial mandate without the 
Educati on Committee. The CECM for that particular Committee has to be vetted and be approved 
by this Committee.  So in short we have to reallocate some of the funds to complete the projects 
that have been rolled over. We entirely need to realign that by Supplement ary Budget and that 
Supplementary Budget cannot be looked into without the substantive Committee for that particular 
Committee. We seriously require this like yesterday. For heaven ’s sake Members let us have these 
Committees up and running as soon as yeste rday. Thankyou Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri): Hon . Peter Njoroge from Murindati, then Hon . Abdi in that order.  
Hon P eter Njoroge : Thank  you Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the Motion. You reali se that these 
Members were given the mandate to represent their electorate on 8th of August and two and half 
months down the line, we have not had an opportunity to conduct important businesses in this 
House. The reason for that is because very crucial Committees are not yet in place and therefore I 
feel that there is need and urgency to constitute and put in place these Committees so that we are 
enabled to hit the ground running. Mr. Speaker, you reali se that the children in this County who 
are hoping for the feeding program to be enrolled really depend  on us and that depends on the 
Committees . If they are put in place we will be able to fast track such things and assist the 
Executive to have that done. You also realize that this being a new Government, some drugs have 
not been supplied to the rural disp ensaries and hospitals because such Committees are not in place.  
Therefore, we feel that there is an urgency and need to put this place in place. Last but not least 
we have very new Municipalities like Gilgil and Molo and they are yet to be operationali sed.  
Therefore if we put these Committees in place, House Business, Selection Committee and also 
Appointment, we are sure that they are able to fast -track for these things to be done. Thank  you 
Mr. Speaker.  
Hon Hassan Abdi : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to support the 
Procedural Motion and I want also to...  
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri ): Order! Hon Abdi. The procedural Motion was overtaken by 
events, we are on Order No. 9 , the substantive Motion.  
Hon Hassan Abdi : I want to support the Motion. If you keenly yesterday were listening to the 
Governor’s address , I think she was just talking about Health and Mr. Speaker if you stay around 
this town and go to PGH or the Level Five hospital, I am telling you it is messy.  The patients are 
lying down on the floor and we need things to move very fast. The second and the last thing is 
about the Digital Centers the Governor was talking about in her address. We need these Digital 
Centers in our Mashinani  because young people have no jobs and we want them to go to those 
Digital Centers watafute kazi na wafanye kazi . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri): Hon Francis Kuria from Malewa West  
Hon Francis Kuria : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to s upport the Motion. I am very worried 
because if every Member was listening to yesterday’s speech from our dear Governor, we are 
supposed to resume our duties. We are running short of time and people in the field are having 
high expectation s on what they se nt us here to represent them, so I support the Motion . We should 
proceed and I raise concern we went for induction Mr. Speaker and allow me to address Hon . 
Kamau of Mai Mah iu. These are the Committee on Selection . 
The S peaker ( Hon Joel Karuri ): Order! Orde r! What information is it Hon . Macharia  
Hon Elijah Macharia : (On a point of information), I want to inform the Honorable Mem ber that 
he should address the S peaker not the honorable Member.  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri ): Hon . Francis Kuria, but Hon . Kamau from Mai Mahiu has not 
addressed himself in order number nine. So you may not be addressing him maybe unless you 
want to...  
Hon Francis Kuria: Mr. Speaker I am addressing the House. Thank you. Allow me to tell the 
honorable M embers that we went for induction and everything in this Paper we were taught there. 
Let us be keen, let us understand and next time we ask the question so that we understand where 
we are heading to. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri ): So, in that order Hon . Virginia then Hon . Jane then we get another 
round of Members.  
Hon Virginia Gichanga : Thank you Mr. Speaker. First of all I would like to appreciate the 
Majority Party Leadership and also the Minority and yourself for coming up with thi s list. I support 
the list of Members but I want to urge all those in this list especially the ones on Selection 
Committee. All the seventy -five of us could not have been able to get into this Committee so, it is 
my prayer that those who are in this Commit tee to do justice to the all in the House. Making sure 
that all Members are well represented in each and every Committee as it is in the Standing Orders. 
Also about yesterday’s Governor’s speech, it is not only the Governor who wants this House or 
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 County t o start working ; all of us were elected by the people or our electorates and they expect us 
to be doing something or work to be in progress. Like Nyandarua County they have already vetted 
their CECs. If we do not allow this Motion or this work to go ahead then we will just be dr agging 
our people behind and as a C ounty Assembly we will be blamed. Let us play our role then the rest 
we give the Governor, the CECs and COs and we leave the work to her, then we shall be able to 
question the Executive if work is n ot done. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker ( Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you. Hon Jane Gituku then later after Jane, Hon . Kamau 
you get that opportunity as we wind up.  
Hon. Jane Gituku : Mr. Speaker I want to thank you for this chance again. I am the one who 
started with a question and I believe  that the intelligence of this H ouse demands we all understand 
the urgency of whatever is ahead of us.  So nobody is actually questioning the urgency of the 
matters that are ahead of us and we are not even in any dou bt that our County Assembly needs to 
move very fast, but the question that I asked which of course I did not get an answer but we usually 
say the majority have their way and the minority have their say is that the composition which we 
were explained deserv es to have all the Members who are elected. It was not answered so I will 
also not demand again but I am also comfortable to say that the composition of the Committee and 
the Standing Orders that were formed could have included all Members. But if those pe ople who 
know that those people are supposed to be like that and can appear in as many Committees as 
possible for this one I totally agree.  
 Mr. Speaker, we might maybe not be good at lobbying so we can get this position but the interest 
for us is that we shall serve our community. I believe even without being in the list we have an 
opportunity to serve our communities so nobody should maybe feel like I am fighting for 
something, I only asked for information and since I did not get it, maybe by and by as th e years go 
by, I will understand. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker ( Hon Joel Karuri ): Hon. Kamau then Hon . Koros then Hon . Alex in that order then 
we wind up.  
Hon Eliud Kamau : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I believe it is only fools who cannot change their 
mind .  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri ): Order! Order! That is unparliamentarily language. So you may 
want to withdraw that?    
SIELE  
Hon. Eliud Chege:  But Mr. Speaker, with the urgency that we have in our County, In my opinion 
I cannot oppose the motion again but I want to give a stern warning to the Leadership of this House 
because although I support the Motion,  I want to give that stern warning that please..  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi : Mr. Speaker  
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): What is your point of information?  
The Minority Leader  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Mr. Speaker there is somebody who is warning us 
in this House and I would be very worried why we are warn ed and the repercussions of the 
warnings. Mr. Speaker can you please stand for the House whether we are supposed to be warned 
or not.  
Hon. Eliud Chege : Mr. Speaker I withdraw  
(Laughter)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri) Order! Allow Hon. Kamau to submit his v iews there  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Mr. Speaker before you defend Hon. Kamau,  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Order Hon. Kamau kindly if you can conclude your submission  
Hon. Eliud Chege : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I stand and now support the Motion.  
(Laughter)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Koros then Hon Alex and then later we are going to have 
two more Members then we wind up  
Hon. Moses Koros:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I want to support the motion and also request that 
looking at the mood of the H ouse I can see we already have a direction. I request that the speaker 
puts the motion to question so that we can end the debate. Thank you Mr. Speaker  
Applause  
Hon. Alex Bor  Thank you Mr. Speaker I arise to support the motion and state that time has gone 
and with the short time we have, we need to hit the ground running by going back to our people 
and serve them. Without any reproach, the committees that have been setup they will do their best 
to serve this House because that is what we have been called to  do. As for Bwana Njuguna  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Mr. Speaker there is no bwana’s here. Can he withdraw?  
Hon Alex Bor : I withdraw and go back to refer him as Hon. Njuguna. The composition of the 
committee on Selection and Appointment remain as it is constituted. Thank you very much I rise 
to support the Motion.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you; Hon. John Maritim f rom Kamara and then Hon. 
Bernard from Marioshoni and then I will give direction because members you also realize that this 
session, needs to be through by 12.30, However, its only because we started a little bit late and 
therefore kindly shorten your submi ssions so that we are not out of order.  
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. John Maritim : Mr. Speaker sir I stand to support the motion, yesterday we had the Governor 
talk about delivering on time and I believe if we just drag our feet, time is running out. I also 
believe that a busy mi nd is also a busy body so I believe that if we can move on together, everything 
will be okay. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Kairu): Hon. Benard then Hon. Rottok  
Hon. Benard Kirui:  Yangu tu ningependa kupata ufafanuzi kutoka kwa Kiongozi wa walio 
Wengi wakati alikuwa akisoma majina ya House Business Committee, alipofika no. 21, akasema 
kulikuwa na typing error na hiyo ndio jina langu.  
(Laughter)  
Sasa sijui ningependa tu atufafanunulie kwa nini ikifika jina langu inakuwa typing error  
(Laughter)  
The Speake r (Hon. Joel Karuri: Thank you I will allow Hon Rottok and then because the Majority 
leader is the mover, he will be able to respond.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok : Thank you Mr. Speaker I want to support the substantive motion about the 
composition of the three commi ttee. Down there in our village people need our support especially 
where I come from Menengai West, We are encountering a lot of challenges whereby incidences 
of robberies have risen in high level. May I take this opportunity to tell my fellow Hon. Members  
that we support this substantive motion and we move on because time is running out?  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Rottok what is making robbery levels to rise?  
Hon. Issac Rottok:  Actually I think due to the delay of forming this committees  
(Laughte r) 
Actually our roads are bad in the village, we cannot access all places easily, floodlights are not 
working and we need to support our governor by forming this Committees. I am not complaining 
because my name is not there but the formed committee are pro fessionals and committed to do 
their duties in a professional way.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you Hon. Rottok. Hon Kajwang make your contribution 
short  
Hon. Peter Kajwang : Thank you Mr. Speaker; I also stand up and say that I was vehemently 
oppos ed to this Motion but now considering that the majority have supported, I now want to give 
my support to this Motion but I want to reiterate and advise Members that we should not be drawn 
into a panic mood. This House is being guided by Standing Orders, we  had seven days to look into 
these issues and that every Member after the other is standing up to say oh! We are late oh! sijui 
County A has done this  or County Assembly has done that. No! Let us stand our ground, let us 
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 organise ourselves because if you miss the first step, you are not going to get it right and we have 
already seen some red flags in this and you know it is only that we have another day that we are 
going to engage. I want to tell Members let us not get into panic mood but let us appreciate  and 
ready to support the agenda of the Governor and we also know that we have time as an Assembly 
to execute this issue. There is no issue to panic or what is to come but instead we are still being 
guided by the Standing Orders. Let us restrict ourselves to the rules of this House as indicated in 
the Standing Orders. Otherwise Mr. Speaker I stand to support.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you Hon. Douglas Naburuke  
Hon. D ouglas Naburuke : I stand here to support this Motion because as I have read the m ood in 
the House, I hereby support the Motion so that the Committee on Selection can continue with their 
mandate so that we finish the task ahead of us. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Hon. Evelyne and then later Hon. Majority Leader you will 
respond.  
Hon. Everlyne Chepkirui: Thank you Mr. Speaker I stand to support the Motion and state that 
as far as we are talking of ten days, during our first day of orientation, yo u told us that this House 
we are going to keep time. I hope this will be last time that we are going to be told to do things in 
a hurry because of time. I also urge the House Leadership to keep informing us in time and if there 
is anything we are lurking b ehind, we are committed to give our time to it so that everything we 
are supposed to do is done in good time. Thank you Mr. Speaker  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): Thank you Hon. Member.  Hon Majority Leader.  
The Majority Leader (Hon. Alex Lang’at): Thank y ou Mr. Speaker sir, I want to also take this 
opportunity to thank the House in view of the mood of what we are just about to do, to actually 
approve these names. In summary I think we are all in agreement, one we have just talked about 
time that time notwi thstanding, we are a new House and just like a new vehicle, you fuel ready to 
move and we did not have wheels. The approval of all these Committees, ideally is just to give us 
wheels to be able to move and allow the County to move forward and also pave way  to 
operationalise and allow us to also perform our mandate even as we go back to our role of 
representation in our various Wards.  
I know the constituents are very much expectant waiting for us on the ground and because we have 
been away for quite a long time it would be wise if we go to our various Wards, we go there having 
a word or something for them just like when a father goes for a journey and come home children 
will be expecting bread. This bread Hon. Members is going to be put in place by allowing these 
names to be approved by this very Hon. House.  
Therefore Members without much a -do, there is a Member who asked about the composition of 
names in number 21. I will look at the list so that we rectify and give the right name in that 
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 particular issue. Mr. Speaker sir, with those few remarks I would wish to request this House that 
they approve the names that we have been able to forward to allow us to start our business. If you 
can recall, the wisdom of the Leadership, this week or the previous week we c ould be in Mombasa 
for further induction but with the indulgence of the Leadership of this House, when we sat, we 
agreed that let us postpone this so that when we go back to Mombasa for further induction, we will 
be able to let things move on in our County . Also for the benefit of time or do away with anxiety 
because we have already talked about placing Members into the various Committees, there is a lot 
of anxiety and Members we urge you as Leadership that this Committee will place them equally; 
they will be considerate that Members fit into various Committees so that you do your work with 
a very happy soul and also be productive in your various Committees. As I was talking about 
anxiety because the more we delay, Members are anxious on which Committee to b e placed, which 
Committee to Chair and all that, the only way to resolve the issue is by approving the this  list of 
names so that the House can remain united and address other issues. With those few remarks I 
request this Hon. House to approve all the nam es of the various Committees as stated. I beg to 
move.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Kairu): I now propose the question that;  
Pursuant to provisions of Standing Orders 161, 182 and 187, this House approves the 
appointment of the following members as indicated and  read with the respective Committees ). 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
ADJOURNMEMNT  
Hon. Members the House stands adjourned up to 2.30 pm today  
(The House rose at 12.50pm ) 
 
 
  
    
 
  
 
 
OCTOBER 13, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
  
  
 
 