DECEMBER 1, 2022                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assemb ly of 
Nakuru.    
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
THURSDAY, 1ST December  2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3: 25 pm 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
BILL  
(Second Reading)  
THE NAKURU COUNTY SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL NO. 4 OF 2022  
(By l eave of the House)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): The Honorable Alex Mbugua , the Chairperso n of the Committee  
on Budget and Appropriation.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  I rise to move that Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Bill No. 4 
of 2022 be now read a Second Time. 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Do you have a seconder?  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi : Thank you Honorable Speaker, I rise to second that the Nakuru County 
Supplementary Bill Appropriation No. 4 of 2022 be now read a Second Time 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you. The Chairperson for the Committee  of Budget  and 
Appropriatio n you needed to...during the first reading,  the Bill was committed to the Committe e 
on Budget  and Appropriation. You have input on that now that you are moving that it be read for 
a second time, you may need to explain a bit why..  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi : Thank you Honorable Speaker , as we went through the  Bill during the First 
Reading in the morning. There  came various issues and commitments that this Committee  noted 
and with the urgency to ensure that, the County  proceeds with its own function well.  We found it 
that as a  Committee,  we have done proper appropriation of various amounts within this Bill and 
you find that the  Members have been served with the gazette notice on the same, the Nakuru 
County Supplementary Bill Appropriation No. 4 of 2022  and as such, Mr. Speaker, you will fi nd 
that the documents lay on the table with them with the proper explanation of how various amounts 
have gone to various votes and with the different divisions. I find that members can go through 
whatever they have been given right now, and we can move thi s Bill goes for  second reading. 
Thank you.  
DECEMBER 1, 2022                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assemb ly of 
Nakuru.    
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you. The Motion has been seconded. The Chairman has 
explained himself and then Motion is open for debate maybe two members, then we proceed. Do 
I proceed to put it question?  
Honorable Members:  Yes 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honorable members the Motion is that the Nakuru County 
Supplementary Appropriation Bill number 4 of 2022 be now read a Second Time 
                                                         (Question proposed)   
(Question put and agreed to)  
next order.  
(Then) 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
(Order for the Committee read)  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) le ft the chair ] 
IN THE COMMITTEE  
[The Chairperson (Hon. William Mutai) took the Chair]  
 
The Chair person (Hon. William Mutai ): Members I want your attention;  it is the Committee of 
the Whole House. So, guided by the sequence to the observed  in considering a Bill in committee. 
The various parts therefore shall be considered in the following sequenc e: 
(a) clauses as printed excluding the clauses providing for the citation of the bill. the commencement 
if any and the interpretation.  
(b) new clauses  
(C.) schedule  
(d)New schedules  
 (e) interpretation  
(F) preamble if any  
(g)  long title  
(H) the claus es provided for the citation of the Bill and the commencement. So, members we are 
going to start with clauses without amendments.  
Clause 3:  
DECEMBER 1, 2022                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assemb ly of 
Nakuru.    
  
(Question proposed that Clause 3 be part of the Bill ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Clause 4  
(Question proposed that Clause 4 be part of the Bill ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
First Schedule  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Thank you Chair. I move that schedule 1 be amended as recorded in dicated 
in the Order Paper.  
(Question proposed that schedule 1 be amended as proposed ) 
(Question  that Schedule 1 be amended as proposed put and agreed to) . 
 
(Question that schedule 1 as amended be part of the Bill  proposed)  
(Question that Schedule 1 as amended be part of the Bill put and agreed to ) 
Schedule 2  
(Question proposed that schedule 2 be part of the Bill ) 
(Question  that Schedule 2 be part of the Bill  put and agreed to ) 
 
Clause2  
The Chairperson  (Hon. William Mutai): Clause 2 has no amendment  
(Question that Clause 2 be part of the Bill proposed)  
(Question that Clause 2 be part of the Bill put and agreed to ) 
Clause1  
Question proposed  
Question put and agreed to  
The Long Title and Citation  
Hon. Isaac Rottok : Hon. Chair, I arise on a point of information; I think we are not understanding; 
can you bring  us back to understand the procedure  
DECEMBER 1, 2022                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assemb ly of 
Nakuru.    
 The Chairperson  (Hon. William Mutai): Hon. Rottok during the Committee of the Whole House, 
there is a procedure that we follow which is guided by Standing Order 126 , so make reference to 
the order 126.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok : It is okay Mr. Chair, continue.  
The Chairperson  (Hon William Mutai): Honorable Members we are done with the Committee of 
the Whole House; we proceed to the reporting stage. We may have done it in a hasty manner but 
in due course we shall understand the process well. Thank you very much. I now call upon the 
mover to move the Motion  
PROGRESS REPORT  
THE NAKURU COUNT Y SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL NO. 4 OF 2022  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Thank you Hon. Chairperson. I beg to move that the committee do report to 
the Assembly its consideration of the Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Bill No. 4 of 
2022 and its approval  thereof with amendments  
The Chairperson  (Hon. William Mutai): I now propose the question which is that  
(Question proposed that the committee do report to the House its consideration of the Nakuru 
County Supplementary Appropriation Bill No. 4 of 2022 with amendments ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(The House resumed)  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) in the Chair] 
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): The Chairperson.  
Hon William Mutai : Hon orable  Speaker sir, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole 
House has considered The Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Bill No.4, 2022  and it’s 
approval  thereof with Amendments. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Mover.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I beg to move tha t the House do agree with the 
Committee on the said report and would ask Hon. Virginia  Wamaitha to second.  
Hon. Virginia  Gicanga : Thank you Mr. Speaker I stand to second that the House agrees with the 
report.  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): I now propose t hat...  
(Question proposed that The House do agree with the Committee in the said report ) 
(Question put and agreed to)  
DECEMBER 1, 2022                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assemb ly of 
Nakuru.    
 The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mover.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Mr. Speaker, I now move that The Nakuru County Supplementary 
Appropriation Bill No. 4, 2022 be now read for the Third Time. 
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Seconder  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Mr. Speaker I second.  
The Speaker  (Hon  Joel Karuri): I now propose that...  
Question proposed that The Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Bill No.4, 2022 be 
now read a Third Time. 
(Question put and agreed to.)  
(The Nakuru County Supplementary Appropriation Bill No. 4, 2022 was accordingly  read a 
Third Time and passed)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Bill is ready to be signed by the governor. Thank you.  
ADJOURNMENT  
The House stands adjourned until Tuesday, 2nd February, 2023.  
(The House rose at 4:05 pm) 
 