COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 21st February 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House Met At 03: 05PM  
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Mwaura): In the Chair].  
PRAYER  
PETI TION 
REVIEW OF REVENUE ALLOCATION OF LARE WARD TO MATCH THE POPULATION AND 
GEOGRAPHICAL SIZE,  CAPTURING LARE AND NAISHI WARD WHICH WERE MERGED TO 
FORM LARE WARD.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Mwaura): There is a Petition to be presented by the 
Chairperson Budget Committee . 
Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker; there is a Petition that was presented to the Committee on 
Budget and Appropriation s by Mr. Joseph  Ngugi  and others seeking review of revenue allocation 
of Lare Ward to match the population and geographical s ize, capturing  Lare and Naishi Ward 
which were merged to form La re Ward. 
 In view of that, the major concern of the petitioner  is the review of the Revenue Allocation. In 
view of the above, the current Ward Allocation pursuant to Section 4 of the Nakuru County 
Revenue Allocation Act of 2018, allocate not less than 45 percent  of the Development  Expenditure 
each Financial Year. In addition  Mr. Temporary Speaker , the parameters for sharing revenue 
among the Wards has been as follows;   
As per  populat ion we normally  award 30 percent equitable share 60 percent , land area,  10 percent. 
Mr. Temporary Speaker y ou reali se that we held within the budget allocation  these parameters are 
very essential  and hence part of the population as enumerated  by this petitioner, has insinuate d that 
the Budget and Appropriation s Committee come to a conclusion that we must review  all the 
matter s as indicated.  
In conclusion , the Committee has embarked on reviewing the Nakuru County Revenue Allocation 
Act 20 18 to reflect the current 2019 Population Census with the new parameters. In this 
circumstance the Prayer of the peti tioner will be answered once the said Act is reviewed 
accordingly. Mr. Temporary Speaker, a s a concern of the Budget Committee, we say that all the 
parameters will be met in this budgetary  allocation this Financial  Year. Thank you Mr. Temporary  
Speaker . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Mwaura): That pursuant to Standing Order 204, I am going 
to allow a few Members to comment  on the Report. Hon . Anthony Kamau . 
Hon. Anthony Kamau : I want it to be on record.  Allow  me to stand and commend  Chair Budget 
Committee for the response that he has given. I want to say this notwithstanding  that this Petition 
was brought concerning  Lare Ward. This matter cuts across  the County because you find most of 
our Wards are very vast and their population is big and as the Chair has said, we are waiting that 
review of the Act so that those parameters  can be captured in this budget  cycle. I support the 
response.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Wajeff . 
Hon. Wilson Mwangi : Thank you Mr. Temporary S peaker for catching your eye. I think this is 
very prudent in terms of the population being a Ward in this City, you know some times there is a 
lot of population influx from different areas. People coming to the urban and when we are doing 
our budget allocation , I do not know we have been using the issue of area population because our 
areas and I think we should  be using the recent census  so that our Wards can have better allocation 
in terms of the population that it has. It is not only Lare and Naishi, we have so many Wards that 
have been having those population s which do not match with the population those Wards have. I 
would request Chair Budget to have the recent Population Census so that our Wards can gain from 
that allocation . Thank you. 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon Elijah Murage): Chair  Budget , it would be prudent if you expedite  
the review of the Nakuru County Revenue Allocation as soon as possible so that these matters can 
be taken into consideration. Next order . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Those  are the Orders of the day; this House stands adjourned until tomorrow 9.30am . 
The House rose at 3.10pm  
  