FEBRUARY 16, 2022               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday, 16TH February, 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3.15pm  
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui) in the Chair]  
PRAYERS  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Good afternoon honorable members.  
                                                               
MOTION  
 
   HOUSE ADOPTS BUDGET AND APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE 2022/2023  
                                                          ANNUAL DEVELOPME NT PLAN 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui):  Honorable Joel Maina Karuri Chairperson of 
Budget and Appropriation Committee, kwa niaba yake  Honorable Murage.  
 
Hon. Josephat Murage:  Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker Sir, am a Member of Budget and 
Appropriation Committee. Thank you for giving me this chance to move  a Motion ;- 
 
THAT the House adopts  Budget and Appropriation Committee report on the 2022 /2023 Annual 
Development Plan.  
 
The Budget Committee has a chairperson Honorable  Joel Karuri , vice chair is Honorable 
Anthony Rono and it comp oses of fifteen members  and the Budget Committee has done a good 
job, has come up with this report.  
 
To address the ongoing effects and the past pandemic , social and economic evolvement the 
County Government shall continue to invest Social infrastructural programme such as social 
protection, health and education as well as general economic and enterprises. This are some of 
the plans the County Government has taken , the report i tself is quite clear, you will allow me to 
go to the most important. I want to go through to the review of the implementation f the previous 
annual development plan.  
  
FEBRUARY 16, 2022               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 We need to know especially in livestock and fisheries has a great role in contributing to 
economic and social development through enhancing food security, economic generation, 
employment and wealth creation and the following exchange earning as well as security of land 
tenants and public land management and contributing 10% economic growth ra te and vision 
2030 as well as 60% to the county’s economy. The directorate of Agriculture initiated a new 
project in the year 2020/2021 that includes that involves procurement and distribution of 
avocados, pawpaw and pyrethrum seedling as well as certified  potato seeds, whose tender have 
been  awarded and part of  the distribution done and completion of 7 0 tea buying centers in 
Kuresoi, Kuresoi south and Kuresoi North.   
This Report is quite big , if you allow me  I will go directly to the  recommendations that the 
committee has given  
RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE ON THE YEAR 2022 /2023 ANNUAL DEVELOPMENT 
PLAN  
the committee upon deliberations recommends the following : 
1. The plan does not highlight how the ongoing projects w ill be funded and fast track 
especially opera rization aspects . the county is directed to assess the viability, the 
infrastructure al expansion and formulate policies on how  this will be addressed in the 
medium term.  
2. the county to focus on completing and opera rization of ongoing projects as initiat ing  new 
project there is a new department to prioritize  completion of ongoing and incomplete 
projects before proposing new ones.  
This will help address the huge backlog of ongoing projects a nd realize values for money 
in Project intervention while addressing the CIDP . Strategic focus further the accounting 
government issued a task truck operation and equipping of projects.  
3. The county to strategize to  approve under developmen t plan any project to be undertaken 
must address … the service need to the intended constituency without compromising on 
their security . 
4.  The county is directed to establish a county  office where county data can be assessed 
easily.  
5.  Public private partnersh ip should be encouraged in the realization of the sub sector 
strategic objective and addressing the deficit in the resource gap.  
6. There should be invest ment  in employees skills in technical capacity for quality service 
delivery.  
7. More technical staff shoul d be employed to fill various gaps encountered in 
implementation of sub sector objectives.  
8. Procurement processes should be streamlined  to ensure timely completion  of the sub sector 
project . 
FEBRUARY 16, 2022               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 9.  The county government should  enhance consolidation and collaborat ion with other 
government agencies eg Kura Kenha, KERRA KUSIP, KRB  and also develop proper 
channels of communication with them.  
10. The county government should therefore, liaise  with the national government to ensure 
funds  are realized  without delay , to enable department achieve their target objectives on 
time.  
11. Rehabilitation centre is needed in the county for treatment and rehabilitation for p persons  
depend ant on alcoholic drinks.  
12. The county monitoring and evaluation framework, there is not robust and effective and the 
county monitoring and evaluation should be strengthened  and facilitate d to ensure timely 
project completion and value for money. That is the report that the Budget Comm ittee came 
up with and I wish to call Mheshimiwa Mwathi to second. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Hon. Mwathi.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi: Thank you Mr. Deputy  Speaker sir. I stand to second the report of the 
Budget and Appropriation Committee on the County Government of Nakuru 2022 /2023 Annual 
Development Plan. I second.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you Hon. Mwathi.  
(Question proposed that th e House adopts the Report of the Budget and Appropriation 
Committee on the County Government of Nakuru 2022 -2023 Annual Development Plan. ) 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): The Motion is open to be debated by all.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr.  Deputy Speaker sir. It is good that procedures be followed 
to the letter because this is a House that abides by rules and regulations. The issue of an ADP is 
very important because it affects the whole year. In actual sense, it is an extract. I always say  it 
would be very bad for anybody to stand at the floor of this House with such a report. When the 
report is being brought when the mover has already sat down, they never brought the report earlier, 
sometimes it is very bad. It has been a habit for this Co mmittee to ambush the House but now that 
I have the report, let me digest it.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Hon. Karanja, first of all I want to inform you that 
this report was tabled yesterday and it was issued yesterday. I do not know if you a re not aware of 
it. 
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Mr. Deputy Speaker sir, as a follower of Jesus Christ, I do not cheat. 
When I say I did not have the report and it was not there, but now because I have it, I do not need 
to even know why the Chair is wasting a lot of energy. You do not have to use that en ergy to face 
his opponent. That energy is required but now that I have the report, let me read the report so that 
I see whether you have hidden cards.  
FEBRUARY 16, 2022               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Hon. Chair.  
Hon. Joel Karuri: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker si r, the problem  with the Honorable 
Member for Naivasha East; as much as he is saying he is a follower of Jesus Christ; we also know 
that there are those followers who will be at the end time at the throne of judgement. They will be 
told to sit o n the left b ecause they did not belong to me from the onset. That is not here neither 
there. What is important is that the Member has received the report. The report was circulated 
yesterday and so Hon. Karanja is one of the learned seniors in this House and he knows the 
importance of having the document as it is so that he can digest it and when time comes to give 
the input. Hon. Karanja has put it rightly the initial stages of the budget making process. The ADP 
is one of the documents that the County Government have to develop to be able to build on that so 
that as they prepare for the Fiscal Strategy Paper and also for the main budget. We as a Committee 
gave recommendations of what we were able to go through and get and of importance and one of 
the risks that we find  the County of Nakuru having is incomplete projects. Going forward,  
Honorable  Members and the executive or this Government has to look for a way to have a policy 
framework.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker right now as we talk, we have dispensaries that are complete bu t not 
operationalized and so that cannot be term ed as a complete project and that is a risk. The other risk 
that we face is concerning projects that maybe were awarded half of the money but then they 
required like double the amount allocated and therefore that project is not complete. We are not 
sure about the future and if any project has not been complete d, then it goes without saying that 
the value for money for that project has not been realized. And so Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a 
committee, we want to urg e the departments and also members to be able to allocate funds even 
in the coming budget for any incomplete project so that we can be able to realize and our people 
realizes value for money.  
In the past the County Government of Nakuru has done collaborat ion with development partners, 
we know of nurses being paid by DANIDA and we know that the department has gotten funding 
from the World Bank Projects and we also know that there has been other climate change programs 
that are in line with the World Bank. Therefore,  we want to really pray and request and urge the 
County Government, the Executive, to be able to look for more donor  partners when we know that 
we get value for money on the amount of development they can bring. Of late Mheshimiwa  Mwathi 
who comes from Bahati, she is a witness and members who come from Bahati sub county are 
witnesses of a collaboration between the County Government of Nakuru and the Kingdom Seekers 
Fellowship and they have been able to build a hospital worth Kshs  300 million. That is the kind of 
partnership or development partner’s that we continue urging the county to really look for . We 
also want to pu t this very candidly that the County Government Executive need to reward the 
departments that look for this development partners so that now they can encourage other 
departments to look for these partners . Therefore,  I want to support that the House adopt this Paper  
FEBRUARY 16, 2022               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 so that it can give room for the budget ceiling to be debated and even the report be tabled in this 
House towards preparation for the main budget. I support.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you Hon. Chair for Budget and Appropriati on 
I can see that members are in agreement on what has been tabled and therefore I want to propose 
a question  
(Question proposed that this House adopts the report of the Budget and Appropriation 
Committee on the County Government of Nakuru 2022/2023 Annual  Development Plan ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned until next week Tuesday in the morning.  
House rose at 3.40pm  
 