NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 8TH November 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:30 am 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
WELCOME TO STUDENTS FROM NAKURU BOYS HIGH SCHOOL  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Honorable Members, in a special way I want to acknowledge 
the presence of Students  from Nakuru Boys’ High School , welcome. This is a House  where 
important matters are deliberated. Next order  
MESSAGE  
NOMINEES TO THE POSITIONS OF CHIEF OFFICERS (CO S) 
Honorable Members, there is a message from her Excellency the  Governor Honorable Susan 
Kihika and pursuant to the provisions of Section 45 of the County Government Act of 2012 as 
read together Section 6 of the Public Appoi ntments, County Assembly Approval Act . I am in 
receipt of  a message from her Excellency  the Governor , nominating the following persons to the 
position of Chief Officers (COs)  
1. Cheruiyot Michael Kiplangat – Department of Livestock  and Fisheries Development  
2. Abuki Alice Manyange  - Department of Public Health  
3. Ndegwa Samuel Njoroge - Department of Trade, Business Support and Entrepreneurship  
4. Kakai Everlyne Bunusu – Department Of Economic Planning  
5. Alex Maina Muhoro – Department  of Resource Mobilizati on 
6. Koech John Kipkorir - Department of Education  
7. Malinda Joseph Mutual - Department of Finance AND  Revenue Administration  
8. Mwaura Newton Kamau - Department  of Agriculture and Cooperatives  
9. Ncece Joyce - Department  of Disaster Management and Humanitarian Assistance  
10. Abdallah Salim Swaleh -Department of ICT E-Government and Public Communication  
11. Kimani Rosemary Wambui - Tourism and Culture  
12. Barasa Kennedy Mungai - Department of Environment, Energy, Climate  Change and 
Natural Resources  
13. Kurgat  Richard Kibet - Department of Youth And Vocational Training  
14. Kinyanjui Margaret Wanjiru – Department Of Water and Sanitation  
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 15. Koech Charles Kipngetich - Department of Administration and Devolution  
16. Mwangi John Murima - Department of Medical Services  
17. Kuria David Kamau - Department of Housing and Urban Development  
18. Sang Bernard Kipkurui - Department Public Works  
19. Mwaura Stella Mabaire - Department of Sports, Gender, Culture and Social Service  
20. Changwony Catherine - Department of Lands and Physical Planning   
21. Mugo Kennedy Kambo - Department of Public Transport and Roads  
Honorable Members, Pursuant  to the provis ions of Standing Order number 48, the Nominees  
stand committed  to the relevant Departmental Committees as follows - 
1. Cheruiyot Michael Kiplangat – Department Of Livestock And Fisheries Development , 
Committed To The Committee On Agriculture  
2. Abuki Alice Manyange  - Department Of Public Health , Committed  To The Committee 
On Health  
3. Ndegwa Samuel Njoroge - Department Of Trade , Business Support And 
Entrepreneurship , Committed To The Committee On Trade, Tourism And Cooperatives  
4. Kakai Everlyne Bunusu – Department Of Economic Planning , Committed  To The 
Committee On Budget And Appropriation  
5. Alex Maina Muhoro – Department  Of Resourc e Mobilization , Committed To The 
Committee On Finance  
6. Koech John Kipkorir - Department Of Education , Committed  To The Committee On 
Early Childhood Eduction And Vocational Training  
7. Malinda Joseph Mutua - Department Of Finance And Revenue Administration , 
Comm itted To The Committee On Budget And Appropriation  
8. Mwaura Newton Kamau - Department Of Agriculture And Cooperatives , Committed To 
The Committee On Agriculture And Cooperatives  
9. Ncece Joyce - Department Of Disaster Management And Humanitarian Assistance , 
Committed To The Committee On Disaster Management  
10. Abdallah Salim Swaleh Department Of ICT E-Government And Public Communication , 
Commiteed To The Committee On ICT And E -Government  
11. Kimani Rosemary Wambui - Tourism And Culture , Committed To The Committee On 
Trade , Tourism And Culture  
12. Barasa Kennedy Mungai - Department of Environment , Energy , Climate Change And 
Natural Resources , Committed To The Committee Environment, Energy And Natural 
Resources  
13. Kurgat Richard Kibet - Department Of Youth And Vocational Traini ng, Committed To 
The Committee On Early Childhood Education And Vocational Training  
14. Kinyanjui Margaret Wanjiru – Department Of Water And Sanitation , Committed To The 
Committee On Energy, Environment And Natural Resources  
15. Koech C harles Kipngetich - Department Of Administration And Devolution , Committed 
To The Committee On Labour, Gender, Youth And Social Services  
16. Mwangi John Murima - Department Of Medical Services , Committed To The Committee 
Health Services  
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 17. Kuria David Kamau - Department Of Housing And Urban Development , Committed To 
The Committee On Lands, Housing And Physical Planning  
18. Sang Bernard Kipkurui - Department Public Works , Committed To The Committee On 
Roads, Transport And Public Works  
19. Mwaura Stella Mabaire - Department Of Sports , Gender , Culture And Social Service , 
Committed To The Committee On Sport, Gender Culture And Social Service  
20. Changwony Catherine - Department Of Lands And Physical Planning , Committed To The 
Committee On Lands, Housing And Physical Planning  
21. Mugo Kennedy Kambo - Department Of Public Transport, Committed To The Committee 
On Roads, Transport and Public Works  
Honorable Members, on the same there will be the substantive time that has been set on the 
schedule and the Chairpersons  of the various Committee  to take note . The office of the Clerk 
will immediately,  after this sitting distribute the program  for the vetting of Chief Officers (COs) 
by the various Assembly Committees . What is  it honorable Stanley Karanja?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Thank you honorable Speaker . I stand on Order  number 48 (1) (2)  on the 
approval of Public Appointments, which says that upon receipts of the notification  for 
appointment for an office under the Constitution  or any other legislation requiring  it to be 
approved by the Assembly ; the nomination shall stand committed to the relevant Departmental 
Committee of the Assembly  for consideration.  
The reason why I am on my knees honorable Speaker  is that last time, you did the same 
communication on the CEC Ms... part 2 of the Standing Order 48 reads that – despite paragraph 
one on appointment under Article  number 179(2) and (b) of the  Constitution shall stand 
committed to the  Committee on Appointments. If going by the Standing Order 48, last time you 
read to us the names of the CEC Ms and the same CECs were committed to the  Committee on 
Appointments if my memory serves me well.  
Then, when the communication has been done and nominee s have been committed to different 
Committees , it means tha t the names now ar e the property of the Assembly , and therefore if 
anything has to be done o r if anybody is not satisfied ought to come to the  Assembly and raise 
the issue. I am perturbed becau se it seems as if there is institutional encroachment. Whereby 
somebody decides to stop the work of the Assembly  through the court process.  
What happens now because we have been given the program, what happens if somebody rashes 
to Cour t and yet the names and the program  of the  Assembly has been committed to the 
Assembly? I am standing to urge for your indulgence because the names of CEC s was the 
property of the Assembly through the Appointment Committee and then the report had been 
committed to the House . There is the rule of the Separations  of Powers ; it must be adhered to for 
it is Constitutional.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honorable Karanja there is a Court Order to that effect and as 
much there is Separation  of Power, a Court Order is a Court Order,  and for that matter  the matter 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 is before the High Court , there is substantive date for ruling,  and I want to believe that the  
Assembly  stands guided.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Honorable Speaker , I am not tal king of the merits and demerits , I am 
talking about the Constitutional  requirements of the Separation  of Powers, what happens because 
you have read,  and now the names are transferred to the court? The independence of the  
Assembly is being usurped and...  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Order Honorable Karanja . 
Hon. Stanley Karanja: I stand guided Honorable Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): We are an Assembly and it does not matter whether in the  
Senate or the National Assembly, in terms of legal redress we have to be under the Judiciary. For 
that matter,  because there is a court order, as an Assembly, we have addressed ourselve s with our 
legal representative, we have advised our Lawyers  on what to do on that matter, and when the 
matter is going to come up for hearing, our legal representatives will take it from there, thank 
you. 
Hon. Stanley Karanja: I stand guided Honorable Spe aker, what I was saying is that you also 
give us time to study whatever you have read on the nominees so that where two Committees  can 
be enjoined to vet a Nominee  because the  Nominee cuts across two Committees.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  On that,  I want you to rest th e case because it is very clear, 
what is Honorable Minority Leader?  
The Minority Leader (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): I am standing on Standing Order  number 48(3), it 
says, before holding an Approval Hearing the Committee to which the propos ed appointments 
have been referred shall notify  the candidate and the public of the time and place for holding of 
the Approval Hearing  at least seven days prior to the hearing.  If the seven days are not expired 
then somebody can rush to the court and in this instance, we are talking about the appointment of 
the CEC Ms. The seven days have not expired . 
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you Honorable Minority Leader , with the specific 
Standing Order, we have taken care of that, immediately after this, the various Committee 
Chairpersons are going to be provided with the schedule and the other matters will be discussed 
at the Committee . Next order  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
HOUSE APPROVES THE NOMINATION OF HON. MACHARIA TO REPRESENT UDA  AT THE COUNTY 
ASSEMBLY SERVICE BOARD  (CASB)  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): We have a notice of Motion  from the leader of Majority Party.  
The Majority Leader (Hon. Alex Langat ): Thank honorable Speaker, I rise to give a Notice of 
Motion ; 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 THAT , Pursuant  to the provisions of Section 12(3) of the County Government Act, no 17 of 
2012 this  House approves the nominations of Honorable John Macharia Gachiri to represent the 
United Democratic Alliance ( UDA) at the County Assembly Service Board.  
 Mr. Speaker, I rest my case. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you, the Honorable Majority Leader.  
Next order.  
                                                                   MOTION  
THE ASSEMBLY  THANKS  BE RECORDED FOR EXPOSITION OF POLICY CONTAINED IN THE 
GOVERNOR ’S ADDRESS DELIVERED ON 12TH  OCTOBER 2022  
       (RESSUMPTION OF DEBATED INTERRUPTED ON  19.10.2022  MORNING SESSION ) 
That is a resumption of the debate by the leader of majority party.  
The Maj ority Leader (Hon. Alex Langat):  Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
We will remember that recently, we had a debate and we adjourned for some reasons. So today, I 
raise to move the resumption  of this debate that the thanks  of this Assembly be recorded to the 
exposition of public policy, which is contained in the address of the governor, which was actually 
delivered on 12TH  October 2022. Thank you.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  because it is resumption of debate and already it was second ed 
at that particula r time , I now want to move that the … of the Assembly be recorded for the 
exposition of public policy containing the address of the governor delivered on 12TH October 2022. 
The Motion is open for debate . Mheshimiwa Palang’a  
Hon. Peter Palang’a : thank you M r. Speaker.  This is a very important Motion or debate before 
us. We appreciate that  the governor did read and like pray on how she needs to undertake a number 
of issues.  
I believe that this was in line to her manifesto, then when she moved around across th is country 
trying to woo members to vote for her and indeed this is where we are.  
In her speech she highlighted number of issues that she needs to undertake, which I want to applaud 
that indeed she knows  areas she wants to address and deliver on the promises she made to our 
people.  
H.E the governor highlighted a number of issues in regards to different departments. She 
highlighted on issues of health and she talked over a number of issues which again, I want to 
mention quite a number.  
she did say that you want to see that this is operationalized  and to cut  quite a number of them.  
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 On NHIF she said that she would want  to …  
It is true that we have vulnerable families within our different areas. And this is an area that we 
need to emphasize that those vulnerable families should be catered for, in terms of the coverage 
for NHIF. However, it also comes with a  lot of resources in terms of how do we then identify these 
families.  
I wish to request the members as we look into these all Honorable  members from our respective 
areas let us not to be selective in terms of identification of these beneficiaries. How I w ish and I 
believe that that shall be a participatory process where members can really get to highlight and 
identify the real vulnerable members to be covered on this.  
 She also talked  of FIF (facility improvement funds ). And I want to reiterate here that f rom my 
intelligence having worked as the Chair for PA IC in the previous term , we had improved this fund 
in terms of the collections that we are getting from the facility.  
However, as a support her in this I think we will have to go an extra mile. There is  a lot of money 
that is being misappropriated. There is a lot of money that is getting lost. This is an area that people 
are getting treated in these facilities, notably PGH hospital. And the money is not been received , 
you pay to get services you are trea ted, then you pay cash to whoever is there that is handling your 
case. So, I support her on this. But as we do this, we want to understand what are these measures 
that she has put in place to ensure that we maintain  if not, so, we increase the facility imp rovement 
funds within those facilities.  
Mr. Speaker, the number of issues and so many people who have voted to poke holes or discussed 
among other issues, she has well thought of inclusivity in her government.  
And us minorities in this county, we feel that  the direction to take, we want to see that particular 
component of inclusivity of minorities is in place not only in the speeches, but is entrenched into 
the offices and officers that handle these offices.  
I am proud to mention that the few minority grou ps have been appointed as the CECs and as the 
COs to move in that direction. And that is the only way we can make anyone feel part and parcel 
of the government.  
On issues of Agriculture, it cuts across , she as well mentioned the packaging and repackaging o f 
the potatoes and agricultural products. I want to imagine that these had been discussed even with 
the previous government. However, in terms of achieving the objectives of the same it was not 
optimized. I feel proud that this time round, we want to ensur e that our Wanjikus our mamas who 
are really doing the farming wherever they are , are not hurt, they are not exploited, the packaging 
of the products is done in accordance to what is required so that they harness maximum profit from 
their farm outputs. whe n I look at the general speech, it was commendable. As I end up my speech 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 saying I am worried about two  areas  that may not really be achieved. Notably, the issues of CHVs 
and the community health workers.  
Our excellent the governor said in her speech, that she intends to give a token, a stipend of 5000 
Kenyan shillings to each and every CHV.  
I doubt and I probably want to know in the future, to get to know where are we going to get these 
funds to ensure that these people are really going to get whatever has been promised.  
It comes with a  huge sums of money, the feeding program, in our areas, in our ECDEs how many 
ECDEs do we have? How many pupils we have?I look at it that it may not really be achievable, in 
terms of the financial implication that it may have, how practical is it? Is it realistic? Is it 
achievable, because even if we make a proposal, it is required to be realistic  and achievable.  
These are some of the areas that requires good political support. But it require s also some lobbying 
from other areas.  
She is well intended to have the issue of the village administrators which again as a County we are 
lagging behind , other counties have already put these systems in place we are really lagging 
behind. But again, we need to  figure it out on where are we going to get these funds.  
 And this I want to pose a challenge to the Labor Committee. We have to look into the wage bill 
of this county. Is it tenable? Is it manageable and sustainable? And where do we want to go? We 
may be required at some point to take very bold steps to really address some of these issues. And 
in this matter, we may differ at some point but we have to get it right in terms of where you want 
to take this county. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joe l Karuri):  Thank you. Mheshimiwa Wilson  Mwangi then we go to 
Mheshimiwa Karanja in that order.  
Hon. Wilson  Mwangi:  I want to take this opportunity to welcome students from Nakuru Boys 
High School, which hails from my ward. And also I would also want to app laud the principal of 
that School Mr. Kangara who is pushing the school to greater heights.  
I want also to congratulate and thank the President of the Republic of Kenya for the appointment 
of Zack Njeru the CS for Lands, he also hails  from my ward and we h ave been having a big 
problem in the insurance of the title deeds. And I think this is a relief now for the county and also 
to my ward  in a manner that we are no longer going to have the problem again.  
As I support the speech of the governor, I also want t o come to terms on how she said she is going 
to reform the health sector, by digitalizing the issue of accountability of…  
today as I was listening to my local radio I heard  one of the dispensaries at Kabazi where  
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 members of the public are crying that the d ispensary does not have drugs,  and the other day, we 
had the governor  distributing drugs to different wards and sub counties.  So, this is an issue that we 
really have in making sure that we have accountability in issuance of drugs to make sure that the 
drugs are not headed to private chemist.  
So, on the issue of health and insurance of drugs to  our health center, I think that is in order. How 
the governor Linked In.  
Also, we do note that most of our health centres  do not have nurses. And I heard the governor 
particularly  saying that she will also do more employment, to make sure that the health institutions 
will have enough nurses.  
 In terms of agriculture, we know the country is experiencing drought and we have a problem in 
terms of food security.  Our county needs to head in terms of visions of water harvesting in building 
dams, and also water pans so that we cannot only depend on rain water, so that our farmers will be 
able to do agriculture, which will not be de pending on rainwater. The governor also touched the 
issue of cash crops.  
That is the issue of pyrethrum and avocados. Of which these are the cash crops that will help 
Nakuru County because we do not have any other cash crops. Apart from the two. If the gov ernor 
is able to do a value addition and explore more on the market of these two products our farmers 
will have enough market and have enough money in their pocket.  
In our town we know there are a lot of problems in terms of traffic jam, the integrated cou nty 
transport infrastructure whereby the governor will be able to construct a modern  Matatu terminus 
will go ahead in terms of reducing traffic jam.  
As we agree on the speech from Madam Governor we also need to realize that we are the team 
that will do the  oversight of whatever Madam governor, we will be  doing, So in terms of 
implementation of all these is what matters most  we will make sure that we are going to do 
thorough oversight to make sure that public funds have been utilized  appropriately Thank you,  Mr. 
Speaker for giving me the opportunity.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Mheshimiwa Karanja.  
Hon Stanley Karanja:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and also the Majority Leader for moving this 
debate. Mr. Speaker, you will remember the historian… History does not  forget, you remember 
Martin Luther King, Jr. once came up with  you know, he came up with the…poetic I have a dream 
which was also echoed by Nelson Mandela when he came out of prison after suffering for a long 
time. And then it was passed to his cousin Oba ma who was the president of America and through 
their cousin in Kenya professor Lumumba and latter to our president H.E Ruto.  
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 If you look at the content of the speeches by them, from Luther King, to our president Ruto. And 
then you look at what our governo r said, they are spiritually connected, in terms of thinking and 
ideology of removing the poor  from the shackles of poverty.  
when I looked at this speech, and I read through it, it is very inspiring. In actual s ense, when one 
looks at it, it is good work but there are some critical elements that maybe the House needs to 
interrogate  … think and then put that one into African scenario. And then look at what we came 
up in 1963 in terms of Africanization.  
I do not know if Hon. Njuguna is here but he can attes t, he was the chair of the Health Committee. 
when you look at our hospitals and I am glad Hon. Wajeff has talked about it the governor says 
that she will try to make sure that the locals and that is in page four, that the board will be 
constituted from wit hin our community. Our greatest problem which has been … in this Kenya  is 
that we have been having people in the boards who know nothing about the hospitals, when you 
see somebody in a white coat you think that this doctor and maybe he is a fundi these are  the people 
who have been having in terms of managers  and maybe members will be able to see if the governor 
will be able to remove these in hospitals.  
It will be good because you cannot have somebody who comes from Nakuru for example, and he 
is the one who  is running Naivasha, he does not even know the doors unless the door that he came 
from. He knows only the doors of the boardroom. These are the people we want removed.  
 If you ask the members,  they will tell you most of their subcounty hospital are run by foreigners . 
And I know because they are here,  they will communicate that, I hope the governor will remove 
tourists from our boards.  
The reason I said you compare the speech with that of Martin Luther , the governor promised to do 
to finish and complete all the hospitals and the dispensary that were incomplete. If you go  to most 
of the wards and member will agree, we did put some money but up to today they are halfway 
constructed and they are so many. In actual sense sometimes I wonder even when God is above 
looking at an unfinished product and what he says about his people.  
You do a hospital that was meant to put healthcare for the old and then, it is left uncomplete and 
those complete have no do ctors and nurses.  
The completion ought to invoke the completion of structures and making sure there are doctors  
nurses and some of these medical doctors.  
Also, there was the issue of Agricultural Extension Officers. Hon. Wajeff will tell us that when 
there was Pyrethrum Board, some of us were able to go to school because there was pyrethrum 
and I know most of these Members that you are seeing here are products of pyrethrum. From the 
time Pyrethrum Board of Kenya was killed, Nakuru has no cash crop. I would  like to take that one 
and maybe because the governor talked about that one, we have the pyrethrum Bill brought up. 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 When we were growing up during the period of Moi, we had few difficulties. I have seen the CBC 
that they are coming up with. If you want to do a comparative analysis of the education system, 
you look at China, South Korea and then you look at what Kenyans are doing. In actual sense, we 
are individuals that God will not want to look at. We need to have extension officers. They are 
those people ambao wangekuja na wanakuonyesha jinsi ya kupanda mimea.  That is why we are 
saying that now that Agriculture is devolved, extension officers ought to be hired. There was the 
issue of potatoes. In order for us to improve marketing, we decided that the 50kil ogram bag eti 
ndio improving Agriculture. That law has done more harm than good. I know they will say that 
because it was not well thought of and I think these are some of the things that we should engage 
in. If you look at this speech, the core is that is sue of grading the 200 kilometers. You remember 
we had agreed that each and every Ward be tarmacked 2 kilometers per year. If we did that one 
during the government of Governor Lee, Naivasha could be boasting of 10 kilometers of tarmac. 
Right now, my Ward h as nothing; it has no tarmac. When the students want to know about tarmac, 
they have to go all the way to Maai Mahiu and when it rains, they are stuck in between. We need 
to budget for the 200 kilometers so that each and every Ward will have 2 -kilometer ta rmac each 
and every year.  
The last one is ECD and I am happy because we have a nominee who will take charge of the ECD. 
Last time, we appropriated some money to hire 350 teachers. Each and every ward was supposed 
to hire 6 teachers. Where the money went t o, I do not know and maybe even the spirits are not 
aware. If we have to put the foundation of education, then we must be very serious on education. 
I do urge the House that even as this supplementary is coming, we need to be revolutionized and 
put some mo ney for the 350 teachers so that we can continue with that cycle. If this is the speech 
that will remove Nakuru from the shackles of poverty, I support. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Mheshimiwa Robert from Amalo, followed by Ho n. 
William Mutai and later Hon. Makori.  
Hon. Robert Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I stand here to support the speech by Her 
Excellency the Governor on the State of the County Address in this House last month. Her speech 
was balanced, outstanding and a brilliant one because it cuts across all the areas from Lands, 
Youth, Education, Roads, Agriculture and Health. I really want to support some few areas which 
are very important and most of my colleagues have touched on several areas. Her speech on food 
security and Agro -processing is a very important component which we really need to support. She 
also talked of enhancing access to affordable farm inputs. She also touched on roads which, in 
terms of integrating the County transport infrastructure and monet izing the terminus in several 
centers. I also want to agree and support the issue of upgrading to the bitumen standard in several 
areas. I also want to touch on education. The way she brought the issue of education, I really noted 
that she is committed in achieving success in quality education. The issue of vocational training is 
also very important. There is a component of school feeding program which is very important; 
equipping of the schools which is also very important. There is the issue of water whic h I know 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 really touches almost all of us. She said she needs to increase access and supply of clean water 
across our County. That is achievable because she touched on few flagship projects. In Kuresoi 
North, we have a stalled project called Itaare Water Pr oject which cost sh. 38 billion and in 
collaboration with the National Government, that can be well addressed. She also touched on 
collaborating with the neighboring Counties, like Baringo County, so that most of the parts of our 
County can get water from the dam called Chemasusu. It is a project which we need to support. 
There is also an issue which she touched across on Malewa Dam which will help supply water to 
Naivasha and Gilgil Sub -Counties. There is the digitization of land records which is very 
impo rtant. We really need to work on that and support her in developing and implementing the 
same. Finally, I want to touch on key component which she touched on; the issue of her firm pledge 
of completion of stalled projects and clearance of eligible pending bills which will help our 
contractors to get their monies. I wish to support our Governor on her speech which was an 
outstanding one and it needs support. Thank you.  
Hon. William Mutai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir , first of all, I want to applaud the speech  of our 
dear Governor. I take this one as a policy paper that if we adapt and put a lot of input, there is a 
possibility that this will be used as a roadmap for development in Nakuru County for the next 5 
years. I just want to mention a few highlights of t his speech and I begin with employment. From 
the proposal that this speech has given, it is like the economy will be expanded in different 
perspectives and therefore, this one is going to create a lot of employment for our youth. As you 
are quite aware, we  have critical issues in terms of employment in our County. I am really worried 
about the trend of unemployment in our County. My colleagues will bear me witness that 
immediately you were elected, you have a file of application papers that have been brough t to you 
by the youth population that we have which is quite worrying. Each and every youth is telling you 
to look for them an opportunity for employment. To me, these issues of employment should be 
addressed much more. I would really have wanted the Gover nor to address on issues of how to 
create formal and informal employment. One other issue which I admired in the speech is about 
the consolidated bursaries. We want to be grateful for the bursaries that are available. 
Unfortunately, the amount that is allo cated for the bursary is Kshs  2 million. From the information 
that I am getting from my colleagues, it is like there is a flat rate that is allocated to each and every 
Ward of Kshs  2 million shillings which to me, I felt like it was not done very well beca use, how 
do you share Kshs  2 million for each and every Ward on equal terms whereas there should be other 
parameters that are supposed to be used when sharing out these monies. Moreover, I am taking 
myself as an example because we had a day when there was some information that went out that 
the bursary was ready. I had about 1,200 applicants in my Ward such that if you share out this 
amount of money to the 1,200 needy cases, that tells you that we are going to allocate each and 
every deserving case about Kshs 900. The big question is, is it worth it? It is high time that this 
issue is addressed and then we get better allocation for the bursaries. About Agriculture, Madam 
Governor in her speech was able to mention how she was going to improve the extension se rvices. 
As you are aware, we have the extension officers but these are people who are in offices. They do 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 not move to the fields. These people must be compelled by being provided with the necessary 
infrastructure so that they can be able to go to the field . Mheshimiwa Wajeff has just mentioned 
about improving the production of various crops. The big question is, how do we improve these 
crops even before some necessary steps are taken? For instance, you cannot do agriculture unless 
you know the potential tha t the soil has. Lastly, let me mention something on AI services. I also 
propose that Artificial Intelligence services be re -considered in our County. If you have to improve 
maize production, then we have to start from this humble beginning by identifying a nd providing 
cheap if not free insemination services to our farmers. The other day, our government provided 
some cheap fertilizers that is costing around Kshs  3,500. From the experience that I have gathered 
from the people from my Ward, accessing these fer tilizers is hard because you have to go through 
some proxies. By the end of the day, you may end up getting fertilizer having paid an extra Kshs 
500 I want to also recommend that these fertilizers be allocated to each and every ward in our 
county. Some sto res to be set aside and proper mechanisms be established so that it can be easily 
accessed by the farmers and this is going to help us so much. Finally, let me also mention on the 
issue of education that is the establishment of feeding programs. My big que stion is which one 
should come first the feeding, the infrastructure or the training? I want to recommend that if 
possible we have a teacher in each and every school and again considering the ratio of the teacher 
to the number of children. It should be fol lowed by the proper classrooms which should be done 
as soon as possible. If possible,  lots of allocation of money should be looked into. According to 
me more allocation should be given to basic education and vocational training centers, rather than 
doing the work of the national government on the higher education. These issues on bursaries  if it 
was possible according to me, it should be reverted back to the national government so that we can 
deal with the nursery schools and vocational training centers. Thank you very much Mr. Speaker 
sir.  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri): Thank you. Hon Isa bella then Hon Everlyn.  
Hon Isabella Makori : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for giving me this opportunity. I listened keenly 
to her Excellency our governor Susan Kihika and she was passionate about water, in fact as a 
mother , water is a very big basic necessi ty and you cannot do without water. Our mothers are 
moving many kilometers looking for water and also our animals are starving. You can imagine a 
woman walking for five kilometers only for one mtungi  of water. Is it going to be used on washing, 
cooking, dr inking or for animals? So, if we have dams and boreholes, our people will be in a better 
position and have at least a good life. Our people dug water panels but they were not provided with 
proper lining so they are doing more harm than good. On the issue o f water,  I pray that it will be 
a reality.  Our governor talked of improving our health centers to be level four.  There is no nation 
that can be wealthy without health. Three weeks ago, in our place we lost a mother who was 
referred to Maili Kumi and on h er way she lost her life. It is very painful to lose a mother when 
trying to bring a life to this world. For them to get x -rays and minor surgeries they have to be 
referred. Our people do not even have trust on our health centers because they have become l ike a 
consultation place where they are diagnosed and given a small paper with a list of drugs to go buy. 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 How I wish our health centers can be improved. On agriculture she talked about value addition 
and in fact agriculture is the backbone of our county. I t is very sad that this time our county is 
starving and our people are even given relief food. If we can really bank on agriculture, our county 
will be the one to assist other counties. This time we are on harvesting season and our farmers will 
sell maize at a very low price and will later buy flour at a very high cost.  We need to get some 
industries to add value to our products, like for milk you sell one litre of milk at a very cheap price 
and buy yoghurt at a very high price. We have been providing our farmers with avocado seedlings 
and I hope in the future it will not be like quills. If we can have an industry to add value to our 
products then Nakuru will be ahead. She talked of internship programs, our youths have no jobs 
and if after school they are g iven internship opportunities then that will motivate them and will 
support them on their upkeep. She talked about sports and arts fund and that is on page 9 E, she 
said that ‘create a sports and arts fund for managing and nurturing the county sports talen t, art 
culture and recreation.’  Our youths usually enjoy sports during campaign time because everyone 
has a tournament at that time but it does fail until another campaign. This fun should be replaced. 
She also talked of improving ICT for opportunities in ‘Ajira digital’ for our youths to have online 
jobs. During campaigns we were telling our youths that we will provide jobs for them and it is 
draining in some way. We are banking on ICT for them to have self -employment. There are youths 
who are doing very w ell due to online jobs. I hope all these messages and statements will come to 
reality. Thank Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri ): Thank you. Hon Everlyne.  
Hon Everlyne Chepkirui : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for the chance you have given me to support  
and surely salute the speech of our Excellency madam governor. On page 6 madam governor talked 
about the safety of the vulnerable groups. Vulnerabilities of our special interest groups which 
include the elderly, people with disabilities, women and youth.  In Part C she talked about 
facilitating faster registration of people with disabilities and increase efficiency in implementation 
of county PWDs fund. On 31st of October I happen to have attended the registration of PWDs at 
the PGH hospital and I came out  there sad because the communication from the office about the 
type of disability that was being attended to on that day was wrong. People actually came all the 
way from Solai which is very far. I really wish that next time these people are been registered , they 
be communicated to well such that, if PWDs that is mental disability are been attended to then 
people who are physically challenged will not waste their time. I also pray that one day we as the 
county get to an extent where we go look for these peop le wherever they are. It is very expensive 
to transfer someone who is moving with a wheelchair from the village to a place where the doctor 
is. I request that next time the doctors or the people who are supposed to do the registration be 
facilitated so tha t they can move  from one village to the other.  
Secondly on the governor’s speech, she touched on gender -based  violence, rescue and 
rehabilitation centers. It is well known to all Members that gender based violence happen in our 
communities and sometimes it is hard to notice and work on it. I request that these centers be 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 opened in all the wards. I am also a youth  and madam governor talked about the entrepreneurship. 
It was sad that during my last internship there are colleagues of mine who were not paid by the 
county, I do not know what really happened. I would like to touch on this…  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri):  Hon Everlyne, do they used to work for the internship program 
or in what circumstances were they not paid?  
Hon Everlyne Chepkirui : Mr. Speaker, a friend of mine happened to call me who was working 
on internship with the department of veterinary that she never received the payment.  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri): Thank you. Possibly after this you may raise the issue in a 
Committee level that is Committee on labor for a follow up.  
Hon Everlyne Chepkirui : Ok Mr. Speaker sir , I stand to be corrected. There w as also…  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri) : You still need more time or…  
Hon Everlyne Chepkirui : Yes.  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri): You found your track or maybe you may want to continue with 
the debate in the afternoon?  
Hon Everlyne Chepkirui : Okay let me look for what I was looking for then I continue in the 
afternoon. Thank you for the chance.  
The speaker (Hon Joel Karuri): So that now I put it into perspective, we will be having the Hon 
Majority Leader then Hon John Maritim from Kamara then Hon Nene from  Elementaita  then the 
last person will be Hon Anthony Kanyere. The other Members who are upstanding will be the first 
Members in the afternoon session  
The Majority Leader (Hon. Alex Langat):  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to give my 
contribution on the speech that was given to this House by her Excellency the governor. May I 
first start by saying that most of our colleagues have alluded that this speech was well thought. It 
is a speech that has a good direction, simple, very practical and something that is very 
implementable. I take this chance to congratulate her Excellency the governor for being visionary 
and bringing to this House a road map that is going to guide us. I actually say that, if we as a House 
together with the Executive can be able to impl ement at least 60% of the recommendations on the 
roadmaps that have been given in this speech , then surely Nakuru as a county will be a bench mark 
for other counties and they will be able to look and to follow. I would want to touch on one or two 
major iss ues among the many good things that have been said in this particular speech. What 
touches us as Nakuru basically the agriculture part of it and also on the part of agriculture, recently 
about a week ago, we have been out trying to give out relief food to some of the affected areas in 
Nakuru County including Naivasha, part of Rongai and some other few places. Nakuru being from 
the history I have of food for this country a store, it was not so good and that is why when I look 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 at the proposal by our governor,  we should be able to implement some of the things so that we 
remove ourselves from the embarrassment of being part of other counties that are being sorted 
with relief food because Nakuru county is an agricultural land with good rainfall and with people 
whose income is not that bad. We are happy with the policy and from the immediate help that 
came but from the agricultural point of view, we should be able to enhance some policies that are 
going to help us as Nakuru county not to fall into the precedent tha t seem to be happening or being 
one of the counties that will be sort ed out by relief food. In my view, the upgrading of Nakuru into 
a city should be helpful because when you compare Nakuru and other cities like Kisumu and 
Nairobi they lack agricultural la nd and I am looking forward to a time when this House is going 
to set policies that are going to cover and protect our agricultural land because of late you find the 
good agricultural lands that are within Nakuru county or within the periphery, not so far from 
towns are actually being sold and being subdivided into very small portions  of fifty by hundred, 
others are being used for industrialization and we actually are losing those good lands that were 
used for agricultural purposes and to give us food security. Maybe in the near future we would 
recommend tough policies for gazetting agric ultural land for those who would want to sell their 
land so that it is sold at manageable size so that agriculture can continue being protected and we 
do not just give out very good land to industries and end  up not producing food.  
I would also want to t hank the governor on issues of employment as we have mentioned. We have 
so many of our youths who are learned and well educated and they do not have job opportunities. 
The networking that I saw in the governor’s speech will be of great help to the youths o f this 
county. We will be able to network with other places where work maybe available within our 
county, other counties and other cities so that we can help them network because these youths have 
the papers but they do not have the network of how they can  be assisted to be able to access the 
job opportunities in other places.  With networking I believe that the youth of Nakuru will be able 
to get meaningful employment. On issues of infrastructure I also applaud the 200kms tarmac road. 
I happen to be a vict im because I come from a ward that does not even have a square inch of a 
kilometer of a road that is tarmacked. I believe that during the tarmacking time, many of those who 
are less privileged will also be able to access these particular roads. I would wan t to end my 
contribution by touching on an issue that usually touches my heart and that is the issue on health. 
According to the spirit of universal Health Coverage (UHC), we are very much aware and the 
governor has touched it in her speech about us as ord inary Kenyans being able to get health that is 
accessible at any given time and not only accessible but it should be health that is of good quality 
and should also be available and very much affordable to Kenyans. This touches my heart when I 
remember our level 5 hospital which is the Provincial General Hospital (PGH ) and we talk about 
putting policies, employing workers and issues like that. Level 5 hospital is in a pathetic state.                           
 I say so not because we don’t have the infrastru cture , we do not even have the machines but the 
kind of service that the ordinary mwananchi receives at PGH now and in most of other hospitals 
is not the type of service that the health service should have. The medical personnel seems to have 
lost a bit of  medical ethics because health and saving life is no longer a priority. What is a priority 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 we talk about the money that we are able to collect? We are talking about having new machines 
and a few things. I have been there and people complained very bitterly  Mr. Speaker sir. Where 
patients or if you are a noble person you are going to be isolated you are left there unattended to. 
The medics there such as nurses are not there to receive you or address your problem. I know of 
some other cases where a patient  from a low class citizen is being chased away because this patient 
cannot afford even the Kshs 3000 fee to be taken for a scan. So, I think something needs to be 
done as the Governor has actually said to improve the facilities either in terms of staff traini ng or 
in terms of motivation or even reprimanding so that people should be able to prioritize the health 
of a human being . Not to look at the way the patient is dressed or look at the way you are being 
brought to the facilities or how you came because for you to be attended you must know somebody 
or reach there, identify yourself. Lastly on the same issues of upgrading of our health centres, it is 
not enough to complete these structures or let us upgrade them because upgrading a hospital level 
comes with a lot of huge financial implications where before starting you have a certain number 
of staff, consultants and issues like that. I think in those hospitals especially those facilities in our 
various sub counties, I have had a privilege of visiting some of th em and where I was working 
previously, most of the hospitals within Nakuru county and for us to support them, we should be 
able to think so much in terms of the leadership of our various hospitals and the kind of staff such 
as having more doctors, nurses a nd more clinical officers. What is the quality in terms of service 
delivery of these people that we have, how are they attending our people because we also have to 
go deeper to find out what is it that is demotivating them such that they do not have that h eart of 
attending to emergencies so that we are able to assist and have a Nakuru County that is going to 
be effective. I would wish to end my contribution by thanking Her Excellency the Governor and I 
have seen great things that she also mentioned in terms  of governance , issues that we as a House 
we also have a duty and a mandate to be able to assist in bringing up policies and laws and setting 
rules that should be able to energi ze this particular speech so that it is given life and be able to be 
operationa lized . Actually,  the policies that are going to be made in this House. Having said that, I 
beg to support the Governor’s speech.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Leader of Majority party. Hon. John Maritim  
Hon. John Maritim : Thank you Mr. Spea ker sir , I also want to comment on the speech delivered 
by the Governor. Nakuru County has been described as an agricultural hub. She also talked about 
on how to improve agriculture and in this case,  I want to talk about AI services. In Nakuru County, 
we n eed to introduce AI services to be free for us to improve on our livestock breeds. Why do I 
say so, I am a farmer and the bulls that we have are of poor quality and this can be supplemented 
by introduction of AI services. She talked also about development and a place like Kuresoi North 
and Kuresoi South we grow tea and this produce is also processed in Kericho County. If the 
Governor would intervene such that we can process our tea in Nakuru and brand them locally. 
Another thing that the Governor talked abo ut is the land caveat; this has affected areas of Njoro, 
Molo , Kuresoi North and Kuresoi South. I believe that the affected people cannot access loans due 
to reasons that their properties do not have title deeds. I believe the issue of tittles can be sorte d so 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 that the affected people should be identified and issued with title deeds. Some landlords have 
stayed for more than 20 years and their parents or their kids have been harassed when a person 
comes from nowhere to lay claim on such properties. On the re venue collection streams, I saw the 
Governor talked more of it and I saw the revenue collection is a lot but where is this money. I 
believe the loopholes can be identified and a system that will enhance generation of more money 
and thus more development pr ojects will be introduced. The Governor also talked about ECDE. I 
believe that the ECDE feeding program can be tricky but as a House, we need to devise means of 
how to get this program running effectively. Also in education, there is a certain facility cal led 
Linda Mama a patient like Maiella dispensary, I believe in that card contains almost Kshs  50,000 
but a patient can be served in a given place but I do not know where the money goes. We need to 
check if we have 10 patients enrolled in this program that is equivalent to almost Kshs  500,000, if 
that money is left at that hospital or dispensary,  it will do great job. So, I believe the issue of the 
Linda Mama should be followed to ascertain where this money is going to. Finally on the issue of 
water, we need to enhance the production, we have Itare dam in Kuresoi North, it has employed 
many people and I believe if it can b e revived it can be one of the best .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Maritim. Hon. Nene  
Hon. George Nene : Hon. Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity , I represent 
Elementaita ward. I want to start by saying that the Governor’s  speech was commendable and 
yesterday I visited Gilgil sub-County  hospital with colleague’s from Gilgil constituency with board 
members. I realized that the facility is run by Facility Improvement Fund ( FIF) that is used to pay 
most of the workers and have  used FIF fund to purchase some of the medical equipment and 
therefore the move by the Governor to prioritize transparency and accountability in the FIF fund 
is actually commendable. However, the facility is also facing several challenges and one being tha t 
of staff. We realize that despite the fact that the sub county hospitals are faced with staff shortages. 
The nurse told us that they need around 180 nurses but they have around 80 nurses at the facility 
and this is an issue that is pertinent that needs t o be addressed with a lot of seriousness. Another 
challenge is financing the facility. We have a big department of psychiatric department in the 
facility. We realized that the facility is using the FIF fund to run the facility but you realize that 
the depa rtment is very big and the hospital is unable to effectively run the department. Therefore,  
the move by the Governor to partner and collaborate with the relevant stakeholders to ensure that 
we have external resources to run such department is actually reco mmendable. Another department 
that is very critical is the water sector. I come from an area that receives little rainfall especially 
on the months of January, February and March. You realize that for example in Elementaita ward, 
we have several boreholes that are not operational because the pumping machines that were 
purchased previous years are not operational. I am looking forward for a day when the issue of 
water will be addressed to ensure that people have access to enough clean water for use. Another 
sector that is also very important, in Elementaita we are facing titling challenge and several times, 
The Governor to collaborate with the National Government to ensure land titling is actualized. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,  for giving me this opportunity and conclude that the Governors speech 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 is commendable and issues raised are implementable to move Nakuru County to another level. 
Thank you . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon Anthony  
Hon. Anthony Kamau : I represent Nakuru East Ward, I take this opportunity t o make my maiden 
speech, to thank God for giving me this chance to serve the people and also thank the people of 
Nakuru east for allowing me to be their servant. I support the motion on the speech delivered by 
the Governor and I would like to say that this  speech touches a lot of things. I can say it is like a 
blueprint for us in the next five years we have something to do. Going by what has been highlighted 
in the speech and to start with, in my ward, what is important that was quoted in the speech is 
abou t water. My ward especially the lower part of Nakuru East such as Mzee Wanyama area lacks 
water. The people of Nakuru East ward have been left at the mercies of private entities who are 
supplying them with salty water drawn from private boreholes. I want t o thank the Governor for 
announcing that water will be a priority and as a House I want to urge fellow members to give this 
issue of water  priority and factor it in our consecutive funding so that we can address this issue 
once and for all. Another issue is on matatu terminus being in the city and Nakuru Town East 
constituency, we have challenges in the sector. I want to thank the National Government in 
Collaboration with the County Government for coming up with the terminus at Ziwani area in 
Biashara ward . In our area at the CBD, we have an existing terminus which was operated during 
the previous government, the matatus were taken out of town yet we have existing terminus which 
are not being utilized. Currently as Nakuru Town East Constituency, we are havi ng a crisis 
whereby many businesses that were being operated in those matatu terminus, most of them have 
been closed and in fact it is a serious issue because a lot of business people, are subject to shylock 
and most of their property confiscated because o f the loan they borrowed. This is one of the serious 
issue because the  businesses were closed and therefore I propose that this House puts this issue of 
matatu terminus especially in Nakuru town as a matter of priority. Also,  in the matter of ECD 
teachers,  Madam Governor highlighted that issue and I echo her sentiments because you find that 
most of our public schools especially ECDE they are not attractive to parents. Most of our parents 
take their children to private ECDs and we can help address this issue  by providing an environment 
whereby teachers are going to be given good remuneration to motivate and hence increase intake 
of pupils to the public ECDs. Also,  we provide feeding program  in our ECDs to address the issue 
of hunger and famine because might t hink that since Nakuru as a county we have plenty of food 
but if you visit deep in some villages, you find some areas are affected with lack of food. So, the 
issue of introducing feeding program in our ECDs is a matter which we are going to support and 
give it a priority.  
On The issue of land titling, I would like to support the issue of digitalizing the land titling because 
in my area we have various cases where you find people faced with double allocation of their 
properties. In an area you find somebody  having a title , in other case three titles in on a parcel of 
land and that has been a crisis in my area. So, I support this issue of digitalizing the land titling 
NOVEMBER 8, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 process. The last one point which I do not want to belabor my fellow members, I want to end by 
saying on the issue of bursary consolidation, It was a well thought idea by the Governor and 
currently, our parents and our children, most of them have been sent home for lack of school fees. 
I want to urge the members of this honorable House that when this matter comes on the floor of 
the House, let us expedite this process so that we can have bursary issues being given priority. 
Thank Mr. Speaker sir for giving this opportunity to contribute and I support the speech of Her 
Excellency the Governor.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon Members. In view of time, we adjourn this 
debate to 2.30pm because morning session is coming to an end it is 12.30. There are members who 
will not be able to debate and give their views, submission or input. You wi ll be able to find that 
opportunity in the afternoon.  
ADJOURNMENT  
The House stands adjourned until 2.30pm  
(The House rose at 12.16pm ) 
 
 
 
 
  