COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday 4 th  October ,  2023  
Assembly Building  
The House Met At 03: 2 0 PM  
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah M urage ): In the Chair].  
PRAYERS  
QUORUM  
Hon. Jane Gituku: On a point of information. Tha nk you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. W e are 
less ;  we do not have a quorum.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Sergeant - A t - A rms, please ring the bell for 10 
minutes.  
(Bell was  rang for 10 minutes)  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
VIS I TING MEMBERS  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Honorable Members, I recogni s e Members from 
Elgeiyo Marakwet County Assembly, Committee on Delegated Legislation, led by the Committee 
Chairperson, Hon. Sally Kosgei and the following Members;  
1.  Hon. John Kahima  
2.  Hon. Christopher Chebochich  
3.  Hon. Peris Kiptoo  
4.  Hon. Gilbert Kipng’etich  
5.  Hon. Simon Chesemba  
I also recognis e members of staff from the County Assembly accompanying the Members , namely:  
1.  Gladys Koima  
2.  Collins Limo  
3.  Eva Kimaiyo  
4.  Michael Kipkiyai  
Karibuni sana.  
 
STATEMENT (S)  
BLUE GUM TREES   
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  There is a Statement  by MCA for  Wa s eges 
Ward, to be done by Hon. Jane Gituku.  
Hon. Jane Gituku: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker . May I first welcome Members from 
Elgeiyo Marakwet County. Thank you so much for visiting us. Feel at home. This is Nakuru 
County, a County of plenty and a County of opportunities. I rise to request for  a Statement on 
behalf of  Hon. Elijah Murage, MCA Waseges Ward.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker ,  Pursuant to Standing Order 47(2) (c),  I rise to request for a Statement  
from the Chairperson of the Committee on Environment, Energy, Water and Natural Resources ,  
concerning tree planting activities along Haji River ,  by Comply Company Limited, Waseges 
Ward.  
Temporary Speaker, w ater is life and therefore, it is important to ensure its conservation through 
various methods such as tree planting being  carried out.  
However  Mr. Temporary  Speaker , noting that tree planting is one of the key water conservation 
method s , some trees such as Blue Gum  absorb  a lot of water hence leading to shrinking of rivers 
and therefore, not recommended.  
Temporary Speaker, Comply Company Limited has been planting Blue Gum  trees along the Haji 
River hence threatening the shrinking of the river. The continued planting of these trees may lead 
to diminishing levels of water which support many livelihoods in the neighborhood localities.  
Temporary Speaker, I  therefore request the Chairperson Committee on Environment, Energy, 
Water and Natural Resources to respond to  the following;  
1.  Whether the Department of Environment and Natural Resources is aware that Comply 
Company Limited has been planting Blue Gum  trees along Haji River.  
2.  Measures the Department has put in place to protect Haji River from Shrinking as a result 
of tree planting along its banks by Comply Company Limited.  
Thank you Mr.Temporary Speaker, I beg to present the Statement .  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage ): Thank you. Chairperson for Environment 
Committee, take note and respond to the Statement  within 14 days from next week.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I have taken note .  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): There is another Statement  from Honorable 
Muraya, Member for Viwandani Ward.  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker . I hereby request for Statement  from 
the Chairperson of the Select Committee on Implementation ,  c oncerning the Implementation 
Status of all House R esolutions since inception of this County Assembly.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, w hile respecting the scope and mandate of relevant Committees, the 
Committee on Implementation should have followed up and scrutini s e the R esolutions of the 
Assembly, including adopted Committee Report s, Petitions and the U ndertaking s  given by the 
County Executive Committee and give back the S tatus of the R esolution s  within the minimum 
time necessary.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, Implementation Committee, whether given the response or not by the 
I mplementers, the decision made should be responded to , on  the floor of the House and the 
U ndertaking implement ation  should take place within the minimum time .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, s ince we assumed O ffice ,  and we have been in various Committees, we 
have gone out, we have done all that is required as Members of this House and we have given our 
recommendations as various Committees ,  but the Chairperson for Implementation has not 
responded to any ,  whether the I mplementers have done anything.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he Implementation Committee should follow and should stick to the 
mandate given to them by this Honorable House to make sure that we are not going out to just seek 
for what I mplement e rs  are supposed to do.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he Implementation Com mittee should follow up on the L egislation s  
passed by the Assembly and oversee whether the legisla tions have been operationali s ed, the extent 
to which such operationali s ation has taken place within the minimum time necessary.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I therefore seek to request for a Statement  from the Chairperson 
Committee on Implementation on the following;  
1.  The I mplementation S tatus of all Acts since 2014  
2.  Adopted Committee Report s since 2014  
3.  Petition Report s  
4.  Motions and other R esolutions, including Budget I mplementation S tatus.  
The plans the Implementation Committee is undertaking to avert challenges in implementation of 
all House R esolutions in future .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, a s I sit, the Chairperson of Implementation Committee has been one 
challenging Motions in the House ,  yet after the Committee has made the recommendations, he is 
the one who is has the mandate to  make sure that all recommendations that we have made are 
implemented.  
Thank you  Mr. Temporary Speaker,  I request for that Statement .  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Thank you. Chairman Implementation? Vice 
Chair? Any Member of Implementation Committee in the House? Okay, Hon. Nixon Morogo take 
note. The Statement  should be responded to within 30 C alendar days.  
MOTION  
ELBURGON HOSPITAL REPORT  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): There is a Motion by the Chairperson Health 
Committee, Hon. Njuguna Mwaura.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir.  I rise to move a Motion that 
this House adopts the Report  of the Health Committee on a visit to Elburgon Hospital on 24 th  May , 
2023 .  
COMMITTEE MANDATE  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, our Committee draws its mandate from our Standing Orders and we are 
a Committee that deals with issues of Health Services ,  in particular  C ounty H ealth F acilities and 
P harmacies,  A mbulance S ervices, P romotion of P rimary H ealth C are, L icensing and C ontrol of 
U ndertakings that sell food to the public, C emeteries, Funeral P arlors and C re matoria. Licensing 
of dogs and F acilities for accommodation, C are and Burial of animals, Water and S anitation 
S ervices,  Refuse D um p  and S olid W aste R emoval.  
 
OBJECTIVE OF THE VISIT  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, t he objective of the said v isit was to:  
1.  Assess the Status of the Elburgon Sub County Hospital.  
2.  Ascertain the quality of services offered to the members of the public.  
3.  Establish achievements made, challenges and areas of improvement as far as delivery of 
services is concerned.  
BACKGROUND INFORMMATION ON ELBURGON SUB COUNTY HOSPITAL  
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  t he Elburgon Sub County Hospital was officially opened on 24 th  October, 
1997 by the late  H.E Daniel Toroitich Arap Moi. The H ospital is located in Elburgon W ard in 
Molo Sub County, Nakuru County. The H ospital is in Elburgon Town. The Hospital serves a 
population  of approximately 36 000 people ; but it is above that Mr. Temporary Speaker , because 
it is the catchment area for mainly two Wards, that is Elburgon  and Mosop, some parts of 
Mariashoni and some parts of Turi.  The hospital sits on 3.72  hectares of land and has no own ership 
documents/no title deed, therefore the County cannot confirm whether the y still own that land or 
not.  
 
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  s ince its opening, the hospital has continued to invest on infrastructure 
and equipment as well as expansion of services. The H ospital has a bed capacity of Seventy - Two 
(72) with average bed occupancy at 40%. There is a new modern M aternity Wing which is a 
F lagship P roject with a Twenty - Four (24) B ed C apacity.  
 
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  t he F acility is currently investing on various initiatives to reinvigorate 
F acilities and E quipment including: R enovation and E quipping of the D ental U nit, establishing a 
P rocedure/ A cute R oom, S trengthening of S ecurity through erection of a chain link perimeter fence 
and gate together with I nstallation of CCTV cameras, L andscaping and B eautification of the 
hospital compound, up S caling T heatre S ervices, R enovation and S olarisation  of the borehole,  
I nstallation of A dditional storage tanks and renovation of windows.  
SERVICES AND PATIENTS SERVED AT ELBURGON SUB COUNTY HOSPITAL  
The facility offers the following services;  
i.  Accident and E merge ncy S ervices  
ii.  General M edicine S ervices  
iii.  Reproductive Health S ervices  
iv.  Dental S ervices  
v.  Pharmacy  
vi.  Laboratory  
vii.  Comprehensive Care Services  
viii.  Theatre S ervices  
ix.  Blood transfusion  
x.  Radiology S ervices  
xi.  Rehabilitation S ervices  
xii.  Health E ducation  
xiii.  Referral S ervices  
xiv.  Mortuary S ervices  
 
Other Support Services  
i.  Laundry S ervices  
ii.  Kitchen (NB. The facility is in dire need of a modern kitchen)  
 
Leadership and Governance  
The said facility has a M edical S uperintendent. Below him, there is the H ospital A dministrator 
who usually are at par in terms of J ob D escription ,  with the Nursing Officer who is in ch arge and 
then there is a H ead of D epartments.  
Committees managing the Hospital  
i.  Expenditure E xecutive C ommittee  
ii.  Hospital M anagement C ommittee  
 
The Staff Establishment  
The staff E stablishment is as shown in the table below;  
 
CADRE  AVAILABLE  NORMAL  
STANDARDS  DEFICIT  
Medical Superintendent  1  1  0  
Health Administrative Officer  1  2  1  
Consultants  0  5  5  
Medical Officers  2  16  14  
Dental Officer  0  4  4  
Pharmacists  1  4  3  
Pharmaceutical Technologists  4  8  4  
Clinical Officers  8  30  22  
Nurses  16  131  115  
Radiographer  2  6  4  
Occupational Therapist  1  10  9  
Nutrition Officer  1  8  7  
Health Records & Information Officer  2  8  6  
Medical Engineering  0  7  7  
Social Work  0  4  4  
Laboratory Technologists  3  8  5  
Ortho - Trauma Technologist  1  3  2  
Community Oral Health Officer  1  2  1  
Orthopedic Technologist  0  3  3  
Physiotherapist  0  6  6  
Adherence Counsellors (UTJ)  1  -  -  
HTS Counsellor (UTJ)  2  -  -  
 
Ongoing Projects  
i.  Uptake of M aternity S ervices in the facility has greatly increased, with a current 8 - bed 
capacity. The County Government of Nakuru planned for the expansion of the D epartment 
in the year 2020. The construction project is almost complete; key gaps that are stalling the 
project are lack of septic tank in the building and a D elivery R oom.  
ii.  Access road to the hospital has stalled.  
iii.  Renovation and S olarisation of the borehole.  
iv.  Installation of a dditional water tanks.  
v.  Acquisition of D ental C hair.  
 
Flagship Projects  
i.  The facility has partnered with Medtronic and have carried out Monthly Diabetic O pen 
D ay C linic.  About 70 patients have been reviewed and defaulter tracing done.  
ii.  Medical Out - Patient Clinic (MOPC) is done twice a week by a Medical Officer.  
iii.  Linkage of Mortuary D epartment with fun soft system for billing and discharge of bodies.  
 
Hospital’s Infrastructure  
1.  Male W ard  
The Male W ard is underutilis e d  since there was only one male patient who has been 
hos pitalis ed for 2 months.  
Men have refused completely to go to the hospital. I do not know if they fear to be pricked by 
ladies. You know, this field of nursing was left for the women but also women go to traditional 
medicine men a lot. Therefore, that could  be the reason.  
Naturally and globally, men do not usually go to hospitals and that is something to be worried of 
and it is something that we need also to tell our CHVs to be cogni s ant of the same. If you see a 
man going to hospital, know that he  and his creator are communicating.  
2.  Female Ward/ Maternity  
This doubles up as a Female Ward and a Maternity. The space is congested.  
There exist a N ursing S tation, P ediatric C ubical, P ostnatal W ard and D elivery R oom with 
2 delivery beds. There are approximately 100 - 110  babies’  deliveries per month.  
 
3.  Laboratory  
Laboratory in the facility provides a wide range of services, which aid in carrying out of 
the D iagnosis, T reatment and M anagement o f patients. The facility has a La boratory, which 
is fully equipped and they also have a L ab T echnician. For the last few months, they have 
been doing blood transfusion because they are equipped with a B lood B ank.  
 
4.  X - Ray  
The facility offers X - ray S ervices. X - r ay  is an imaging study that takes pictures of bones 
and soft tissues. X - rays  use safe amounts of radiation to create these pictures.  An X - ray is 
a  quick and painless procedure commonly used to produce images of the inside of the body. 
It is a very effective  way of  looking at the bones and can be used to help detect a range of 
conditions.  
 
5.  Dental Unit  
The H ospital has a small room that serves as a D ental C are U nit for the patients. It has an 
old dilapidated D ental C hair but I can confirm that there is a chair that has been brought 
fourth. Also the room, they have made a makeshift room  so that has been overtaken by 
events.  
 
Committee Findings  
The following are the findings and observations that were highlighted by the C ommittee and 
M anagement of the H ospital during the visit;  
1.  The H ospital has no Ownership Documents/Title Deed.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, a ny Citizen or any Company can go to court and challenge the County 
Government of Nakuru. This County cannot prove the ownership of that land.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, as in the previous Reports, and I want to thank the Member who requested 
for the Implementation Status of all the Reports, since the inception of Devolution , because w e 
have been tabling Report s here requesting for these tittle deeds but nothing has been forthcoming.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  I am a Member of that Committee and we are trying our best but I want 
also the Committee to be reprimanded so that this D ocument can be provided. It cannot be that the 
Government has been issuing T ittle D eeds to the citizens of the R epublic but they cannot issue 
themselves tittle deeds to the facilities and other G overnment L ands. It is ironical.  
They say, love your neighbo u r as you love yourself. Therefore, you must love y ourself first before 
you love your neighbo u r. The County Government of Nakuru must issue itself tittle deeds before 
it issues to the citizens.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  w e want to tell the Lands Committee, because we have been tabling these  
Report  day in day out; we are tired and this is the second time we have gone to Elburgon and the 
same recommendation wa s there. Therefore, we want to see the way forward so that we can have 
tittle deeds for our F acilities across the County.  
2.  I nadequate staffing level in the Hospital .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, a Level Four Hospital should have at least six Medical Officers but 
currently, we have one. Assume by any chance, because it is human nature that the Medical Officer 
who is there gets sick. Who will attend to patients? Will a sick pe rson attend to patients? MR. 
Temporary Speaker, it means majority of the services are going to close down and substandard 
services are going to be offered to the citizens. Therefore, there ought to be something that ought 
to be done so that we can scale up  the number of staff that are in our Hospitals, because currently 
we are doing badly.  
 
3.  Inadequacy of space as the Dental Unit shares space with the Health Records Office .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker  t his one, as I mentioned earlier has been overtaken by events.  
 
4.  Insufficient water supply due to breakdown of the pump.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, it is true that the pump in that Facility has broken down. This is because 
the Department of Water has refused to be inspecting the pumps in our Departments.  
Therefore, we need to challenge the Department  of  Water, and I can see the Chair;  t hey need to 
take up all matters concerning water, including all the servicing and checking of the boreholes 
because these Facilities have been depending on Private Entrepreneurs who are out here to make 
money. They have been giving wrong diagnosis to our p umps. They have been giving wrong 
recommendations because they are out to make money.  
Therefore Mr. Temporary Speaker, we really need that the Engineers at the Sub - County  level must 
own up these issues of water at our facilities so that we can be able to move forward.  
5.  T he Maternity Unit which is 75% complete and has a 24 bed capacity.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, we  are challenged because we do not have space and if you look at all 
the Members present excluding one Member that is Hon. Degaulle who is past the age of making 
babies, we are all challenged because we do not have space for exercising that right.  
The Temporary S peaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): What is it Hon. Ruto?  
Hon. Robert Ruto : Mr. Speaker, this is a House of rules and regulations and therefore it is not in 
order for Hon. Njuguna to say that there is an age limit for making babies or reproduction. Hon. 
Njuguna should apologise.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Muraya resume your seat. Hon. Njuguna, 
how sure are you that Hon. Degaulle cannot make a baby?  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Mr. Temporary Speaker, I was with him some day chatting and he was 
advising me on family matters.  He told me that he has grandchildren and in an African culture if 
a person has grandchildren, he can no longer produce babies. If it does happen then it wi ll be 
presumed that you are competing with your own children to give birth. What I meant is that we 
are in that age gap that if given a chance…  
Hon.  Bernard Langat : Mr. Temporary Speaker, I think that it is in order to allow Hon. Degaulle 
to confirm to the House that he is no longer active or unable to make babies.  
(Laughter)  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Degaulle Naburuki.  
Hon. Degaulle Naburuki : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker, I echo what Hon. Njuguna has 
said; it is true that we spoke.  
(Laughter)  
I still can produce babies but I am not at the moment. Let me allow my son and daughter to do so. 
Thank you.  
(Laughter)  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage ) : Thank you. Hon. Njuguna, kindly continue with 
the Report.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker. The issue was that the maternity is 
75% completed and we are worried because we have seen that the current maternity we have is 
already congested. Everyday there is a mother or two who are nursed in those beds and that is  why 
I was worried  Mr. Temporary Speaker, because I said at this age we are in and majority are, it 
means that we need to improve and there is urgency for completion of that Maternity Wing so that 
we can continue enjoying those services including Hon. Ruto because I know that is where we 
belong and especially for politicians because they believe in many votes and increasing numbers 
so we must lead by example. We should not preach wine and drink water. Let us preach wine and 
drink wine.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, the morgue does not have a Cold Room and a freezer. The reality of life 
is that one day we will all be gone and we do not know where they are going to preserve us. We 
will be preserved in these morgues and this is a reality and there fore we need to improve all our 
mortuaries because they are in bad shape. You find that sometimes the bodies are lying on the 
floor…  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech : Mr. Temporary Speaker, the Chair is not in order to say that one day we 
will all die. We still ask God to give us grace so that we may live many years. You must tell us 
that the morgue must be there but we have to live for many years.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage ) : So Hon. Njuguna …  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Mr. Temporary Speaker there will also be one day. I did not say 
tomorrow. I have said one day because that is in the future and I know that that day will come. I 
do not want to preach because I am from a theology back ground. I would have elaborated it  but 
allow me to say that our morgues are not in good shape and we usually say , what is good for the 
goose is good for the gander. Those Members whom I have been visiting these morgues with can 
tell the status of those facilities. I woul d wish that when I rest, I be well preserved before those 
microorganisms that are in the soil start enjoying. Therefore, we must have good places as our 
resting homes like the private ones that we have. I am making a comparison because if you go to 
Umash… I do not need to be informed Mr. Speaker unless he has not understood and I am here 
elaborating it.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Alex, what is it?  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Mr. Temporary Speaker, I want to inform the Chair Health that he has told 
the House that the organisms stay within the soil. I want to inform him that the bacterias are 
actually in his body. Thank you.  
    
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage ):  Let us allow Hon. Njuguna to finish with the 
Report.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Mr. Temporary Speaker you know the Hon. Member is a Doctor and he 
ought to know better than me that those microorganisms that are in the soil and the body are not 
the same. What he should have said is that there are microorganisms in the soil and also in  the 
body. The Facility does not have a perimeter wall and therefore security is not guaranteed.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I want to reiterate and say that where I come from people take a lot of 
chang’aa and there was a break - in to the morgue for formalin. The tank that has formalin was 
connected to the bodies through pipes. They vandalised and directed those pipes to jerry cans and 
stole all the formalin that was there so that they can go create their drinks. It is that serious  Mr. 
Temporary Speaker and therefore installations such as a perimeter wall and in security language 
we call them guardians shoul d be installed so that we can reinforce the security of the said Facility.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, in the past we have heard of some Counties where babies are stolen. We 
are not safe and we need to make sure that the security of the Facility is checked. I wish that the 
Security Committee Members who are here could go to the ground  and generate Reports for 
Security Status of our Facilities.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, the Facility has no operational incinerator. We produce a lot of waste and 
especially Medical Waste but how we dispose that waste is wanting.  
 
Recommendations  
1.  The Department of H ealth should work in collaboration with the Department  of Lands and 
Housing to make sure that they process title deeds  
2.  The County  G overnment should allocate resources for the recruitment of more staff 
especially nurses.  
3.  The Hospital  Management  should get adequate space to accommodate H ealth R ecords and 
Dental  U nits  
4.  The Department  of H ealth together with the Hospital  Management  should fast - tr a ck  on 
the ongoing projects especia lly the installation of additional water tanks, renovation of the 
borehole to curb the shortage of water in the Hospital .  
5.  The Department of He alth should fast - tr a ck the completion of the maternity so that we can 
start enjoying those services.  
6.  The  Department of H ealth should allocate resources to purchase and equip the Hospital  
morgue with a cold room and freezer  
7.  The  Department of Health should prioritise  the construction of perimeter wall and the gate 
for security purposes.  
8.  The Hospital  Management  should utili s e the Facility  improvement fund to refurbish the 
incinerator/ the burning chamber.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, these Reports are not for beautifying the Archives of this Assembly. Let 
all these recommendations that were put forth be implemented. We want to see the Implementation 
Committee on the ground, and after six months they generate Repo rts that will be showing the 
status of the recommendations of different Committees of this House.  
 Mr. Temporary Speaker, we want to see that Committee working like bees. Let us see a beehive 
of activities so that the Wanjiku  that we serve, and who has employed and entrusted us to come to 
this House can start enjoying the services because of our supervisory skills that they trusted we 
have.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I want to request that this House adopts this Report as it is and the 
Implementation Committee to take over this matter and make sure that they are implemented. Once 
again allow me to salute Hon. Muraya for bringing and requesting fo r the Statement of those 
recommendations. I believe that this is the hundred and something Report from the Health 
Committee for different Facilities but I have never seen a Report of what we went to the field to 
check being tabled here. Mr. Temporary Speak er, we are ashamed of ourselves  and we look 
forward to improving on the same so that we can live on the mandate of this House that is 
Oversight.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I am requesting the Hon. Members to pass this Report and to also tell 
them that we are still on and we will be headed to other Facilities so that we can generate more 
Reports and we also want to see other Committees meeting their par t of the bargain so that the 
citizens of this Republic and this County can progress.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, allow me to request Hon. Alex who is a Member of the Health Committee 
to second and also to move. If there is anyone who needs clarity on something I am readily 
available. Thank you Mr.  Temporary Speaker, I beg to move.  
Hon.  Alex Mbugua : T hank  you Mr.  Temporary S peaker .  I think by all virtue of clarity  this 
Committee has done  a noble job . We have generated so many Report s and I want to congratulate 
the C hairperson  for this C ommittee Hon. Njuguna because of his steward leadership  within the 
C ommittee. As a M embe r of this C ommittee, I find myself challenged by the Hospital s that we 
visit. When you clearly look at the recommendations, findings and observations of the C ommittee 
you will be touched.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, wh en we talk about a morgue that has no C old R oom or a freezer ,  that is 
not a morgue. We live in the current era where  we should have all these Facilities working well.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, f ormalin  that  i s  used to preserve bodies is being stolen by liquor business 
people and th ese  business people end up making illicit brews with this formalin and that  is why 
you find the D eputy P resident of the R epublic of Kenya  complaining  that zombies are walking in 
form of men because what they have consumed is breaking down their bodies. Mr. Temporary 
Speaker, I will always stand with the recommendations of this Committee that these things should 
be checked.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, the poor security that we have in our facilities makes it very easy for 
things to be stolen within the Hospital. Formerly in Nairobi, we had Pastor Deya and we had so 
many babies getting lost in Pumwani Hospital and this should not b e assumed that it cannot happen 
in Nakuru.  Mr. Temporary Speaker, we live in a population of about 1.2 million voters and with 
that population of voters we generate to another whole 10 million plus people staying in this 
County. And we just cannot jeopard ise the security of our sick people within the Hospital.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, in regards to Land ownership and Documentation, in the last Budget that 
we read here, we gave the lands Department a whopping Kshs 15 million for this Land Digitisation 
and Ownership, Verification of title deeds and everything. Mr. Temporary Speaker, I would 
suggest that this money be used to acquire title deeds for all the State Department Lands that is 
owned by the County Government of Nakuru Mr. Temporary Speaker, beca use that will help us 
acquire bigger things in future.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker that is the same state of nature we have in Naivasha. We have a Hospital 
and the land documentation is not yet there. With the heavy investment that we have done within 
these Hospitals, like in Naivasha we have a Hospital Wing that ha s cost the Hospital around Kshs 
300 to 400 million and that kind of Facility is not sitting on land that is owned by the County 
Government, it becomes a very big joke.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, on the part of incinerator, we need to curb and control our waste and I 
will say that without these burning chambers working well, we are exposing the population to 
diseases that can hurt and derail their wellbeing. Thank you Mr. Tem porary Speaker, I rise to 
support this Report.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you. The Motion is well seconded.  
( Question proposed that this House  adopt  the Report of the C ommittee o f  H ealth S ervices on the 
visit of Elburgon sub County  Hospital  on 24 th  May, 2023 laid before the table of the Assembly on 
Tuesday, 3 rd , October 2023 during the afternoon plenary.)  
The Motion is open for debate. Hon. Rose.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech : Mr. Temporary. Speaker sir, I really want to thank the Committee on 
Health for the good work that they have done. As a Member of the Committee, I want to confirm 
that the information that is there is true. Concerning the perimeter wall, it is a big probl em because 
of security issues in the Hospital. They also do not have enough staff so it is really a challenge. 
Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage ) : We will have Hon. Muraya and then Hon. 
Mutai in that order.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker. First of all, I would wish to commend 
the Committee on Health for the job well done. It is true and as the Chair said, the Bible tells us 
that we should love our neighbors as we love ourselves. I can clearly state that th e County 
Government of Nakuru is somehow forgetting to love itself because there is no Report that has 
been brought here of any Hospital or any Dispensary that we have heard has a title deed. Mr. 
Temporary Speaker, most of these Reports have clearly indicated that our Hospitals do not have 
title deeds.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, this is why I requested the Committee on Implementation for a Statement 
because we have been here, the Chairman has been here over hundred times and there is nothing.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, you can see that there is only one Member from the Implementation 
Committee yet they know that there was a Report to be brought to this House. To some extent, you 
need to command these Members to be here especially the Chair to take up the matter and know 
what he is supposed to do, if not we can a s well do away with the Committee.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, several Reports have been laid here and there is absolutely nothing that 
has been done. I saw the Chairperson for Implementation seated and when he heard that there was 
a Motion he walked out. He knows very well…  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Muraya concentrate on the debate because 
the Chair is not in the House.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Hon. Temporary Speaker there is a Member here who will take the notes 
and grievances to the Chair. My concern about the Chair is part of the contribution. This is a good 
Report but we need to know who is taking up the matter and that is my concern. The Chair ought 
to be in this House so that he can take up the matter. We cannot have a Hospital Morgue with no 
Cold Room and a freezer. We need to take care of these bodies even if God is for the living we 
also need to respect the dead. I support.  
Hon. William Mutai : Thank you very much Mr. Temporary Speaker for this opportunity. I also 
stand to support this Motion and I would like to commend the Committee for this comprehensive 
Report they have given us today. Mr. Temporary Speaker, the Report is a case study and a replica 
of the many Health Facilities that are in our County. Mr. Temporary Speaker, as we analyse this 
Report, you need not to go to any other Hospital to collect more information because this is a real 
reflection of what is happening in  most of the Facilities that we have in the County. These 
challenges or the situation that has been exposed is quite touchy and a remedy should be looked 
into.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I am one of the Members of the Implementation Committee and I think 
that this is a great challenge that we have been given. We need to do more and look into the Reports 
that have been brought before to ascertain whether there is any step that aims at improving the 
Facilities we have. As I went through the Report and as I listened to the Chair of the Health 
Committee I just imagined the amount of trauma and impact that the young ladies in the female 
Wards go through when they see a lad y in labour, struggling with all that pain. The kind of 
psychological impact they would have and especially if they are preparing to procreate in future.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, a Labour Ward being the female General Ward that is in itself 
unacceptable. That should not be happening because it is going to lead to our young generation 
running away from the noble duty that they were given by God of procreation.  It is quite 
detrimental and I believe that action  should be  taken.  
Another issue Mr. Temporary Speaker that has come out very clearly is that the hospital itself does 
not have the legal ownership documents which is also another replica of most of the facilities that 
we have in our County. Mr. Temporary Speaker, I would li ke to request that the concerned 
Departments expedite so that we can have these documents as soon as possible, lest we have these 
unscrupulous cartels taking advantage of the public land. I stand to support the Motion.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Bor  
Hon. Alex Bor : Thank you Mheshimiwa Spika wa Mda.  Allow me to also contribute to this Report 
and first I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the Chair for taking the right direction. 
However, one of our greatest concerns as a House is the implementation of all these 
recommendations. I do repres ent Kiptororo Ward where I have seven Dispensaries and one Health 
Centre. Of all these seven, only one Dispensary has got land title deed. This means that this Report 
contains a replication of what is in alm ost all the Health Facilities that we have in this great County.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, the implementation Committee has a huge task to undertake so that they 
can come up with a Report. On the recommendations that have been passed in this House of 
honour, it is so sad that in this century we are still talking about some  issues that should have been 
in the past. I also come from a Sub - County which has no Level Four Hospital; that is Kuresoi 
North Sub - County. As we sit here, an accident has occurred in Kuresoi Centre and one of the boda 
boda  operators has lost his life. Mr . Temporary Speaker, I am wondering if the body of the departed 
Erick will be taken to Molo or Kericho and in my case it has to be taken to Kericho Referral 
Hospital because it is the nearest facility. Mr. Temporary Speaker, coming to Molo would be very 
fa r.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, the Committee on Implementation should also expedite on this so that all 
the Health Facilities that have well equipped Morgue facilities so that those bodies will be 
preserved well. I have imagined the incident that has happened and the body being taken to a 
morgue that has no refrigeration; how will the family be in a position to collect that body yet 
imepondwa pondwa.  If it has no cooling facility, after two or three days, that place will be very 
bad. So, the Chair of the Health Com mittee is doing great but the implementation part of this 
recommendation is actually a great challenge to this House. Mr. Temporary Speaker, I think the 
Health Department in our County is heading the wrong direction and now that Doctors in this 
County are on strike, what do we do with our patients? We need to talk about this as an urgent 
matter that has to be addressed because Health is a key issue for all of us. Mr. Temporary Speaker 
I wish to support this Report and congratulate the Committee for the good  work they are doing. 
We only to ask ourselves whether these recommendations will be implemented. Thank you Mr. 
Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Jane  
Hon. Jane Gituku : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir for this opportunity. Once again 
karibuni wageni wetu,  the Report before this House on Health matters is a very critical Report 
owing to the fact that Health is paramount for everybody and just like a police cell, nobody knows 
who will need this hospital tomorrow. Mr. Temporary Speaker, I know our people requ ire a lot of 
services, they do not have all the money to attend to private Health facilities and that is why when 
the Chairman tables this Report an d many more. It is only important if we are able to follow and 
maybe ease the problem that our people are going through.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, there is somebody who suggested sometimes back that if the County 
Governments are unable to handle the Health Department, they should just hand it over to the 
National Government because people’s Health cannot be negotiated. We need to prove ourselves 
whether we are capable of handling a Department like this one.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I happen to sit in the Finance Committee and when you look at the 
revenue that comes in, I think the Health Department contributes a lot of money through this 
County. Therefore, the recommendations notwithstanding, or the observation s that have been 
made, this should be taken as an emergency and I wonder why the Chairman of this Department 
or whoever sat down does not usually come up with timelines as I said again in the morning.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, when you look at the issue of incineration where they said they are 
burning the waste generated from the hospital, it is something that should be given preference like 
it is a disaster in waiting because Health waste is not just any other waste. It is very dangerous and 
can cause a lot of harm to the community surrounding those facilities. The other day, I had a case 
of a person from my area who was attacked by the other community that we boarder with and was 
injured using a spear, bo ws and pangas . When we took him to the hospital after administering 
first - aid in the Ward facility, we took that person to the Naivasha Sub - County where I happen to 
belong and from 2.00 in the afternoon up to midnight, that gentleman had not been attended to. He 
had su stained broken ribs and blood started clotting within the rib cage. We requested to know 
what was happening; I particularly asked for the records for Doctors who were on call and the 
records indicated something like ‘out - on - permission’. Mr. Te mporary Speaker, when we asked the 
Medical Superintendent why the facility did not have Medics to attend to patients because the 
emergency unit was holding eight critically injured patients, we were told that these Doctors are 
not available during the week ends because when you fall sick no one knows when it will occur, 
we insisted on knowing why they give permission to Medics when actually this is a Health Facility 
that is serving other areas that are within or bordering Naivasha at the Nakuru County.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, this is just a tip of the iceberg and I would also request that the Chairman 
rush to Naivasha please look at the situation. When we question the Doctors, they claim that they 
are overwhelmed and when you look at the data that we has just been given in this particular 
Facility, you realize that it is highly understaffed. We have issues about our Medical Doctors right 
now going on and I believe we have the capacity to deal with Health issues as one of the Cities 
that has been newly inaugurated. Mr. Temporary Speaker, somebody has just raised the issue of 
the Implementation Committee and the need to have these Reports taken care of. I would request 
the House to take notice that one year down the line, all that we h ave been doing is Reporting and 
nothing has been done. We believe that we have the capacity, the staff, and the ability to deal with 
these matters especially those that require implementation so that we can give direction.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I am highly appreciative of the work that the House is doing but we really 
need to pull up our socks so that we can come up with a Report that shall be implemented and will 
go a long way to assist. Maybe if this Report from the vario us Institutions had been implemented, 
we would not be talking about the problems that are facing us, as one of the honourable Members 
has said it affects all the other Health facilities.  
Therefore Mr. Temporary Speaker, I highly recommend that we adopt this Report and appreciate 
that recommendations that have been given here on what is required will also be tabled in this 
House as soon as possible. Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, for  the opportunity.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Now we are going to have Hon. Wathiai then 
the Chair to reply  
Hon. David Macharia:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker; I rise to support this Report and also 
commend the Committee on Health for the good work they have been doing all through. In this 
Report, I have come across the Committee’s findings in regard to insufficient water supplie s due 
to the breakdown of a pump in the facility. It is really sad to see that in such a facility, wanasema 
maji ni uhai na maji yanatumika kila mahali . Mr. Temporary Speaker ukiona hospitali ya serikali 
inakosa maji, mashini ya kupiga maji inaharibika,  that shows there is a very big problem there. 
So, I would like the Department to move in with speed and make sure there is sufficient supply of 
water in all the facilities in our County, because, kama maji yatakosa kwa hizi  Facilities, zitakuwa 
zinapatia wagonjwa ugonjwa mwingine kwa sababu hakuna maji.  So Mr. Temporary Speaker, I 
would request that the Department takes charge and deal with the water problem with speed.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, in regards to the understaffing in our Facilities, we also request that the 
Department moves with speed and employ Medical Staff in our Facilities so that they can give 
effective and efficient services to Wanjiku  who is our employer. I stand to support the Report Mr. 
Temporary Speaker; thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Chair to give a reply  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker. Let me start with the issue of 
Kuresoi North. They do not have a Level Four Facility, which is true but have the budget for the 
construction of Kuresoi North Level Four. Mr. Temporary Speaker, the Challenge has been the 
a vailability of land where that Facility can be constructed. I know that our Excellency the Governor 
has been on the ground and I wish the Hon. Members was here, to actually confirm where the 
community would wish to have the Facility con structed. Mr. Temporary Speaker, I do not know 
what the current status is, but we are hopeful that the project will be advertised and that they will 
have identified the site for the hospital to be constructed so that we can ease the burden of patients, 
some who have been going to Kericho and others coming all the way to Molo town and there are 
no motorable roads. Mr. Temporary Speaker, that is the kind  of situation members of the public 
are grappling with currently and we really want to see something being done urgently. Mr. 
Temporary Speaker, I also urge the Members of that Sub - County to work together with the 
Department and the Executive to make sure that they have struck a balance as to where that Facility 
is to be constructed.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, the issue of Doctors’ strike has been mentioned and I am aware that there 
have been some negotiations; there has been a court process and the Executive has been sent out 
as an arbitrator and the Doctors are to resume duty during the mediation process so that they offer 
services to members of the public.  
However Mr. Temporary Speaker, I would like to say the issue that was at hand with the Doctors 
prompting them to go on strike was to do with promotions. Two of their Medics were not promoted 
and that is why they declined to go to work; which was actually v ery awkward Mr. Temporary 
Speaker. If one of the Members in this House fails to turn to his duties because of one two, or three 
issues, he or she will be subjected to disciplinary action by the House. This House should not stand 
in solidarity with that Mem ber at the detriment of the members of the public.  
Therefore Mr. Temporary Speaker that is what is happening. It is the reason our Doctors went on 
strike and there have been negotiations; they are going to strike a balance and resume offering 
services to our people. However, I said on the issue of the week end, there was a time Hon. Lang’at 
from Marioshoni and I went to PGH just to see what was happening and we went to the Casualty 
Department where we found Ambulances were lining there all the way from Samburu, Laikipia, 
and Baringo, and there were no Doctor s by that time. We had to call the Medical Superintendent 
to explain to us what was not happening in that Facility. I would humbly request that the 
Honourable Members, that whenever they are at home during the weekends, it is no crime to just 
pass by those  facilities to check what is happening because these days people wanapiga sherehe  
on weekends and forget to Report to work. Therefore, I would wish the Honourable Members 
would occasionally pass by the Facilities on weekends, to establish their operations rather than 
entrusting these people with the issue of Health because the situation is wanting.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I do not know whether they are deterred by the working conditions or 
whatever, but we need to actually see how we can boost the morale of these people, so that on they 
can be on duty on weekends.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, on the issues of Health Management, I believe the Department is doing 
all it can to up its game on the issue of supervision so that the Medics and all the Health workers 
can actually offer themselves to the maximum so that the member s of the public can enjoy the 
services that they ought to be offered. On the issues of Naivasha Hospital, we are going to revisit. 
Mr. Temporary Speaker, I know we were there and I think we have made two Site Visits. The 
second time we went there, the Repo rt was not yet out and we are going to table that Report here. 
We would wish that once we table the second Report, we want to see the implementation of the 
first Report. This is because if we are tabling a Report for the second time, it means that even the 
third time there will be no implementation.  
Therefore Mr. Temporary Speaker, we are actually going to make sure to even stop the Business 
of this House so the implementation status of the recommendations of the House can be brought 
forth, so that we can improve the status of that Facility and other Facilities. Mr. Temporary 
Speaker, these issues are congruent; the issues that are facing one facility are the same across the 
County including the PGH. The issues of title deeds, Naivasha, Molo and Njoro face similar title 
deeds issues. I remember when I was here I also tabled issues of Njoro and you remember even 
the County Commissioner and Police OCPD are Housed in that Facility compound and they say 
those are National Government House Units, just because we do not have title deeds. And that is 
why I sai d we do not know whether these are our pieces of land or not.  
Therefore Mr. Temporary Speaker, we need the Department to work around the clock to make 
sure we have our title deeds so that we can start owning and planning on those properties so that 
we make sure the land, which is the capital of everything can be maxi mumly utilised so that we 
can serve the citizens of this County comfortably.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, on the final matter of receding back the powers of Health to the National 
Government, I would wish to request the County Assemblies not to go down that narrow path 
because we will be retracing back to the dark days whereby the achiev ements we have realised 
through this Devolution, will go to waste. I believe the MPs cannot Oversight Health and the only 
person to do that, because they are close to  Mwananchi are the MCAs. I believe through the 
procedures and the CIDPs and also the Publi c Participation that we have been having, the County 
Assemblies are better situated actually to oversight the County Health Departments.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker therefore, and I also believe the improvements that we have had in the 
last ten years are so huge that we cannot compare them with the gains we had since 1963 - 2013/14. 
In those ten years, we have achieved a lot than before and therefo re would wish to say it was the 
right decision but the National Government should Devolve funds to the Counties so that they can 
handle their affairs comfortably. I wish to beg the House to pass the Report. Thank you, Mr. 
Temporary Speaker,  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Thank you Hon. Njuguna. I now want to put it 
into question.  
( Question proposed that this House adopts the Report of the Committee on Health Services on 
the visit to Elburgon Sub - County Hospital on 24 th  May 2023, laid before the table of the 
Assembly on Tuesday 3 rd  October 2023 during the Afternoon Plenary.)  
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
The House stands adjourned to tomorrow morning at 9.00 AM.  
The House rose at 4.25 PM  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 