COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 26 th  April 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03:20 PM  
[Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon . William Mutai ):  Next order.  Hono u rable Mwathi .  
Hon. Grace Mwathi: Thank you Honorable Temporary Speaker, I have a concern ;  my concern is 
about Deputy Majority Whip . I have observed that from morning she has been s it ting in the wrong 
seat, I request that she seats on her own seat, Hono u rable Leah Serem.  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon . William Mutai ):  Hono u rable Leah Serem , it has been noted that 
you are in the wrong position, please can you take your position.  
Hon . Leah S erem:  Honorable Temporary Speaker , I want to congratulate my sister for observing 
that I am s it ting at the wrong place but you are the one who told me to s i t in your seat today because 
you are the S peaker of the day, thank you.  
(Laughter )  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon . William Mutai ) : Hono u rable Serem is that your position? kindly 
get into your position.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya: I have a point of order Hono u rable Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon . William Mutai ):  Which order Hono u rable Muraya?  
Hon . Joseph Muraya : Hono u rable Temporary Speaker, let me ask about the Standing Order , I 
will reve r t  back to you. Is the Hono u rable Member in order to  tell this House that you had asked 
her to s i t on your chair whereas it was not communicated in the floor of the House?  Is she in order 
to inform the House  as such?  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon . William Mutai ):  Thank you Honorable Muraya, that is why I am 
giving instruction s  that Hono u rable Serem, if you are not in th e right position can you please get 
into your position. What is it Honorable Wathiai?  
Hon . David Macharia : Hono u rable Temporary Speaker , as we all know this H ouse is a House of 
order and rules. We have been talking about this issue over and again, I request that you take firm 
action against Hono u rable Leah Serem so that she can be an example to others who do not follow 
the rules and regulations of this House.  
The Temporary Spe aker ( Hon . William Mutai ):  Thank you for your concern, I think we are 
going to consult on the steps to take but preferably advisory step will be taken, thank you. Next 
order.  
Hon . Degaulle Naburuki : Hono u rable Temporary Speaker, she is still not s it ting in her proper 
seat, she is on the Majority Party Whip seat, let her go to her seat.  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon . William Mutai ):  What is it Hono u rable Serem? I think  there must 
be some confusion.  
Hon . Leah Serem:  Hono u rable Temporary Speaker, I am no t used to these seats….  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai):  May be the W hip can assist you.  
Hon . Leah Serem: I am the W hip .  
Hon . David Macharia : Hono u rable Temporary Speaker , may be Hono u rable Serem is under the 
influence of something.  
ERICK  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): … Order! Mheshimiwa Wathiai, Hon. Serem  is 
the Whip and I am therefore requesting the Deputy Whip to assist whip the Member if she is not 
in the right position.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi: Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I am requesting Hon. Wathiai to withdraw his 
words that Hon. Serem is under influence of  something. Can he please withdraw that word because 
Hon. Serem is sober?  
Hon. David Wathiai: Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, when I said that Hon. Serem is under influence, 
it might be she might has taken some drugs after lunch and maybe she is feeling the ef fects of the 
drug …  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): Mheshimiwa Wathiai, Order! Hon. Serem 
Order!  
Hon. Leah Serem: Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I do not agree. I am very much sober. I am a 
Christian and I do not know which drugs he is talking abo ut.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): Hon. Serem, please resume your seat.  
Mheshimiwa Wathiai, I would ask you to give a profound apology. You withdraw and apologise.  
Hon. David Wathiai: Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I withdraw. I pray that you pr otect me because 
these ladies according to what I am seeing here is that these Hon. Members of this House …  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): From the body language of the House, they are 
demanding that you withdraw and apologise.  
Hon. David Wath iai: Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I apologise.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): Thank you Mheshimiwa Wathiai.  
Next Order.  
PAPER(S)  
(SUPPLEMENTARY BUDGET II OF 2023)  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): There is a Paper to be laid by the Mi nority 
Leader.  
The Minority Leader (Hon. Philip Wanjohi):  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I am going 
to lay a Paper on behalf of our Majority Leader Hon. Dr. Alex Lang’at who is out on official duty.  
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 35 of the Pu blic Finance Management Act of 2012, I wish to 
lay a Paper on the Nakuru County Supplementary Budget II (2023).  
Hon. Members, now that we have laid the Supplementary, if you have any issue to do with your 
projects, kindly consult the Chair of Budget Commit tee.  
I lay the Paper.  
 
STATEMENT(S)  
(STATUS OF ANNUAL LEAVE DAYS)  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. William Mutai): There are several Statements to be made.  
Pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 47(2) (c) let me request Hon. Wathiai Macharia to 
make a Stat ement.  
Hon. David Wathiai: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. Pursuant to Standing Order 47(2) 
(c), I rise to request for a Statement from the Chairperson of the Committee on Labour, Gender, 
Youth and Social Welfare concerning the status of annual leave days for staff under the 
Department of Finance and Revenue Section.  
Annual leave is provided for under Section 28 of the Employee Act No. 11 of 2007. The Act 
stipulates minimum leave days an employee is entitled to and an employer may decide to be mo re 
generous with the days …  
SHARON  
Hon. David Wathiai : …an employee may accumulate leave or carry it over when management 
has a reason to believe your absence from duty may hinder the production or service delivery 
process. It is also worth noting that policy on annual leave may vary from one Organisation to the 
other. For instance, annual leave maybe paid or unpaid or an employer may divide leave days to 
different intervals depending on the agreement.  
 Further to this an Organisation may advice the empl oyees to forfeit annual leave days and award 
monetary compensation. It has been alleged that most staff in the Department of Finance Revenue 
Section have not been able to access their annual leave days for a while since the Head of 
Department believes that  their absence from duty will hinder their production and service delivery 
process since there are no substitute staff to discharge their duties in their absence. I therefore 
request the Chairperson of Committee on Labour, Gender, Youth and Social Welfare to issue a 
Statement on the following;  
1.  Whether the County Government of Nakuru has an approved Human Resource Policy on 
leave days and whether its staff have been sensitised on the same.  
2.  Whether the County Receiver of Revenue is aware that staff in the De partment of Finance 
Revenue Section have accumulated leave days and whether the respective officers were 
notified.  
3.  Measures the Department Public Service Training and D evolution has put in place to 
ensure adherence to the provision of S ec tion  28 of the E mp loyee A ct 11 of 2007 on leave 
days.  
Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
Statements Laid  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Thank you. I commit the Statement to the 
Labour Committee and you give the Report in two weeks’ time.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi : Thank  you Mr. Temporary Speaker, we are well guided.  
STATEMENT(S)  
PREPAREDNESS BY THE AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT IN DEALING WITH INVASION OF 
CROP PESTS  
The Temporary S peaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Thank you Hon. Grace. There is also another 
Statement to be laid by Hon. Elijah Murage on the request for a Statement from the Chairperson, 
Committee on Agriculture.  
Hon. Elijah Murage : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker. Pursuant to th e Standing Order 47(2) 
(c), I rise to request for a Statement from the Chairperson Committee on Agriculture concerning 
the preparedness of the Department of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Cooperatives in 
dealing with crop pests and its invasion in v arious parts of Nakuru County.  
As you may all be aware, 70% of the total Nakuru County land is highly agriculturally productive 
and there is no doubt that if measures are put in place for the adoption of good agricultural 
practices, many small farmers wil l transform into profitable and commercially oriented enterprises.  
However, agricultural production has declined in the recent years due to crop pests affecting 
majorly the maize plantations. The invasion of crop pests is critical because it will decrease  
production in maize plants and other plants. Army worms and aphids among other pests will cause 
remarkable damage and thus affecting production. The issue of crop pests and its invasion is 
alarming and necessary control measures should be taken since it h as been reported in some parts 
of the County since the onset of the rains.    
 
SIELE  
Hon. Elijah Murage:  Mr. Temporary Speaker, therefore I request the Chairperson, Committee on 
Agriculture to issue a Statement on the following: -  
1. Whether the Department of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Cooperatives is aware of the 
crop pest and its invasion in var ious parts of the Country.  
2. Whether there is budgetary allocation for purchase of pesticides to mitigate the spread of crops 
pests in the current Financial Year 2022/23  
3. What are the long term plans for the Department of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheri es and 
Cooperatives to curb such menace in the Country? Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
STATEMENT(s)  
REQUEST FOR A STATEMENT FROM CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON HEALTH SERVICES 
CONCERNING THE PREVALENCE OF HIV/AIDS AMONG THE YOUTH IN THE COUNTY  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Thank you very much Hon. Elijah Murage. Let 
me commit the same Statement to the Committee on Agriculture and within two weeks, you bring 
the Report to the House. Hon. Members there is also another request for Stateme nt to be read by 
Hon. Ann Wamaitha to request for a Statement from Chairperson Committee on Health Services 
concerning the prevalence of HIV/Aids among the youth in the County. Hon. Ann.  
Hon. Ann Wamaitha : Thank you Hon. Temporary Speaker for giving me thi s opportunity to arise 
to request for a Statement. Pursuant to Standing Order 47 (2) (c), I arise to request for a Statement 
from the Chairperson Committee on Health Services concerning prevalence of HIV/Aids among 
the youth in the County.  
There is a nota ble rise of HIV/Aids cases among those aged between 10 - 13 years in Nakuru 
County. This trend has worried Health Authorities and Leaders. Data from the Health Department 
shows that 40 percent of these cases are occurring among adolescent girls and young wom en aged 
between 13 to 35 years.  
The worrying part is that the rising cases of Mother To Child Transmission (MTCT) in the County 
has surpassed that of the National level where Nakuru County is at 11 percent with that of the 
National level at 9 percent. The  burden is growing where the number of people, families and 
communities affected is increasing. The rising infections among teenagers is worrying because 
this is the future generation. A number of challenges facing teenagers such as poverty, economic 
inequ alities, parental negligence, inappropriate forms of recreation, low self - esteem, use of 
alcohol, substance abuse are listed as part of the increasing menace.  
To curb the increasing prevalence, public education and awareness campaigns are some of the 
most  effective strategies in prevention of HIV and Aids in the County. It is of this premise that I 
request the Chairperson Committee on Health Services to issue a Statement on the measures the 
County Department on Health has put in place to deal with the risi ng cases of HIV/Aids in 
teenagers and that of MTCT within the County. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. William Mutai): Thank you very much Hon. Ann Wamaitha and 
I want to commit the Statement to the Committee on Health and within two weeks you bring the 
Report.  
Hon. Members in regard to Order Paper No. 5, which is also another very crucial Paper which was 
laid by Hon. Wanjohi on the Nakuru County Supplementary Budget II, 2023 , I want to commit this 
one to the Committee on Budget; expedite so that wit hin no time, we are able to discuss the same.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable Members, this House stands adjourned until Tuesday next week at 9.30 am  
The House rose at 3.40am  
 