COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday  21st February , 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:35 AM 
 [Speaker (Hon. J oel Karuri ) in the Chair]  
PRAYERS . 
PETITION  
OMISSIONS OF PERSON S WITH DISABILITY  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  We have a Petition by Ambrose Kiplangat  Lasoy concerning 
omission of Persons with Disability Mainstreaming and Empowerment P rogram that was 
founded in respect to the approved budget for the medium term framework for the Financial 
Year 2022 /2023. The Honorable  Chair Budget C ommittee will table the Report.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Thank you H on. Speaker.  On the 22nd November 2022 before this 
Honorable  House a  Petition was laid and one Ambrose Kiplangat L asoy petition ed this H ouse 
to interject and bring fo urth on a  matter pertaining  omission of PWDs  funds in the County  
Budget Estimates since the Financial Year 2019/202 0 onwards.  
Mr.  Speaker the P etitioner was seeking the Assembly ’s intervention to remedy in the budget 
allocation in the coming Financial Years and to get clarification as to why this fund was not 
utilised. Mr. Speaker  the B udget C ommittee sat down  and on various we have held meetings 
and also interacted with the previous Administrations mainly from the Budget Committee. We 
have had background search and Hon.Speaker, pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 
205, the Petition was tabled and commit ted to the Budget Committee and hence the resolution 
as per why the omission was there has been tabled. The rationale of the Petition by Ambrose 
Kiplangat Soi was to seek intervention of this Assembly on PWDs fund which was not 
allocated with the Budget th en. After deliberations by the Committee Members the following 
were the findings;  
FINDINGS  
i) The Committee was disappointed to note that money amounting to Kshs 55 million 
for PWDS had not been utilised denying the much needed support to the most 
vulnerable segment of the people. The previous Budget Committee within the 
Second Assembly held severa l meetings with the Department of Sports, Youth, 
Gender, Culture and Social Services to shade more light on what occasioned delays 
in disbursement of funds for the Financial Year 2019 - 2020 and 2020.  
ii) The Committee after thorough interrogation s with the Department on the above 
matter, it confirmed the Kshs 55 million was eventually utili sed and assured the 
Committee of future commitments once allocated the funds.  
RESOLUTIONS  
My Committee had some resolutions on that and within the coming budget, we find that  even 
if the monies were placed back to this fund, there are some resolutions that must be made for 
these funds to be utilised.  
i) To allocate the Kshs 27.5 million in the Financial Year 2023 - 2024 which is to be 
shared equally across the 55 Wards ; that is e ach and every Ward will be getting 
Kshs 500,000.  
ii) Nakuru County People Living with Disability Regulations be amended in order to 
conform to the recommendations of the Controller of Budget. This fund was not 
well utilised or not utilised at all because of th e regulations that are there. We must 
realign our regulations to conform to our PWDs Act 2016 so as to ensure that this 
money is well utilised.  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Chair I am going to allow three Members 
to comment on that Report so that we can proceed. Hon. Member from Keringet.  
Hon. William Mutai : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker Sir, I take this opportunity to first of 
all com mend the Committee on Budget for studying the Report and giving the resolutions 
accordingly. I took time to go through the Report and there are certain loopholes that are 
supposed to be addressed. We have the aspect of youth empowerment; now according to m e, I 
have a view that strategy no. 5 should be People with Disability. I believe they should be treated 
with a lot of humane.  A lot of consideration should actually be put in place. You know it is so 
worrying when you hear that some Kshs 55million was all ocated but it was never used so it 
brings a lot of questions such as what was the work of PIAC and Implementation Committees. 
Denying the right of this allocation of Kshs 55 million until it is taken back without being used 
seems to indicate that there is a lot of disregard to these People Living with Disability.  
Therefore my further recommendation which I believe the Committee on Budget and 
Appropriations should take is first of all is to increase allocation. Kshs 27.5 million is a very 
small amount. Even arriving at that figure without having networked with Wards  to identify 
People Living with Disability is not appropriate and not clear. How do you arrive at Kshs 
500,000 without statistics on the needs of these people? I believe we should still go down to 
the ground, get some statistics about these people, get to know their needs and from there we 
establish their budget.  
Otherwise Mr. Speaker, I believe this will be the right direction to go, bearing in mind these 
people have actually been abandoned for a very long time. Thank you so much.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel K aruri): Thank you Hon. Mutai. The Hon Gathanwa you are raising 
your hand; you should be upstanding.  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa:  I was trying to catch your attention. First I wish to commend the 
Chair Budget and on behalf of Members that we have interacted with,  the CIDP Report and the 
Governor’s maiden speech that was delivered in this House. I am very confident that the issue 
on PWDs is largely considered in this Administration and from the response from the Chair, I 
have gathered we have enabling laws and I am  happy that he has pointed some of them out. It 
will be largely on the part of the House especially the Rules and Delegated Committee to ensure 
we have enabling regulations that marry with the Acts so that we are able to utilise this amount. 
Therefore havi ng considered that there is an allocation, we would wish now to call for an 
expedited process so that we can go back to our Wards and spend the money. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member from Elburgon.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Allow me to commend the Budget 
Committee for responding to that Petition and how I wish the petitioners were in this House. I 
do not know whether they are in the Public Gallery so that they can see that we are still 
considerate of them. I know  that the County has evolved since the inception of Devolution but 
there has been some challenges about People Living with Disability. I want to thank the 
Member who has suggested that we come up with their register so that we know how many of 
them are in each Ward. There are some officers employed in this County who do not render 
any service as they are supposed and these are Social Service Officers. Each Ward has a Social 
Service Officer but those Officers do not report to their offices so that they atten d to these 
people and because of stigma, PWDS have been hidden under the beds so that their neighbors 
do not know of the existence of such victims. We need to go an extra mile so that we establish 
how many PWDs are there so that when we appropriate as far as those people are concerned. 
We know how much we are going to spend in this Financial Year as far as those people are 
concerned.  
Secondly, those M embers who were here previously know that when these people are called 
for public participation you can ima gine somebody who is on a wheel chair being told to go 
for a public participation. Some of them are critically ill and are at a stage where they  cannot  
even  express themselves.  
Mr. Speaker, t here is a lot to be done and if there is a public participation for the PWDs, let 
their care giver s go and present their views. They are actually dictated to what is coming to 
them, on what to be given such as all devices and some of them do not require them. Therefore  
Mr. Speaker,  there  is need for a regulation as to what they are supposed to be given. I am happy 
because the Governor said other than giving them the devises, we ought to be giving them 
something; a card sort of that can keep their money. We give them food, money for upkeep and 
NHIF cards so that when the y fall sick, they can go to hospitals for free treatment. Those who 
would wish to study can be given some  pocket money so that they can also g o to school to 
study and further their education. Mr. Speaker that is not enough, if one of the Person s With 
Disab ility can come to this House and does  not know how to speak there is no  Interpreter.  
I would also as an affirmative action, we need to come up with a law whereby each and every 
public office in this County should be hav e an Interpreter. If that can be done they will be happy 
to attend our sessions to also listen to us and follow the proceedings. Also bearing in mind there 
is inflation in this Country, Kshs 500,000 is not enough and ask this House to be considerate 
at least  ea ch Ward to be allocated Kshs 1m to go direct to their pockets so that they are able to 
feel as citizens of this Country.  
Otherwise the current situation is bad. These people are desperate and the only saviours of 
these people is this House and Jesus Chris t. Therefore I request this Hono urable House you be 
considerate and come up with proper budget for the PWDs so that we can add on that Kshs 
500,000 that was passed in the first Regime to become Kshs 1m so that even when they will be 
allocated they be given  something that is tangible. Otherwise I thank you Mr. Speaker and I 
believe this House is going to consider the PWDs.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The other gender . We have listened to the 
gentlemen; where are the ladies on the same front? Hon. Doreen.  
Hon. Doreen Korir : Thank you so much Mr. Speaker, I also rise to support that being a 
woman, there are so many women suffering out there in our Wards with kids and family 
members who are disabled. So I support that we add the allocation to Ksh s 1million so that we 
support these people who are really in need. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Hon. Chair for Budget you have listened to 
your membership and also the Chairperson Committee on Sports, Youth Gender C ulture and 
Social Services , take note ; and the Chairperson Committee on Delegated Rules and Procedures 
take note and see how the three Committees can work together to come up with  the necessary 
enabling legislations and to expedite on what is remaining. Th ere are laws and regulations to 
the fund so that now the fund can be operationalised.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hono urable Members this House stands adjourned until today 2.30pm  
The House rose at  10.55AM 
 
 