MARCH 30, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday 30TH March 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10.45am  
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui):  Good morning Honorable Members.  
(Then)  
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
(Order for the Committee read)  
[The Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui) Left the Chair]  
IN THE COMMITTEE  
[The Chairperson (Hon. Philip Wanjohi) took the Chair]  
THE NAKURU COUNTY URBAN FOOD AND AGRICULTURE BILL NO. 3 OF 2021  
The Chair person  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Honorable Members welcome to the Committee of the 
Whole House and we will be guided by the following; Standing Order No.126. We will look at the 
clauses as printed, new clauses if any, Schedules, New Schedules , and Interpretations of the Bill, 
preamble and the title, the long title and finally look at the clauses provid ing for the citation for 
the Bill and its commencements.  Honorable Members welcome to The  Nakuru County Urban Food 
and Agriculture Bill No.3 of 2021, where we look at the clauses with amendments, those without 
amendments and the new clauses. We will start with the clauses without amendments.  
Clauses 3 , 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Philip Wanjohi):  Honorable Member s we have Clause 3 to 10. These 
ones h ave no amendments.  
(Question proposed that Clause s 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and  10 be part of the Bill)  
(Question put and agreed to)  
Clause 11  
The Chairperson (Hon. Philip Wanjohi ): Clause 11 has an amendment. Mover . 
MARCH 30, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Wilson Mwangi:  Thank you Chair. I propose that Clause 11 to be amended as is in the Order 
Paper  
(Question that Clause 11 be amended as indicated in the Order Paper proposed ) 
(Question that Clause 11 be amended as proposed put and agreed to)  
(Question that Clause 11 as amended  be part of the Bill put and agreed to)  
Clause 12  
The Chairperson (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Clause 12 has an amendment. Mover  
Hon. Wilson Mwangi:   I beg to move that clause 12 the be amended as is on the Order Paper 
(Question that Clause 12 be amended as indicated in the Order Paper proposed ) 
(Question that Clause 12 be amended as proposed put and agreed to ) 
(Question that Clause 12 as amended be part of the Bill put and agreed)  
Hon. Joseph Waweru:  Honorable  Chairperson , I am of a different opinion, I do not see why a 
farmer should be subjected to licensing not unless if the license is free  
The Chairperson (Hon. Phillip Wanjohi):  Hon. Waweru you are out of order;  this Bill was here 
yesterday for debate and you did not giv e your amendments.  
Hon. Joseph Waweru:  Okay then I cannot second  
The Chairperson (Hon. Phillip Wanjohi):   Let us continue, Hon. Chairperson who will second 
now that Hon. Waweru has declined  
Hon. Wilson Mwangi: … Malewa to second  
Hon. Josephat Murage: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I second.  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. Murage. I wish to repeat again that 
once we go through the procedure of a Bill as it is brought in the House and goes through an 
amendment, there is always time pro vided for in the Standing Orders which we are supposed to 
adhere to so that it can be included in the Bill.  
(Question that the New Schedule 12 (b) as indicated in the Order Paper be part of the Bill 
proposed)  
(Question that Clause 12b as proposed be part of the Bill put and agreed to)  
Clause 2   
The Chairperson  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Clause 2 has an amendment. The Mover  
MARCH 30, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Wilson Mwangi:  I beg to that Clause 2 be amended as is in the Order Paper  
(Question proposed that Clause 2 be amended as indicated in the Order Paper proposed)  
(Question that Clause 2 be amended as proposed put and agreed to ) 
(Question that Clause 2 as amended be part of the Bill put and agreed)  
 
Short Title  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): The Short Title has an amendment. The Mover  
Hon. Wilson Mwangi: Thank you Chair. I propose the short title to be amended as is in the Order 
Paper  
(Question that the Short Title be amended as indicated in the Order Paper proposed)  
(Question that the Short Title be amended as proposed put and agreed to)  
(Question that the Short Title as amended be part of the Bill put and agreed to)  
Long Title  
The Chairperson (Hon. Philip Wanjohi) : The Long Title has an amendment. The mover  
Hon. Wils on Mwangi : Thank you Chair. I propose the Long Title be amended as is in the Order 
Paper  
(Question that the Long Title be amended as indicated in the Order Paper proposed)  
(Question that the Long Title be amended as proposed put and agreed to)  
(Question that the Long Title as amended be part of the Bill put and agreed to)  
                                                PROGRESS REPORT  
               THE NAKURU COUNTY URBAN FOOD AND AGRICULTURE BILL NO. 3 OF 2021  
Hon. Wilson Mwangi: Thank you Chair , I beg to move that the Committee do report to the 
Assembly its consideration of the Nakuru County Urban Food and Agriculture Bill No. 3 of 
2021and its approval thereof with amendments.  
Chairperson (Hon Philip Wanjohi) Thank you; Hon. Members we are now through with the 
Committee of the Whole.  
I wish to put the question  
MARCH 30, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 (Question proposed that the committee do report to the House its consideration of the Nakuru 
County Urban Food and Agriculture Bill No. 3 of 2021 its approval with amendments ) 
(Question put and ag reed to ) 
(The House resumed)  
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui) in the chair]  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): The Chairperson  
The Chairperson (Hon. Philip Wanjohi ): Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker; I beg to report that the 
Committee of the Whole has considered the Nakuru County Urban Food and Agriculture Bill No 
3. of 2021 and its approval with amendments.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you; the mover  
Hon. Wilson Wachira : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker; I beg to move that the House do agree 
with the Committee on the said report. I now request Hon. Jane to second  
Hon. Jane Maina : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker Sir; I do second  
Thank you I now want to propose a question  
(Question proposed tha t the House do agree with the committee in the said report ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): The mover  
Hon. Wilson Wachira : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker; I now beg to move  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Order mo ver you should be coming in front here so 
that you can move at the right position  
Hon Wilson Wachira : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker , I now beg to move that the Nakuru County 
Urban Food and Agricultural Bill No 3. of 2021be now read a Third Time. 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Now I want to propose the question  
(Question proposed that the Nakuru County Urban Food and Agriculture Bill No 3 of 2021 be 
now read a Third Time) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(The Nakuru County Urban Food and Agriculture Bill No 3. 0f 2021was accordingly  read a 
Third Time) 
ADJOURNMENT  
MARCH 30, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 This House stands adjourned until 2.30 in the afternoon.  
(The House rose at 11.00am ) 
 
 
 
 
  
 