COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 20 th September, 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:15 AM 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) in the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
NOTICE(S) OF MOTION  
AUDITORS GENERAL REPORT  ON THE NAKURU WATER AND SANITATION SERVICES 
COMPANY LIMITED  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  We have a Notice  of Motion  from the Chairperson  of the 
Committee  on Public Accounts and Investment . 
Hon. Robert Ruto: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. On behalf of the Chairperson  of Public Accounts 
and Investment Committee, I wish to table the Report,  THAT  this House adapts the Report  of 
Committee on Public Accounts and Investment on the Report  of the Auditor General on the 
Financial Statements of Nakuru Water Sanitation Service Company Limited of Nakuru County for 
the year ended 30thJune, 2021.  
NOTICE(S) OF MOTION  
AUDITORS GENERAL REPORT  ON NAKURU RURAL WATER AND SANITA TION  COMPANY 
LIMITED OF NAKURU COUNTY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30THJUNE, 2020.  
Hon. Robert Ruto: Also, I wish to table on behalf of the Chair person  that this House adapts the 
Report  of the Committee on County Public Accounts and Investment on the Report  of the Auditor 
General on the Financial Statement of the Nakuru Rural Water and Sanit ation  Company Limited 
of Nakuru County for the year ended 30thJune, 2020.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Ruto . 
MOTION  
ICT AND E -GOVERNMENT REPORT  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Motion by Hon. Hezy Kung’u, Chairperson 
Committee on ICT AND e -Government.  
Hon. Hezy Kung’u: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to move a Motion on a Report  of ICT and 
e-Government Committee. The Report  on the visit to Menengai Digital Center held on 26thJuly, 
2023.  
 
 
COMMITTEE MANDATE  
The Sectoral Committee on ICT and e -Government is established under the Second Schedule of 
the Nakuru County Standing Orders and is mandated to deal with all matters relating to Access,  
Development, Use and Skill in ICT and e -Government. Access to information for PWDs.  
 
OBJECTIVE OF THE VISIT  
The objective of the visit was to:  
1. Check on the status of service delivery at the Digital Center.  
Check on the achievement s of the D igital Center, challenges and areas of improvement as far as 
delivery of services is concerned.  
BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON MENENGAI DIGITAL CENTER  
Menengai Digital Center is located at Menengai East Ward, Nakuru East Sub County, Nakuru 
County. The Menengai Social Hall Dias is partitioned to create space for the Menengai Digital 
Center. It is where  Youth between the ages of 22 -35years are trained on basic Computer Packages , 
Data Analysis, Essential Skills, Community Sessions , Comprehensive Curriculum and Mentorship 
Program . The training is fully -sponsored by the County Government of Nakuru. The objective of 
this partnership is geared towards addressing unemployment challenges among the Youth through 
ICT in Nakuru County.  
 
Menengai Digital Center started in 2022 and 250 youth graduated having qualified and were issued 
with Certificates . However, the In-Charge Mr. David Opingo stated that the ICT Hub is not 
registered.  There is an exchange program between Generation Kenya, Menengai Digital Center 
and Shabaab Digital Center . Currently the Digital Center has a total of 198 students but do not 
have a permanent teacher . However , there are five attaches from Kabarak University, Karatina 
University and Jomo Kenyatta University who are attached to train the Students  in the Digital 
Center.  
Menengai Digital Center program operates in three shifts as follows;  
i. 1st shift is at 10.00am - 12.00pm,  
ii. 2nd shift is at 12.00pm - 2.00pm  
iii. 3rd shift is at 2.00pm - 4.00pm.  
Nakuru County has 7 Digital Centers namely: Shabaab, Kuresoi South, Subukia, Rongai, 
Menengai East, Kagoto and Naivasha which are spread across the County and are also running 
similar programs. The objective of the Digital Centers is to provide a platform for  youth to train, 
work  online and provide space for Innovations  and Research  at no cost, thus a way of reducing 
youth unemployment.  
COMMITTEE FINDINGS AND OBSERVATIONS.  
The following are the Findings and Observations  that were highlighted by the  Committee and the 
In-Charge Officer Mr. David Opingo of the Menengai Digital Center during the visit;  
1. The ICT Hub is located inside Menengai Social HALL at the partitioned dais with one Server 
Room . However, the ICT Hub is not registered.  
2. Menengai Digital Center has 35 computers , out of which 31 are fully functional and online  
while 4 computers are not functional due to Hardware  problems.  
3. The Digital Center has one Internet Service provider with a good Software for Transcribing.  
4. The Training  program is free to youth between 22 -35 years courtesy of the County Government 
of Nakuru.  
5. The facility has been able to mentor 250 youth to date.  
6. Currently the Digital Center has 5 Attaches who train the students.  
7. The Center experiences frequent Internet instability.  
8. The ICT Hub was congested due to limited space hence lack of proper operation   
9.  Lack of a Board (Membership) to manage the Digital Center and permanent Teachers.  
10. There is an Exchange Program between Generation Kenya, the Menengai Digital Center and 
Shabaab Digital Center.  
11. The ICT Hub does not have a projector.  
 
COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS  
From the above  Observations , the Committee made the following Recommendations;  
1. That, the In -charge Mr. David Opingo should work closely with the Director  ICT to fast -track 
repair of the 4 non -functional Computers.  
2. That, the County Government of Nakuru should ensure contracting two Internet Service 
Providers  who will be resourceful to curb internet instability.  
3. The County Government of Nakuru should consider hiring of two permanent teachers  to be 
attached to Menengai Digital Center and a Board of Management.  
4. That, the County Government of Nakuru should consider expanding the Digital Center by 
constructing a new modern structure.  
5. The County Government of Nakuru to consider registering Menengai Digital Center so that 
qualified students  can be issued with Accredited Certificates . 
6. The County Government of Nakuru to consider facilitating Menengai Digital Center with a 
Projector.  
 
I wish to thank Members of this Committee for their commitment during the Committee visit to 
Menengai Digital Center, held on 26thJuly, 2023 . Also, I want to thank the Office of the Speaker 
and the Clerk for their facilitation during the visit.  
I move the Motion and I would like to ask Hon. Kirui to second the Motion . 
 
Hon. Bernard  Kirui: Thank y ou Mr. Speaker sir. I do second . Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Motion is properly seconded and it is open for 
debate . The Honorable Member for Maai Mahiu Ward . 
 
Hon. Eliud Chege: Thank you Mr. Speake r sir. First , I would like to thank the Committee on ICT 
and e-Government for the good work they did. I was among the people who visited that Digital 
Hub and as the Committee recommended, there are several issues that I would like to touch on and 
make this House be aware. One, in that Digital Center , there is a team that is called Generation 
Kenya that is partnering with our County. They are experiencing a lot of problems and I think that 
as a County, we have a role and a duty  to assist and to offer any help to those people who are 
willing to partner and work with us Mr. Speaker. They had two teachers in a class, and they were 
very congested. As the Committee has just recommended, the teache r does not even have a 
Projector , he is trying to train the student s using a book which is giving them a very hard time. 
That recommendation of providing that Digital Center with a Projector  is very crucial. They are 
also experiencing unstable internet which is a big challenge. If you look at the youth  who are there, 
I happen ed to interview some of them and they have come all the way from Njoro. One of them 
was claiming that she came on foot all the way from Njoro. That is a clear indication that those 
students are very much willing to learn and we have a role to facilitate and help them to our level 
best.  
 
We also observed that they had 31 computers and four were not functioning so we recommended 
that at least something should be done .  We can also do a modern Digital Class because the current 
learning sittin g arrangement is  they learn in one round table. If you look at our Country  right now, 
we are running a Digital Countr y and also our youth are getting jobs outside our Country  through 
digital training and the level of unemployment i n our Country is very high . So, if we cannot 
facilitate those programs in computer  then we will be failing as a County . 
 
I would like to thank our Chairperson  for that determination and also the Members. I wish that all 
recommendations that were recommended by this Committee will be considered. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Member for Maai Mahiu. The Hon. Member 
for Nakuru East.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this chance. First and 
foremost,  I would like to commend the good work done  by the ICT and e-Government Committee. 
They  have highlighted some issues which are of concern and one of the issues  is the registration 
of the ICT Hub. In the presentation, I heard the Chairperson saying that there are some students 
who were given certificates , so I wonder if the Center has not been registered is that certificate 
really authentic , and is it recogni sed by other Bodies ? They do not even have a permanent teacher  
or Tutor.  I think we should have a clear roadmap from the ICT Department . They need to tell us 
if this issue of ICT Hubs was an afterthought or they have a plan because I understand that even 
the National G overnment from what the Presiden t said the other day is to establish ICT Centers in 
each and every Ward . They should use what we have as a parameter or to measure what is going 
to be done and see the successes that have been  achieved. We can see that four of their computers 
are broken down and the internet provision is not sufficient. The Committee needs to do a lot of 
work by engaging the CEC from the relevant Department  to know the roadmap that they have 
because having heard what my colleague from Maai Mahiu has said , some came all the way from 
Njoro on foot so that they can get free service that is being offered.  
I also want to urge the Nakuru County  Government to establish these ICT Centers in other Sub 
Counties so that we can give service to other deserving youth especially those coming from Njoro. 
They might want to come to town and I understand now that life has become difficult especially 
on transport. We ne ed to domesticate these things at  Ward level. The Chairperson  ICT has a lot of 
work. He needs to give the House a road map from that Department . Thank you and that is my 
take.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Olkaria.  
Hon. Peter Palanga : Thank you Mr. Speaker for allowing me to contribute to this. I must 
appreciate the...  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the order the Hon. Member for Maai Mahiu?  
Hon. Eliud Chege : Mr. Speaker I think when we were labelling these tables in this House we had 
enough reasons and in case any person is absent in the House no one should assume their seats. I 
can see Honorable  Palang ’a is in the  Speaker’s Panel Seat and also other Hon orable  Members. 
They should resume their  Seats as in the order of this House , please Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): That is noted. The Hon. Member for Olkaria are you aware that 
you are seated in the space for the Speaker’s Panel?  
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to confirm that I am not even aware as to 
where I am seated but what I am aware of is that I am within the precinct  of the Assembly and I 
had not read where I am seated.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Olkaria, the way you are not able to sit at 
a place designated for say the Deputy Speaker or Leader of Majority Party is the same way that 
you are not able to sit at a place that is not designated for let us say Chairperson  for Lands or the 
Honorable  Member for Olkaria. We are going to allow you to sit there this  Morning but in the 
Afternoon Session, kindly before you sit, confirm the spaces designated to what category of 
Members.  
Hon. Peter Palang ’a: Thank you honorable  Speaker, I am most obliged and advised accordingly 
and learning is a process , no one is well versed with every information so I am well guided. I am 
happy that Hon orable  Member who is my Vice Chair person  seated on the other side could see 
where I am seated .  I think that I am equally advised that before I assume my seat in the next 
session I will have to adhere to that. I had just stood up to make some contribution to this noble 
Report  that has been presented to us b y the able Chairperson  for ICT and e-Government.  
I do not recall any other time that we have received a Report  from this Department  but again that 
does not mean that we have not had any Report  there before , but just debating on this particular 
Report , I would like to applaud the Committee and its membership for the job well done. When 
such a Report  is tabled in this House they are meant to give us a platform and even to foster for 
future developments. Out of this Report , I will not get into the observations as such but I will just 
get to the recommendatio ns of course emanating from the observations.  
It is worth noting that a fully -fledged  facility like that does not have any  teacher permanently hired 
by the County Government . Noting that we only have some  teachers coming from the Universities  
around which again we do not know the mode of engagement with these particular teacher s if they 
are not permanently hired. I do not know whether there  could be some payment to that effect but 
then that brings us to the need to have to transit from the  colonial era to digital era. I have heard 
some Members saying that the ancient time of operating is not the way things are. Of course  we 
have moved to the digital era and there  is need to have hired teachers. Picking up from where the 
Honorable  Member from Me nengai had said where for example , there were some Certificates  
issued to some  students whereas again the  Institution had not been registered. We  also need to be 
very cautious enough  so that we do not subject our youth to a process where by the end of it , it is 
not like legally abiding or authentic. You know like now students  having undertaken the training 
up to the point they are issued the Certificates  but again the rationale of the authenticity of the  
Institution is in question. That  is a matter that we need to check seriously that going forward we 
do not subject our students to such  Institutions only to find that the  Institutions are not registered.  
I have also heard that  which again  is in the public domain , we are moving to digitali sing all the 
Urban Centers within the Country  not only just within the County. That gives us a platform on 
how and what is it that we need to do to ensure that we domesticate these kinds of facilities  to 
respective arears in our respective Counties .  
Recently like a Mont h or two  weeks ago, there was an ICT Center that was launched within my 
Ward by the Cabinet Secretary Eliud Owalo and I think  this should be replicated to many other 
areas. Of course  this gives a platform for our youth to seek for employment online  and all that. I 
want to echo and support that indeed the findings are very good and Mr. Chair person  do not get 
tired of going out to other facilities and even ensuring we make this as a bench mark to ensure that 
this Department  is adequately funded Mr. Chairperson,  because again if you look into the budget 
previously, it is like some Department s are not really funded at the expense of other Department s. 
We need to balance as a House to ensure that such Department s equally receive some equitable 
funding to operationa lise these Department s. Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Hon orable  Member for Malewa . 
Hon. Francis Kuria:  Thank you Hon. Speaker , first is to commend the good job by the 
Committee. I rise to support this Motion . The word itself, “Menengai Digital Centre ”, means there 
is transformation from the previous regime to the new regime. Also, the word still, “digital, ” means 
that we are shifting from the previous era to a new era and my support is  our youth need to be 
educated so that they can have the knowledge and technical know -how to handle this. Remember 
the world where we are is more digitali sed and we are using the Networking System . Therefore, 
as I support the Motion, urge the Chairperson  that he need s to push the Department  so that they 
can get more funds so that the facilitation of the equipment in that facility can be on the higher 
side and that the services that are being offered there can be fully facilitated. Thank you Hon. 
Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Hon. Member for London Ward . 
Hon. Bernard Gatuso:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity so that I can also 
give my input. N umber  one is to commend the Committee on ICT and  e-Government for the good 
job that they have been able to do. I think we are moving towards a Global Village where ICT will 
be widely used. You can be able to do business when you are in this Country with other Countrie s. 
Having such Centers  will be equip our people and prepare our young generation so that they can 
transact business with other Partners  in the World.  
I believe going by what we were able to see the other day where there was recruitment of Military 
Officers  or Jeshi , I think majority of the recruits that went for the exercise, they needed 300 
individuals so that they can offer services in military but I believe to some extent, with such kind 
of unemployment status in this Country , I believe technology is the way to go. To some extent, 
because we have been interacting with different individuals within our communities, I  am believer 
in this industry of technology . We have been able to get quite a good number of people who have 
been able to earn a living through such a thing.  
So Members , especially elected Member s, we take this as a challenge and  set such facilities in our 
Wards so that we can ease movement of our young generation from one Ward to the other , 
Considering the cost of living in terms of movement and transport has gone high , I believe that is 
one way we can help our people. The other thing is that ICT is a component that is being supported 
by the Head of State Dr. William Samoe Ruto, the President of the Republic of Kenya whereby in 
so many occasions he has been try ing to say that we need to have such facilities at Ward  level so 
that we can help our people.  
In terms of  Education where Hon orable  Nene can confirm that majority of students  are doing 
online learning and considering that we are working from different parts of this Countr y where to 
some extent, people are not able to go to school, colleges considering that their places of 
employment are far from such facilities. So, having these facilities will equip our people so that 
they can as much as they get opportunities in terms of working, they can learn from such facilities. 
To some extent, I believe this is a good Report  whereby the Implementation Committee is 
supposed to take a step and ensure that the Department  will implement each and every Report  that 
has been passed in this House instead  of being put on the shelves where we are not getting value 
for the Committee  sitting down and passing such kind of a Report . Lastly, is to say that Technology  
is the way to go, let us embrace it and unanimously as this House support the Report . Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Hon. Member for Flamingo . 
Hon. David Muraya:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this 
Motion  of ICT and e-Government. First, I would like to commend the Committee led by the 
Chairperson  for this action they have decided t ake.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that I am very 
happy to see that the ICT Hub is located within Menengai and this is very good because it can 
serve so many people,  students that are within that locality. We have Bondeni, Flamingo and other 
villages that we have huge populatio n who are vulnerable lives and cannot afford for the ir Children 
to go be educated on how to use those computers. So, on observation by the Committee , the ICT 
hub do not have a Projector which was one of their observation and within the recommendation, I 
have seen that the Committee  has recommended that the Projector  must be bought. So, I also look 
at this point no.4 in the observation that the Training Program is free for the youth aged between 
22-35 years , courtesy of the County Government which is highly commendable Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to also refer  to the recommendation that within Menengai Social Hall, we have very 
big space wh ere we can build that Hub and I am very happy because already this has been brought 
before us here and what I would like to say is to support this Motion  fully  so that our children  can 
learn and have  get ideas on how to do  Internet Business. Thank you Mr. Speaker, I support.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon orable  Member of Flamingo . Chair man, as 
Members  were discussing this Report , there are areas that clarity needs to be made and as such, 
you need to have an urgent meeting that is in the next two  weeks between the Committee  and the 
Department  and the area  MCA to see what areas of cooperation exist , because  now it has been said  
that they are the partners ; we are not  sure whether they are the partners  who provide  the 
Computers’ Hardware , and who pays the Instructors . On another point we have seen that there are 
no teachers or Instructors.  Then  they are housed in a Social Hall . So you may need to d uring that 
meeting , to bring it out ; was it properly thought from the start or maybe it  is a project that was 
boarded along the way. So, have that urgent meeting so that you can have  very deliberate point of 
action even moving to the future. I am going to call it to question . 
(Question proposed that this House adopts the Report  of the Committee  on ICT and e -
Government on the site visit to Menengai Digital Centre on 25th July, 2023 .) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned until 2.30 this afternoon.  
The House rose at 10.55 AM 
 
 
 
 
 
 