APRIL 5, 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday, 5th   April 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met a t 10: 05a m 
[The Deput y Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui) i n the Chair ] 
PRAYER  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ): Good morning honorable  Member s, welcome to the  
morning session. Clerk next order.  
PAPER  
HEALTH COMMITTEE REPORT THE NAKURU COUNTY COMMUNITY HEALTH SERVICE  
 BILL NO. 9 OF 2021  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ): We have a  Paper to be laid by the Chairperson  for 
the Committee  on Health Services . Chairperson Health Services Committee  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Honorable Deputy Speaker , I rise to lay the report of the 
Committee  on Health Services on the Nakuru County Community Health Service Bill no. 9 of 
2021. I beg to lay.  
                                                   (The report was laid on the table)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui ): Thank you, next order.  
BILL  
                THE NAKURU COUNTY COMMUNITY HEALTH SERVICES BILL NO. 9 OF 2021  
                                                                         (SECOND READING ) 
(By leave of the  House ) 
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Honorable Deputy Speaker , I rise to move the Motio n; 
THAT  the Nakuru County Community Health Service Bill No.  9 of 2021 be now read a Second 
Time. This Bill is one of the Bills that are very critical in our Health Department . Our  Health 
Department is arranged in such a manner that it is clustered that level one are the Community 
APRIL 5, 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Health Volunteer (CHVs ). These people are not recognized in anyway. There are no laws or 
policies that guide  them to operate in our County.  
We have received a lot memorandum  from the members of the public and majorly different clusters 
of Community Health Volunteers requesting  us to consider their welfare and to consider their 
operations and the way they have been operating in our Count y. Therefore, as Committee, we sat 
down and we felt that it was in order for us to consider them and to make them be an chored  in the 
law so that  whenever they will be operating, they can be operating effectively for they will be 
having some guiding principles that can guide them whe never they are doing their work . 
This Bill entails the issues of their rights, their responsibilities and it caveats them on what they 
cannot  do. This Bi ll is one of the  Bills that is very critical and it one that will support the Health 
Departmen t in our  County.  
The Community Health Volunteers usually link the patients with the health facilities and therefore 
this Bill majorly addresses their welfare - That is their stipends, the allowances that are supposed 
to be given by the  County . You realize  that there has been some pilot progra ms to assist the people 
who have been volunteering and to some exten t some of them did not receive their stipends,  as it 
was required.  
As a Committee,  we felt that it was prudent for us to come with the law or legislate on that gap 
that has been exi sting so that when we are going through the budget cycles, we should consider  
them. And that could only be possible if there was some policies or guidelines or legislations that 
is requesting the executive to make sure that they have paid them something small, so that they 
can be able to operate effectively.  
Also you realise that during this time, there has been some psychological issues that have been 
affecting our communities. And by so doing, the only persons that are there actually to link our 
youth into our youth friendly centers, or even into our facilities. It is the CHVs. A nd therefore, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as the population is growing, the medical services is required. The only person 
who can be a link and who can be supporting such kind of things is the CHVs. And therefore, I 
beg to move the Motion that this Bill  be read  for the second time and I request Hon. Wajeff that is 
Hon. Mwangi from Menengai East to second the Motion. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
Hon. Wilson  Mwangi:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to second the Motion. As you know, 
we have been having a lot o f funds that have been given out in the Health Services. One of the 
issues that this Bill will be able to relay on is about the quality of the health services in our County. 
And, also there will be good coordination that this Bill will be able to enhance t hat is from the 
National Government policies, and the County Government policies.  
We will be able to monitor and evaluate the health services that we are going to give to our people. 
It has touched on the issues of the Community Health Volunteers. We have been having a very big 
problem with those members of the public who have been volunteering, and they are not being 
APRIL 5, 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 paid. So that gap will be able to be filled, and the Bill will be able to make s ure that our members 
of the CHVs  will be able to be compensat ed for the good work they usually do to our community. 
So that  is why I am seconding the Motion  Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui):  Thank you honorable and now I want to propose that 
the Nakuru County Community Health Services Bill No. 9 of 2021  be now read a Second Time .  
                                                             (Question proposed)  
The debate is open for all to contribute, welcome honorable Members. Okay, honorable Mwangi 
then I come to Honorable Chair for Environment.  
Hon. Si mon Mwangi:  Mr. Deputy Speaker I just want to seek first of all before I contribute, I 
want to seek your guidance. I have the amendment. Yes. But the original Bill, I wish we could 
have it so that we are also able to go through what we are amending.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui):  I think the original Bill is available but  maybe the 
copies are less but you can have one because you want to contribute on that. Meanwhile, I would 
like to give to Hon. Chair for Environment to contribute.  
Hon. Jo seph Kamanu : Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. May I commend the Chair and the 
Committee at large for the proposals to amend the original Bill. This will bring sanity and ensure 
that we have quality services. I am sure we have a number of people known as C ommunity Health 
Volunteers. They have been volunteering but some of them have not been trained. We need a lot 
of capacity building to ensure that they provide prudent and efficient services to the people they 
attend to. Some of our areas are not covered or  under any health facility proximity. We are facing 
some challenges, especially in the rural areas where we have very few health facilities. Due to 
financial constraints, we have not been able to construct and also equip and staff the health 
facilities. I am sure this one will take us a long way to ensure that areas that are not covered by the 
trained personnel as we capacity build the current Community Health Volunteers.  
For example, we have a number of home deliveries and even some expectant mothers do n ot attend 
the anti -natal clinics. Through the guidance and wise counsel of the Community Health 
Volunteers, I am sure we will contain the infant mortality rate within the County. I am sure we 
also have the issue of the stipend for the Community Health Volu nteers and I am sure this one will 
also be addressed. I do support the proposal and also the Motion but I am sure that t he County will 
action once ame nded, proposed and ascended to A ct actively and also involve the necessary 
personn el to ensure that we cov er large  part of this County. I do support.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you Hon. Chair for Environment. Yes Hon. 
Mbae.  
Hon. Peter Mbae: Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion and the Bill at 
large. We have come a long way. The whole issue about Community Health Services and workers 
APRIL 5, 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 came into light during the issue of the Covid -19 disease. What is key is that when we  were being 
told to get in and get lost and remain indoors, these workers were being told to go out there and 
take care of those cases of Corona. They were being asked to go, and risk their lives. You are being 
asked to go bury the dead who have been affec ted by Covid -19. If there is something this Assembly 
has done in this terms of this Government is to secure the welfare of the Community Health 
Workers. This is a big issue for the record. I want to recommend the Chair and the Committee and 
some of our par tners; I know we have a number of partners who have really worked to make sure 
that this dream comes true. What is key also to  that t his Assembly Mr. Deputy Speaker is that we 
were able to secure at least 2000 for all the 3620 volunteers across the County.  Was passed in this 
Assembly which started to be paid in October last year up to now it is on. One thing I wish urge 
this House again and as a Member of the Budget Committee, when we come back here is to make 
sure that the allocation is sustained. However,  now what is important in this Bill is that it has been 
secured in the law, the stipend is secured in the law.  
Additionally it is not fair to ask Community Health Volunteers to go look for the sick people when 
they too are sick. In this Bill, we are going  to have recommendations beginning this July that there 
is going to be NHIF cover for each of the Community Health Volunteers and also to make sure 
they are catered for in terms of equipment, facilitation, the badges, gadgets, first aid kits. That is 
what is key in this law.  
Therefore I wish to support the few amendments which have been made of course in consultation 
with all the players to make sure the Bill does not have any legal loopholes and all that. I seek to 
second. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you Hon. Mbae for further explanation on the 
same. Hon. John Ndonyo.  
Hon. John Ndonyo:  Asante sana Bw. Naibu wa Spika kwa sababu ya  Chairman wetu wa  Health 
nikiwa  Member katika ile Kamati ya  Health, mimi nimeshukuru siku ya leo sab abu kwa kweli hata 
mtu anapochaguliwa na asijichague wewe mwenyewe, huwezi fanya kazi.  Hawa watu hata mimi 
nataka niunge mkono na ni vizuri kuwafikiria sana. Wakati mmoja kulikuwa  Corona, kuna mmoja 
alipata kijiji kimoja watu wameambukizwa na akajitolea ku wasaidia na kwa kuwahakikishia 
katika harakati ya kuwasaidia, kunao wawili waliaga  ambao ni  volunteers. Naunga mkono 
kwamba ni vizuri sana tunapoona mtu wa kujitolea. Mtu wa kujitolea anasema kufa au kupona na 
ndiposa naunga mkono hao watu washughulikiwe v izuri tena kwa undani. Leo asubuhi nilikutana 
nao walikuja pahali kwa masomo kidogo na hawakuwa hata na  fare. Ilibidi niwalipie ili waweze 
kusoma masomo ya kujitolea. Ukiona mtu anatoka kwake na hana  fare na amejitolea ili akanyage 
miguuu, tuangalie sana h ili jambo. Shukrani nimeunga hii Mswada mkono kabisa. Asante  Deputy 
Speaker sir.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you Hon. John Ndonyo for your contributions. 
Now I want to give Hon. Mwangi  
APRIL 5, 2022                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 Hon. Si mon Mwangi:  Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker. Firs t of all I want to congratulate the 
Committee through the chair for a job well done. I think the Community Health volunteers or 
workers have actually  been  ignored for a very long time. We could see what they wou ld do 
especially during the 2021/2022  Covid p andemic. They were of great help to our community. With 
this Bill, I believe we will give them more moral support and encourage them to do more. My only 
hope is that as we head towards making the budget for the next financial year, I hope they will be 
considered actually for this stipend because in most cases, you will find them during funerals or 
any community activity, you will find them being around and at the end of the day, it ends up being 
our responsibility as elected leaders to see what we can give them even for lunch. They are never 
considered and with this Bill it will come to fruition and they will start getting something to 
encourage them to do more. Therefore Mr Deputy Speaker I arise to support this motion and also 
to thank the committee for co ming up with this Bill. Thank you Mr Deputy Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Samuel Tonui): Thank you and now it is my opportunity to propose 
a question  
(Question proposed that the Nakuru County Health Service B ill No.9 of 2021 be now read a 
Second T ime) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(The Nakuru County Health Service B ill No.9 of 2021was accordingly read a Second T ime) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Before we adjourn, I want to announce that the Liaison Committee members should liaise with the 
committee Clerk on the pending a ssignments. This House stands adjourned until 2.30 in the 
afternoon  
(The House rose at 11.05 am ) 
 
 
 
 