COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU
THE HANSARD
Thursday 29th June, 2023
Assembly Building
The House Met At 2.15PM
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): In the Chair].
PRAYER
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR.
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): I want to recognise the presence of Cheptwich Primary School from Kiptagich Ward, the pupils at the Assembly’s Gallery. 
We want to extend our welcome to you. This is your House, and we execute matters in this House that affect the residents of this County. So karibuni sana.
MOTION
REDUCE THE PUBLICATION PERIOD OF THE NAKURU COUNTY APPROPRIATION BILL NO. 6 OF 2023 TO ONE DAY
Thank you. That is a Procedural Motion by the honorable Chairperson, Committee on Budget and Appropriations. The Honorable Alex Mbugua.
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir. I rise on a Procedural Motion that notwithstanding the provision of Standing Order 119, this House resolves to reduce the publication period of the Nakuru County Appropriation Bill number 6 of 2023 to one day. 
Mr. Speaker sir, as you realise that any money Bill requires seven days period for this publication. Mr. Speaker at the moment, we are moving to the end of this Financial Year. We are beginning another Financial Year Mr. Speaker sir in the less than 40 hours Mr. Speaker sir, we shall be moving and crossing to the next Financial Year. 
Mr. Speaker Sir, Nakuru County should be one of the Counties that will not be termed or recorded as the County that did not pass this Bill to do with this money or the Appropriation Bill in time Mr. Speaker. I know that these Honourable Members are eager to know what lies within the Budget, and even for the National Assembly and the National Government to start raising the funds that can help our people. 
Mr. Speaker, you will find that even within this House Mr. Speaker sir, we have students and pupils who have traveled far and wide to come and observe how laws or how the Budget is passed in this Assembly. And it will be the joy of these students and pupils to go back to their homes knowing that the procedures and everything that happens within this Assembly has fruitfully done something good to them. 
Mr. Speaker sir, I wish to call upon honorable Rose from Gilgil to second the Motion. Thank you. 
Hon. Rose Njoroge: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I second the Motion.
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Motion is seconded. Therefore the Motion is that notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order 119, this House resolves to reduce the publication period of the Nakuru County Appropriation Bill number 6 of 2023 to one day. The Motion is open for debate. The Honourable Member for Viwandani.
Hon.  Joseph Muraya: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I wish also to welcome the pupils from Cheptwich, feel much welcome. Again Mr. Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. And I think as the Chair Budget has elaborated the matter, the reason why we need to reduce the days of publication, I think Mr. Speaker it is quite in order and also we would not like our County to be left behind in terms of development and also budget appropriation. 
So I support that we reduce the period so that we can have continuity of work being done in our County. Thank you Mr. Speaker.
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Honourable Member from Viwandani. The Honorable Member from Nakuru East.
Hon. Anthony Kanyere: Asante sana Bwana Spika. Nachukua nafasi hii kuwakaribisha wanafunzi kutoka Kiptagich na pia nisema naunga mkono uchapishaji wa makadirio ya fedha za Kaunti. Nakama vile tulijadiliana asubuhi tuliona kuna manufaa mengi sana katika makadirio hayo na tukaona ni vyema iharakishwe ili wananchi wa Nakuru waweze kupata ile dhamana ya kuwa na Serikali ya Kaunti.. Kwa hivyo mimi nasimama kuunga mkono kwamba hiyo process iharakiswe kidogo.
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honorable Member from Ndundori, Hon. Gathuita.
Hon. James Mwangi: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, first I want to welcome the students from Kiptagich Ward to this County Assembly; it is their Assembly. I want to support the reduction of publication period for the Nakuru County Appropriation Bill, so that we can have it passed and in concurrent year, it can be used. This is because it is affecting the budget that we want to do the prospective projects that affect our Wards and even the projects that align with our Governor Susan Kihika so that we can deliver as a House and as a County. I want to assure students from Kiptagich that in this budget we have looked into the Education Sector even in our bursaries in Kiptagich. I have seen that there is a lot of improvement in bursary allocation and I want to support it. Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Hon. Joseph Muraya: Mr. Speaker there is a point of clarification that I need from you. 
The Speaker (Hon. Joseph Muraya): What clarification?
Hon. Joseph Muraya: Mr. Speaker you gave a direction here on matters of decorum but I can see some Members here who are out of order and they are not in decorum like Hon. Kamau from Kihingo. He is not properly dressed to be in this House. You gave a direction on how we shall be coming here, it is either you have changed or these people are ignoring your ruling.
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): On that the Minority Whip take charge and make sure that the Member that has been mentioned is in decorum if not then enforce. The Hon. Member for Olkaria.
Hon. Peter Palang’a: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I just want to inform the House and to remind ourselves that we are on a Procedural Motion to reduce the number of publication and the number of days to one day. I learnt that the Hon. Member was indulging into the budget issues which again was not in relation to the discussion of the day in terms of it being a Procedural Motion so I felt with your permission that I should remind Hon. Member on that.
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Member for Olkaria. The Hon. Member for Kiptagich, Hon. Rose.
 Hon. Rose Chepkoech: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Let me first welcome teachers and pupils from Cheptwich primary that is in Kiptagich Ward and for the Motion allow me to support the Motion to reduce the days of publication to avoid delays of budget because we know that when the budget delays many development projects will not be done in our Wards. Thank you.
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Robert Langat.
Hon. Robert Langat: Thank you Mr. Speaker. Before I continue I would also like to welcome the pupil Financial Year will be closed by tomorrow midnight and as the Chair Budget had initially said that we have some few hours so it is in order and I support. We all know the budget is indeed very important and we need to support it so that we can develop our County. Thank you so much.
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member from Kuresoi South.
Hon Everlyne Chepkirui: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker for this chance you have given me to contribute towards this Motion this afternoon. Let me also take this opportunity to welcome the pupils and teachers from Cheptwich primary. The school is a ridge across my home and I really want to welcome them to this Assembly any time, not only today but whenever they visit Nakuru. Secondly, I would like to support the Motion this afternoon that we reduce the time because all these Members have commented that time is not on our side and therefore we should reduce the number of days. Thank you.
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thankyou Hon. Everlyne. I now want to put it to question that notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order 119, this House resolves to reduce the publication period of the Nakuru County Appropriation Bill no.6 of 2023 to one day.  
(Question put and agreed to)
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Next order! The Hon. Chair for Budget and Appropriations you want to table?
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Yes. Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I present to the Assembly the Kenya Gazette Supplement No.7 Nakuru County Bill No.6 of 2023. Mr. Speaker I table the Bill in the Assembly. Thank you.
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Chair. The Bill now stands committed to the Committee on Budget and Appropriations. Honourable Members remember that we are coming back at 3pm for further processing of the business before the House.
ADJOURNMENT
Honourable Members, this House stands adjourned until today at 3pm.
The House rose at 2:30 pm.

