COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 7th November, 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House Met At 03:10 P M 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): In the Chair].  
PRAYERS  
MOTION  
VISIT TO SEED SAVERS NETWORK -KENYA.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage) There is a Motion from Hon. Isabella Makori, 
the Chairperson Committee on Agriculture.  
MOTION  
SEED SAVERS NETWORK -KENYA  
Hon. Isabella Makori:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  THAT  this House adopts the Repo rt 
of the Committee on Agriculture on the visit to The Seed Savers Network -Kenya laid on the Table 
of the Assembly today during the Morning S itting . 
Mr. Temporary Speaker , The Seed Savers Network is a National Grassroots Farmers Organization 
located along the Nakuru -Nairobi Highway, 600 Meters from Lake Elementaita.  Its mission  is to 
conserve Agri -Biodiversity by strengthening Farming Communities to utili se local varieties of 
Seed Systems for improving seed access and enhanced food and National Security. The Committee 
visited Seed Savers Network and came up with some Findings  and Observations.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , Seed Savers Network - Kenya was registered in 2009. The Network  has 
grown to more than 66,000 Farmers , conserving Agricultural Biodiversity across the  Country and 
has 3000 Farmers and groups.  The impact of Seed Savers is as follows ; 58 000 Farmers have been 
trained , 43 established Seed Banks, 80 D ocumented Local Crop V arieties , 35 Documented Roast 
Crop Varieties, and 300 Kitchen Gardens established .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , at the Seed Bank is where seedlings are stored and t his assists farmer s in 
to get local  seeds that are not available in Seed Companies or Agro -Vets.  At the Se ed Bank, before 
the seeds are stored, the  Seed Manager receives the seeds, and cooling and drying is done. Farmers 
are trained to establish their own Seed Bank at the community level.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , in Nakuru County , Seed S avers is working with farmers from Subukia, 
Lanet, Njoro and Naivasha . Concerning  Food Safety , it was noted that the safety of our food is 
threatening, mainly because of the pesticides used in day  to day farming. Food Safety starts from 
production , all the way  to marketing and consumption . Mr. Temporary Speaker , Research shows 
that there is limited information on the Pesticides D atabase and more on Toxicity Levels.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , Kenya imports pesticides from the European Union, China, and India. 
And report s praise Syngenta as the Leader of the Pesticides Market, with 20% of the Market Share . 
Pesticides have effects on our Environment, Water Sources, Groundwater , and Chronic Health . 
Pesticide s also cause cancer  and are toxic to Natural Resources like bees. 
Mr. Temporary Speaker , improper use of Pesticide s results in non -compliance with Quality and 
Safety Standards . Farmers should be fully capacitated to adopt modern and efficient food 
technologies . Agro -Ecology  has an element of guiding the transition to a Sustainable Food and 
Agricultural System . 
Mr. Temporary Speaker , the Committee had some Recommendations that: - 
i. That the Department of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Cooperatives should 
inculcate integrated Pest Management Programs , enhance Good Agricultural Practices, and 
formulate regulations for the Nurseries  on safe use of Pesticides.  
ii. The Department of Agriculture , Livestock, Fisheries  and Cooperative s should sensiti se 
farmers to embrace Organic Farming.  
iii. The Department of Agriculture , Livestock, Fisheries and Cooperatives should enforce 
continuous  Monitoring and Enforcement of Quality Standards .  
iv. The Department of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries  and Cooperatives should enhance 
appropriate Food Handling Practices and adoption of Mode rn Technologies . 
v. That the Department of Agriculture , Livestock, Fisheries and Cooperatives  should ensure 
farmers are trained on proper use of Bio Pesticide s which are environment friendly.  
vi. Agricultural Quality Standards Agencies should ensure adherence to High Quality 
Standards on food production.  
vii. That the Department of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Cooperatives should come 
up with a Policy and a Bill on Agro -Ecology.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , the Committee observed many thin gs there which  they were taken 
through and I request Hon orable  Wanjiku  to second.  
Hon. Mary Njoroge:  Thank you  Mr. Temporary Speaker , I second the Motion.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage ): I propose the question that this House adopts the 
Report  of the Committee on Agriculture , Livestock, Fisheries and Cooperatives on a visit to  The 
Seed Savers Network - Kenya laid on the table of the Assembly today during the  Morning sitting. 
The Motion i s open for debate . Honorable John Maritim . 
Hon. John Maritim:  Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker, sir. I want to congratulate the 
Agriculture Committee for a job well done.  What our able Chair did in terms of the Findings is 
okay. I also believe that what has been  written in this Report  is applicable even in our households.  
Nowadays, we lack huge farms for crop farming or vegetables but we see 300 Kitchen Gardens. I 
believe that such initiatives could also work in areas where houses are congested areas like slums.  
So Mr. Temporary Speaker, t his is a good Report . It needs to be followed well and also needs to 
be implemented in that it will save a lot of people from  food insecurity and even on a diet that 
people need to have for healthy living. Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker , I support the Motion.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): We have Hon. Gathuita then we cross to the 
other side.  
Hon. James Mwangi:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker, I rise to support the Motion on the 
basis that Agriculture is one  of the backbones of this Country, I think Seed Savers made a very 
remarkable stride ahead in doing some things that as a Committee we observed , like Seed Banks . 
Mr. Temporary Speaker , it is very hard to have a Seed Bank in most of the areas and with the visit 
of that Seed Bank , I came to reali se that to maximi se food production, we need such a thing as a 
Seed Bank so that this County can do Commercial Farming . Mr. Temporary Speaker , Commercial 
Farming means that the input s and outputs should have a relevant margin so that the Farmer s can 
be maintained in that farming field.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , the other issue was about Kitchen Gardens . In this era, we have a shortage 
of resources like land. Land  is bec oming scarce and v ery expensive and w ith Kitchen Gardens , I 
think it is high time as Honorable Members and the House to encourage our County to sensiti se 
our Community to do farming on Kitchen Gardens so that we can utili se the small resources we 
have  and to maximi se production.  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker , I do support it.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Alex . 
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker. First is to start by commending the 
Committee on Agriculture and say that t his is a good masterpiece of a Report  they are giving to 
this House. If you go through the Report , you will reali se the essence of such a Report  on such an 
important Committee that is a backbone , since  Agriculture is the backbone of this Country ; and so 
we should come up with ways in which Agriculture  shall be integrated into the Society  and more 
so, the farmers.  
By far and reach  Mr. Temporary Speaker , Nakuru County has vast of its land covered under 
Agriculture. If you come from Naivasha, you will  find vast land being covered by Flower Farms . 
Such Agricultural activities bring along the use of Pesticides and such Pesticides, from a medical 
perspective, become hazardous to the people since they affect the breathing system. How do we 
manage such wast e? I have observed good farming here and the request from this Committee that 
among its Observations, one of it should be embracing Organic Farming . Mr. Temporary Speaker , 
if we engage and work with Organic Farming within the County, we shall ensure that o ur people 
feed on the right food s. 
Mr. Temporary Speaker , in Naivasha, people are affected by respiratory diseases, o ther people, 
like those from Kuresoi, do maize farming  and other things ; they migh t one time suffer from 
cancerou s cells Mr. Temporary Speaker and t his will be mainly so,  because of the pesticides. When 
you look at Britain and even the USA, they have rules that contain and control the use of Pesticides  
in their Country . Mr. Temporary Speaker , in this Country , in Bungoma and Mura ng'a Counties , 
they have come up with Acts in their Department s or the Assembly that will contain and control 
the use of Pesticides  within the boundaries of those Counties. Mr. Temporary Speaker , a healthy 
Nation  will help us sustain our future.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , such a Report  and more so  on food production is very important.  When  
I listen to the President speaking, he always says that when you add fertilizer to the farming inputs 
on your farm, the producti on goes high but without the requisite knowledge the  farmers might end 
up using chemical s that will end up destroying them in the future. Mr. Temporary Speaker , I stand 
with the Committee on the same and I would like to ask you contain  Hon. Muraya  that next time 
he should not be using live audio s within the  Premises of the Assembly when  we are having 
debates of such caliber. Thank you  Mr. Temporary Speaker.  And he is  out of time  Mr. Temporary 
Speaker . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon . Muraya are you in decorum? Where are 
the Whips?  
Hon. David Wathiai:  Mr. Temporary Speaker, if Hon. Muraya is not in decorum then I believe 
he should be headed out  of this House so that we can go on with th e discussion of the Report .  
The Temporary Speake r (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Muraya.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Mr. Temporary Speaker, I want to know whether the Hon orable  Member 
is among the Whips  to check on whether I am in decorum. I am waiting for the Whips  to give back 
a Report  to you that I am not in dec orum.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Michael Gathanwa, you can confirm 
whether Hon. Muraya is in decorum.  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa:  Mr. Temporary Speaker the Hon orable  Member for Viwandani, Hon. 
Muraya  is not in decorum and it is not the first time. You should take a step and maintain the order 
in this House.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Muraya, walk out and come back when 
you are in decorum.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
(Honorable Joseph Muraya leaves the  House)  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Let us continue with our debate. Hon. Wajeff.  
Hon. Willison Mwangi:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker, I rise to support the debate on th e 
issue of using Organic Fertilizers bearing in mind that in recent times we have been having issues 
of so many chronic diseases  within our  community , most cases being as a result  of use of 
chemicals.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker , we have International Communities that consume foodstuffs that come 
from our Countr y and when we check on Continents like Asia and Europe , most of them consume  
Organic Foods. Mr. Temporary Speaker , when  we look at our own Country, it has been like a 
dumping site f or every chemical that is being manufactured.  When you look at a  Country like 
China that is producing so many Agro  Chemicals, you find that the tests are being done in our own 
Country. Most of the Members  of our community are not aware of the Chemicals  they are using 
and that is why they end up having cancer.   
Mr. Temporary Speaker , if you check on the cause of death in our community you will fi nd that 
out of ten people dying, seven are dying out of cancer. When you check o n this Report , this team 
visited this Company  and they are using Organic Fertilis er. If at all we adopt and advise our farmers 
to use the right seeds and chemical s which  are organic , then we shall evade diseases that  are killing 
our people. We would urge our County  mostly the Directors  and the Field Officers that are helping 
our Farmers , to request them  to utili se their crops using Organic  materials.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, when you check on the exports that we are ge tting out of this  Country , 
every time they have to go for analysis and when  the analysis is done, the  residue levels  are above 
the required levels. The maximum levels are very high and that is why most of our farmers  are 
lacking the market because of the M RL.  
Therefore  Mr. Temporary Speaker , I am requesting the Agricultur e team in our County  and across 
the Country to use the required materials which are Organic  in terms of the Pesticides  and also in 
terms of the  Fertilizer  so that we can save our people from deaths that are occurring because of 
toxins that are getting into our crops.  
Also  Mr. Temporary Speaker , when we check on our Blue Economy , whatever we are using on 
the Highlands  is being washed into our  Lakes . When yo u check on Lake Naivasha where we 
usually consume the fish that is coming from the Lake, most of the  fish that we consume also have 
toxins. Hence, this is a  necessary debate that is supposed to be adopted very fast to make sure that 
whatever we are consum ing and giving out to our  community is fresh and without toxins. So, I rise 
to support and also to request the County Government and the National Government to come 
together to make sure that such a Report  is adopted and put to practice. Thank you Mr. Temp orary 
Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Gathanwa . 
Hon. Michael Gathanwa:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker, I am one of the Member s of Seeds 
Savers -Kenya . I am a farmer and I use their seeds and I have adopted Organic Farming . As a 
Country we are quickly moving to being Digital and in Computer Technology , they usually say 
“Garbage In Garbage Out ”; meaning what we take is what we become and as you have heard , 
44% of the Pesticide s that we are using have been banned in the European Countries  and the same 
Countrie s are the Manufacturers and then they supply to us but still we cannot export back 
whatever we produce using the same products they have manufactured back to their Market.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, i t begs the question of why one would refuse to take something they have 
manufactured themselves. Kenya is a youthful Countr y with a population of about 70 percent 
Youth. It would be very important for us  to take care of our population.  If we are exposed to long-
term illnesses or unhealthy food, then we are putting a whole  Nation at risk and this should be 
taken as a National Security concern because we are putting the whole  Countr y under some form 
of thre at because of the products that we are using. Mr. Temporary Speaker, i t is also important 
for us to know that originally the Seed Savers seeds  were being grown here  and have proven to be 
resilient to drought and diseases . Mr. Temporary Speaker, i f we use t hese seeds, we are going to 
use less of the  Pesticides . 
Mr. Temporary Speaker,  I want to support  the recommendations that have been brought forward 
by th e Committee , of the Agriculture Department  coming up with a Bill on Agro -Products and 
also, we are call ing on the National Government , we know that this debate has been taken to the 
National Assembly a couple of times but because we are dealing with Multi  Nationals who are 
also bigwi gs, I do not know what happen s then it  flops .  
Mr. Temporary Speaker, i t is high time that we put a very ser ious and calculated approach to this 
issue by encouraging Organic Farming . It has also been proven that it is our lifestyle that is 
bringing about diseases that were not there. We have seen people in their early 20s dying of cancer 
and who come from famili es with no histor y of the disease ; meaning they are picking it from their 
lifestyle s. I believe  it is what we are taking in, as we have said “garbage in garbage out ”. I support 
the Report . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Thank you . I now call the mover to reply.  
Hon. Isabella Makori:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker . I take this opportunity to thank 
Honorable  Members for supporting this Motion . In fact  Mr. Temporary Speaker, with the current 
rains , some people have planted wheat  and you find them spraying roundup forgetting that we are 
the consumers. So, I wish the implementers act to make sure that we go the Agro  Ecology  way to 
prevent our people from dying . Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Thank you. I now put the question that this 
House adopts the Report  of the Committee on Agriculture on a site visit to Seed Savers Network 
Kenya laid on the table of the Assembly today during the morning sitting  
(Question put and agr eed to ) 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned till tomorrow at 9.30 am  
The House rose at 4 .10 PM  
 
 
 