COUNTY ASSEMBLY  OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 1 st August 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House  met at 10:20 AM  
[The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware) In the Chair ] 
PRAYERS.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
VISIT BY CAROL ACADEMY  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware ):  I want to take this opportunity to welcome Members  
to this session and also take the opportunity to welcome pupils  from Carol Academy and at this 
juncture I want to invite  Honourable  David Muraya to welcome the pupils . 
Hon. David Muraya: Thank you Honourable  Deputy  Speaker for giving me this opportunity . 
Today  I am privileged to have one of the school s from my Ward , which is Carol Academy . I am 
with them today and I can see them in our Gallery  here. So Karibuni Sana Katika Bunge yetu ya  
Kaunti ya Nakuru,  you are most welcome, thank you Honourable  Speaker.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware ): Members  let us appreciate Carol Academy .  
(Applause)  
Thank you. Next Order  
MOTION  
VISIT TO BONDENI MATERNITY HOSPITAL  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  I want to take this opportunity to welcome 
Honourable  Njuguna Mwaura to move the Motion . 
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Honourable  Speaker , I rise to move a Motion  on the issues 
of Bondeni Maternity. The Health Committee  has a mandate establi shed in the Second Schedule 
of the Nakuru Standing Orders and its Mandate  is to deal with all matters relating to County  Health 
Servic es including the County  Health Facilities , which include also the Private Facilities and 
Pharmacies, Ambulance Services , pro motion  of Primary Health Care, Licensing  and Control  of 
Undertakings that sell Food to the public .  
Secondly are Funeral Parlors and Crematorium s, licensing  of Dogs  and facilities for 
Accommodation , Care  and Burial of  Animals , Water Sanitation Services , Refuse and Solid Waste 
removal . 
 
 
1.3 OBJECTIVE OF THE VISIT  
The Objective of the visit was to ascertain the quality of services offered to the  Members  of the 
public, the achievement of the Hospital, the Challenge s and areas of improvement as far as service 
delivery is concerned. Allow me Honourable  Speaker to thank Members  of the  Committee  for 
their commitment and contributions during the Committee  Visit to the Bondeni Sub County  
Hospital  held on 28th February, 2023.  I also thank the Office  of the Clerk and the Speaker  for the 
facilitation during this Visit . On behalf of the Committee  it is my pleasure and duty to present the 
Report  of the Committee  visit to the Bondeni Sub County  Hospital . Honourable  Speaker , allow  
me to give the background  information about this Hospita l. 
2.0 BACKGROUND INFORMATION ABOUT BONDENI SUB COUNTY  HOSPITAL  
Bondeni Sub County  Hospital is a Level  Three (3) Hospital with an 80-bed capacity. It was 
establi shed in 1952 and it lies in a 2.1 Acres of land . It is in Bondeni area, opposite Bondeni Police 
Station, near Menengai Social Hall within Nakuru East Sub-County  in Nakuru.  
The main catchment area includes  Bondeni, Kisulisuli, Kambi Somali, Paul Machanga Kivumbini, 
Kaloleni and Shauri Yako, serving a p opulation of 44,000 people.  
The Hospital is located in an area of high-density  population of low-income  earners. The  Facility 
has no Title Deed. The Member s of the Committee  interacted with the Board Management of the 
facility and they discussed a lot of i ssues as far as the Hospita l is concerned, and majorly they 
discussed about the services that the Facilit y offers.  
3.0 THE INTERACTION WITH THE HOSPITAL BOARD AND MANAGEMENT  
The Committee  held a consultative meeting with the  Board and Head of Department s to understand 
the quality of Services  offered at the facility , achievement s and challenges  that need to be 
addressed for the hospital to operate optimally. It was noted that there exists  a public perception 
that the Hospital only offers Maternity Services which has remained  a big challenge.   
The Hospital compound during the visit was clean. The Hospital is fenced with a sub-standard 
perimeter fence, while the  pathways are chirped with potholes. There are asbestos iron sh eets in 
the hospital compound next to the k itchen .  
The Hospital has a number of blocks with offices distribution as follows;  
The 1st Block has the Nursing In charge Office , the Cash Office , M.C.H, Radiology, and Family  
Planning Room. There are two make shift offices that serve  as NHIF Office  and Triage Area. 
The 2nd Block has the ANC room, Nutrition Office  and Comprehensive Care Unit . 
The 3rd Block has the Consultation Room , with the  Pharma cy next to it followed by the  Lab. The 
same block has a Small Store, H.T.S and two Cloak Rooms that are used by gents. 
The 4th Block has Washrooms for Ladies, the Public Health Office , the Accounts Office , the 
Administrator’s Office , Records Office , Library and a small kitchen.  
The 5th Block host s the Maternity Ward s, Delivery Room together with the Theatre which is not 
operational despite being 98% complete.   
The 6th Block serves as the Physiotherapy/ Occupational Therapy Department , Psychology/ 
Counselling Department , Hospital Store and County  Store. However, this block shou ld be the 
Postnatal Ward  and Admission Ward . A major challenge has been insecurity from thieves within 
the communit y and inadequate staffing.  
The 7th Block houses the Kitchen and the Laundry Room for the facility. There is a Parking Shad e 
that accommodates five cars including the Ambulance . The facility has two Linda Mama Cars , 
one Waste Management Vehicle and a Salon County  Car which needs repair s to be functional.   
4.0 DEPARTMENT S OF THE HOSPITAL  
The Hospital has two major Department s. They are;  
a)  Non Clinical  
It covers Administration, Accounts, Procurement, Records and Information Technology.  
b) Clinical  
It covers Outpatient, Inpatient, Pharmacy , Laboratory, Maternity, Nutrition, M.C.H, Public Health, 
Family Planning, C.C.C, ANC, H.T.S, Physiotherapy and Clinical Psychology.  
i) Pharmacy  
The Pharmacy is used to manage the use of medications in hospitals and other Medical Centers . 
Its main mission i s to include the Selection, Prescription, Procuration, Delivery, Administration 
and Review of medications to optimize  patient outcomes . 
The Board of the Hospital noted that KEMSA supplies are not sufficient and they take time before 
they are supplied.   
ii) Post Natal and Well Child Clinic  
The Hospital Well Child Clinic is where Mothers  are taken care of during pregnancy and after 
delivery. Th ey are advised on proper diet and nutrition during pregnancy and  when  nursing their 
Babies. The Board noted that the  Room is too small for the services . 
 
iii) Laundry  
The Staff  in this section collect soiled  linen from various sections. They do inspection and repairing 
or replacing damaged  linens . Further, they distribute clean linen to the respective Department s. 
 
iv) Kitchen  
The Hospital has a Kitchen  which serves the In-Patien t clients admitted in the facility for 
observation and treatment.    
 
5.0 HUMAN RESOURCE ESTABLI KSHS MENT  
The Bondeni Sub County  Hospital has a total Staff Establi shme nt of 83 Staff. They are distributed 
as follows;  
CADRE  NO OF 
STAFF  REMARKS  
Medical Office rs 4 2 on study leave  
Administrators  1 Permanent & Pensionable  
Clinical Office rs  4 1 PNP  
2 Fixed Term Contract  
1 UTJ Contracted  
Nurses  27 10 PNP  
2 UTJ Contracted  
1 Hospital Contracted  
14 Fixed Term Contract  
 
Nutritionists  2 Fixed Term Contract  
Public Health Office rs 3 2 PNP  
 1 Community Health Assistant  
Medical Laboratory  1 Fixed Term Contract  
Pharmacist  2 Fixed Term Contract  
PNP 
Physiotherapist  1 Permanent & Pensionable  
Radiotherapist  1 Fixed Term Contract  
Mentor Mother  1 UTJ Contracted  
HTS Counsellor  3 UTJ Contracted  
Clinical Psychologist Office r 1 Fixed Term Contract  
Clerical Office rs 3 All PNP  
Accountants  2 Fixed Term Contract  
Drivers  3 2 PNP  
1 Fixed Term Contract  
 
 
6.0 THE MAJOR ACHIEVEMENTS OF BONDENI SUB COUNTY  HOSPITAL  
The Hospital takes pride in the following  
a) Increase in daily revenue collection from Kshs .200, 000 - 450,000 per month on average.  
b) Bondeni Sub County  Hospital is NHIF accredited. Capitation is done quarterly based on 
application.  
c) There is improved numbers of daily skilled deliveries.  
d) Introduction of Lamaze Classes for expectant Mothers.  
e) Renovation of Theatre that is approximately 98% complete.  
f) There is  a successful Baby Friendly Community Initiative Program - support groups in the 
community and hospital that currently has 639 Women in Mothe r to Mothe r group, 100 
Men in Father to Father Support Group and 61 Teens  in Binti Shujaa Support.  
g) There is introduc tion of Toto Smart Book Club  
h) Introduction of Physiotherapy  services, Occupational  Therapy Services , Specialized 
Clinics and Clinical Psychology Services.  
i) Introduction of a Specialized Clinic for Diabetic, Hypertension, Pediatrics and Primary 
Gynecological and Obstetric Cases  
j) Introduction of Diabetic  and Hypertensive Support Groups that include clients being seen 
in other facilities that do  not have such support.  
k) Introduction of Inpatient Services  
l) Introduction of Temporary Isolation Wards during Covid -19 Pandemic era and identified 
as possible Isolation Ward s to support Nakuru PGH and Naiva sha Sub County  Hospital in 
case any other outbreaks overwhelms the two.  
m) Upgraded Laboratory services to include Biochemistry Tests (i.e Full Hemogram, Liver 
Function Test, Kidney Functional Test, Lipids Profile, HB1AC test)  Labourers  4 Permanent a& Pensionable  
Cook  1 Permanent & Pensionable  
TOTAL  64  
Casuals  19 17 Hospital contracted  
2 County  Contracted  
TOTAL  83  
n) Upgraded the Ultrasound Machine to increase services to all clients rather than pregnant 
Mother s only as was the case before.  
o) Well establi shed Kitchen to allow specialis ed m eals to different groups of clients as guided 
by the Nutritionist.  
p) Improved Defaulter Tracing.         
7.0 FINDINGS AND OBSERVATIONS IN BONDENI SUB COUNTY  HOSPITAL   
The following Challenges  were highlighted by the  Board of the  Hospital  
1) THAT, there exist Kshs  of supplies at the Hospital . Further, there is no Store  for the Drugs  
purchased by the Hospital.  
2) THAT, the Hospital  has no Stand by Generator  
3) THAT, the Hospital Theatre is complete. However,  it has not being equipped and has no 
Staff thus unable to operationalize it.   
4) THAT, the hospital needs a Perimeter Wall to enhance security.  
5) THAT, the Hospital Management System is not fully automated.  
6) THAT, there exist a huge Debt that NHIF owes the Facility . At the time of the visit the 
Hosp ital Management Board said that the NHIF declined to pay Kshs . 27 Million  but paid 
Kshs  4M. 
Mr. Deputy  Speaker, there is a crisis on the issues of the reimbursement of the facility by the NHIF. 
And we want the Department  and through her Excellence Office , through the Council of Governors 
to intervene on these matters of Huge Debts that the NHIF are declinin g to reimburse our facilities 
that is crippling service delivery at our Hospitals.  
There is only one old Ambulance which is Kshs  among the seven  Facilities around town. Mr. 
Deputy  Speaker , Ambulance is also a facility at Level  One and that maternity  only h aving just one, 
and not only  just one, but also old Ambulance It means that it is critical. And actually, I would say 
it cannot be able to serve that facility alone  and the other facilities that around this Facility.  
There is inadequate staffing levels in the facility as we have Kshs  shown, Mr. Deputy  Speaker , 
those Staff  are not enough for that facility and therefore need to support them with  staff. 
Inadequat e resources to fund the Community Outreach Services . There is Outdated Electricity and 
Powe r System in the  Hospital . Some of the facilities and establi shments Mr. Deputy  Speaker  were 
done in 1952 a nd therefore, there is a need for proper refurbishment  of the State  Facility so that it 
can give proper services to the Members  of the public.  
Lack of Waste Disposal System in the F acility. Those are the findings of the Committee  and the 
Committee  had the following recommendation s: 
That the County  Government of Nakuru  should ensure that there is adequate supply of drugs in 
Health Facilities within Nakuru County . Mr. Deputy  Speaker , I know the outcry for all the facilities 
across the County  is that there are no drugs . And indeed there are no drugs Mr. Deputy  Speaker , 
despite that we have the budget.  
We want to interrogate and we want to request this House  to pass this recommendation that the 
County  Government of Nakuru can supply those facilities with drugs, otherwise we will be doing 
nothing. But if they will not be supplying Mr. Deputy  Speaker , we be told how many Level  Twos 
and Level  Threes that we have, so that even we can slash that budget, so that it can be only to 
support the Level  Twos and the Level  Threes. However , currently we do not have drugs in all 
facilities across the County  and we need those drugs to be supplied as soon as possible.  
That the County  Government of Nakuru should  appropriate funds in the Financial Year 2023/2024 
which we have already done, to purchase a Standby Generator , equip  and employ  staff for 
operationalisa tion of Theat re and other services in the Facility . 
 Erect  a perimeter wall to enhance security at the Facility, automate Systems or services  at the 
Facility and  purchase an  Ambulance for the facility. I will not belabo ur on that.  
That the County  Government of Nakuru should liaise with NHIF to ensure that the amount owed 
to facili ty is paid in full.  
That the County  Government should create awareness to the Members  of the public on the services 
offered at Bondeni Sub County  Hospital , so as to cub the notion that the Hospital  only offers 
Maternal Services . Mr. Deputy  Speaker , this one will also be addressed by the Referral Systems 
and Referral Systems Bill that this House  ought to generate, so that that Bill can put a capping  to 
the Members  of the of the public who usually end up at the PGH and they end up queuing there 
for a whole day or two days before they have been attended.  
Therefore, we need to establi sh a Referral System Mechanism s Whereby Members  of the  public 
should  go to the facilities that are just onto their doorsteps so that they can be given referrals to the 
bigger facilities for Specialist s’ treatment.  
The other issue Mr. Deputy Speaker is that Nakuru County  Government shou ld renovate the  
Electrical and plumbin g Installations and Systems  at the facility to reduce constant break down.  
The other issue is that the County  Government of Nakuru should have a proper Waste Disposal 
System  in the Hospital; a nd not only that Hospital , but in all Hospitals  Mr. Deputy  Speaker . We 
have been using the archaic systems of burning whereby we are having Burning Chambers 
whereby we have been disposing our waste Mr. Deputy  Speaker , but there is one of the Microwave 
Shredders  that you have at the PGH that w ere supposed to support not only the Publi c but also the 
Private Facilities across the County  Mr. Deputy Speaker .  
Therefore , they need to operationali se that Microwave Shredder  so that all the wastes from the 
Publi c and Private Facilities can end up at the Microwave Shredder  for sterilis ation so that it can 
be disposed properly in our environment.  
Mr. Deputy  Speaker  this Bondeni Maternity is one of the Satellite Facilities , that if given proper 
support, I believe we are going to decongest  the PGH , and the  members  of the public are going to 
enjoy the services that will be offered at that Facility.  
Mr. Deputy  Speaker , I also want to give a disclaimer, that the Health Department  is in ICU and 
needs the rescue of these Members , and when I say it is in ICU Mr. Deputy  Speaker , we want this 
recommendation that we have been giving to the  Executive to be implemented to the l atter. And 
Mr. Deputy  Speaker  this time round , I want to see a response from the Executive  as far as these  
recommendation s are concerned. We want to see the receipt that they are in custody of th ese 
recommendation s so that after six months  Mr. Deputy  Speaker , we are going to invite them to 
account whether they implemented whatever we recommended as a Committee . 
Mr. Deputy  Speaker  we can keep on generating Report s and Reports that  is wasting our time. Mr. 
Deputy  Speaker , we really need actually this recommendation to be put in use so that we can see 
the value of money and the  members  of the public can e njoy the services that they ought to enjoy 
as per the Constitution of Kenya. Mr. Deputy  Speaker , I beg to move this  Motion . And I wi sh to 
request my able Chair person Honourable  Bernard from Maria shoni to second.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ng ware ):  Honourable  Bernard.  
Hon. Bernard  Langat:  Thank you Mr. Deputy  Speaker , I second.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ng ware ):  Thank you. The Motion  is open for debate. 
Honourable  Stanley.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Thank you Mr. Deputy  Speaker . Let me first of all, congratulate the Chair , 
because he has ably taken us through the Report . And I feel that he has tackled almost everything. 
But also I congratulate Honourable  Duale ; I am seeing he is here and he is also a Member  of our 
Committee . And I am seeing on Social Media that now he is the  President of Young 
Parliamentarians in this Republic . Mayb e Mr. Deputy  Speaker  you will give him a chance  because 
we do not know whether it is rumours. And you know, there are so many Presidents, President of 
sijui Football Club but he will tell us what  that Presidency contains of Mr. Deputy  Speaker , if you 
do allow so that we can congratulate him and he tell s us what he will bring on the board.  
Therefore, Mr. Deputy  Speaker , I was just concerned that whether it is true that he is the President , 
or just masquerading as such. Therefore Mr. Deputy  Speaker , you will give  him a chance.  
Secondly , let me first of all start by what Honourable  Njuguna  said. He said the issue of  Health is 
becoming a problem in this County . So Mr. Deputy  Speaker , there is a critical problem in the 
Nakuru County . And I do remember  as Honourable  Njuguna  has said after the death of the late 
Chief Office r Dr. King ’ori, and I know everybody and may God rest his soul in eternal peace. 
Since then, Mr. Deputy  Speaker , the issue of Health in this County  has been nosediving. Mr. 
Deputy  Speaker , and I know the Chairperson  maybe when he will be answering to the Report , he 
will say from that particular tim e we have been having problems. And maybe we thought that we 
the government that we are now in , we will we will be doing better. But Mr. Deputy  Speaker , there 
is a problem that I am seeing and I am foreseen. We started by coming up with a Report  last time 
in Naiva sha and then we went to PGH.  
The issue of the PGH and the Cancer Center. Mr. Deputy  Speaker , we came here, we deliberated 
the Report ; we thought that the CO and the CECM and the people concerned will do something. 
After  we did dispense with that Report  of Naiva sha. Mr. Deputy  Speaker , we went back again, to 
meet that situation, other than improv ing became worse. And when the press covered, I have heard 
some people really complaining.  
 Mr. Deputy  Speaker , the Media is part of the society. And you know, each and every Committee  
ought also to be covered if the Press thinks so, therefore, I feel that  the Chair person  and the 
Committee  and the Implementation Committee  ought to be a little bit more serious because people 
are taking  the Report  for granted. Mr. Deputy  Speaker  the Report s are not meant for Academic  
reasons, they are supposed to be acted upon and therefore I do concur with the Chair person  that 
we needed to do something.  
Mr. Deputy  Speaker , when you go to the Observation s that we did get from Honourable  Munna’s 
Bondeni, I think it is him because we we re with him, you will see that we talked about an  
Ambulance , which ought to be a vehicle that can make sure that it rescues people. But when you 
have an old rugged  vehicle in the name of an Ambulance , Mr. Deputy  Speaker , when you are put 
inside you get harmed by the metals.  
Mr. Deputy  Speaker , I am telling you that the situation is worse. And because even the Member  is 
here, he will talk about it. the Ambulance  looks more of an accident than a rescue vehicle, it is like  
a wreck. And you know maybe the Chair person  lacked adjectives to explain. That thing is a wreck. 
And you know, Mr. Deputy  Speaker , and then that wreck in the name of an Ambulance. It is used 
in the whole of this County  to do the rescue mission.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ng ’ang’a):  Order Honourable  Stanley ! What  is the point?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  The point is that Mr. Deputy  Speaker , we are dealing with something that 
masquerade s as an Ambulance. But it is like i t is not.  
I do not know how to put it and I want to ego massage the adjective. But Mr. Deputy  Speaker , it 
is more of an accident in the name of an Ambulance . And maybe the Chair person  will do that. 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy  Speaker  that is what we wanted removed in that Hospital. When you are 
put inside, you look more dead than alive. You are not even sure whether you will get out alive.  
Mr. Deputy  Speaker  the other one is the issue of a  Generator . You know, Mr. Deputy  Speaker , we 
have been talking of a Generato r all the time, including what we talked in Naiva sha and I think 
that the budget is there, because we are putting more budget in Health. But Mr. Deputy  Speaker , 
we are not seeing what the Executiv e is doing. Now  Mr. Deputy  Speaker , I do urge that next time 
the Chair person  invites the CECM Health  and CO to the  Committee  of the Whole House  rather 
than a Committee  because everywhere we are suffering.  
When we go to number three on the issue of drugs. Mr. Deputy  Speaker , I am wo ndering whether 
KEMSA became a pedestrian to Nakuru or something of the sort, because the issue o f drugs is 
becoming like “Hekaya Ya Abunwasi, Haifiki ”, therefore, Mr. Deputy  Speaker , I do encourage 
that something may be done. And Mr. Deputy  Speaker , you know, when we did vet some of these 
CO’s and CECMs we did so because we loved the Governor , but the people we vetted, they have 
become Merchants  of Interests other than Servants  of th e People . And that is why I wanted the 
Assembly  to interrogate because Mr. Deputy  Speaker , we are in a deep Hole and I think something 
ought to be done.  
Mr. Deputy  Speaker , I also take this cha nce to ask you the Leader ship here that we shou ld be 
merciless to people who are not doing service to our people. Currently, Mr. Deputy  Speaker , as 
we are talking here, we are still having a problem with issue of Municipality which also Mr. Deputy  
Speaker  shou ld make sure that they do check how our Hospi tals are doing. We have people who 
are being put in Hospital Boards and  I think th e Chair person  will talk about it. In Naiva sha we 
have people of questionable character . And yet they are now the Managers  of the Boards . They  
are people who are implicated in Vampire Wood and I know people know that vampire and yet 
that person now…  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ng ’ang’a):  Order Honourable  Karanja! Kindly summari se. 
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Deputy  Speaker  when it became  fiery you come up with a summary 
of summarizing, let me now summarize, Mr. Deputy  Speaker  there is a need that we shou ld not be 
fearful , we shou ld talk the truth and the Boards  of the Hospitals  are very important, I was telling 
the Chair person  that the Board Chair persons  must be vetted by the whole  Assembly  and I think 
that is where we shou ld be going because some of these things that are happening here are so 
dangerous. We are talking about health, we are talking about life; can we be serious.  
I have summari sed with, can we be serious?  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you. Hon. Kamau.  
Hon. Eliud Kamau: Thank you Mr. Deputy  Speaker sir. I would like to commend Hon. Njuguna 
on the Committee  on Health for the good work they are doing. They are challenging the other 
Committee s because if I am not wrong, this might be the fifth Report  that the Committee  on Health 
has tabled in this House . Allow me to commend Hon. Njuguna and the Committee  for the good 
work. Kongole B wana Chairman  kwa sababu ya kazi nzuri unayoifanya.  
When we are talking about matters of Health and you have heard the Chair person of Health 
lamenting. I happen to be a friend of the Committee  last week. They had invited the mother 
Department , the CO and the Director. The issues of Health in our County  is completely 
deteriorating. People are taking these Report s, the Committee  is doing a great job; a tiresome job 
and people are taking this as novels. They are taking these Report s as songs and somebody must 
be responsible and I am urging the whole House , let us join hands together with the Committee  on 
Health because matters of Health is a matter that is cut across the whole County . Everywhere you 
go in our hospitals, our people are crying.  
If you talk on the issue of medicine, it is unfortunate. I visited my health center last week. Zile 
dawa ziko huko ni za minyoo.  I wonder, kwa hii  economy tuko nayo saa hii, ni dawa za minyoo 
watu watakunywa kweli? Ni chakula gani tunakula ndio tunywe dawa za minyoo?  It is something 
that is hurting and we cannot allow it. I am urging the whole House  and the whole Assembly, let 
us join hands and look in -depth to this issue to do with health in our County . 
The Committee  on implementation must make sure that all these recommendations, each and every 
one of it, must be fulfilled because if Hon. Njuguna comes with other Report s, tutakuwa 
tunamumaliza.  I urge the whole House , let us take this matter to do with health very seriously; let 
us know what is not happening to medicine.  
I thank God because last week, I talked to the Chief Office r when I was a friend to that Committee . 
Most of the things is to do with human resource.  Some of them are discipline cases. There are 
people who are neglecting their work. Some people are arrogant. If you go to those hospitals, 
sometimes you go to the hospitals and they do not know us and the language they are using even 
to our Members  is not  in order and appropriate.  
Mine is to commend and support Hon. Njuguna and the Committee  of Health and saying that from 
today, I will make sure that I am available in that Committee  because it is a matter that is touching 
on each and every area.  
To our Gov ernor, if matters to do with health are looked into, they are issues which are going to 
affect our political future; to the Governor and to all of us. It is not a laughing matter; it is a matter 
that needs to be taken seriously. Thank you.  
The Deputy  Speak er (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Hon. Alex  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Deputy  Speaker  sir. I start by congratulating the Chair person 
on Health. He is a very hardworking gentleman and I can tell you that I am a Member  of that 
Committee  and most of the time, he calls us very early in the morning and ensure s that each and 
every person report s to each and every hospital that he has assigned us to be and we come up with 
the Report  that we have.  
I also want to congratulate Hon. Hassan on the position that I have seen that he has been elected 
to. On the same note, let me recognise  pupils from Carol Academy from Flamingo Ward . I 
encourage them that this is what we do for the sake of our Country and that the future can only be 
brighter. Ensure that you learn something from this Assembly and ensure that in the future, you 
also do justice to the people because you are the future leaders of this Country and be encouraged 
that you can be what you want to be. 
I am touched by the state of health within Nakuru County . I am a Doctor and I feel so saddened 
by some of the things that we find within Nakuru County  at the moment. A week ago, we visited 
Naiva sha Level  4 Hospital and the state of affairs within that hospital was so deplorable, so 
disheartening  and I imagined that the overwhelming nature of Naiva sha Level  4 hospital and the 
other hospitals around the County . How are we as a County ? This shou ld be a debate that shou ld 
be engaged at all levels. I would u rge that those within the Executive that do give advice on health 
matters to the Governor to give the Governor the correct report  on the status of some of these 
things that are happening because I know she is a willing Governor and a willing person to help .  
There is one part that has been quoted on the ambulance that ferries people in Bondeni area.  It 
serves Bondeni and 7 other I nstitutions around Bondeni. The state of that ambulance is not one 
that one can smile in. Hon. Karanja has referred it as an acci dent itself. I would state that that 
ambulance shou ld not be used to ferry people.  
In the last budget, we read a budget of Kshs . 7.8 billion on Health and this money, I will urge the 
Committee  on Health to interrogate how these monies are being used because like yesterday, 
someone sent me a text from my own Dispensary and asked me, ‘ sincerely Mheshim iwa, are we 
supposed to be served with piritons? I am sick but the only thing available in the h ospital at the 
moment is piriton s.’  
We might be fortunate enough as Members  of this County Assembly  that we can access Healthcare 
from wherever we want would afford but the level of desperation within the people is so much. 
We must speak it out. Otherwise , even God himself will judge us when time comes.  
I am touched by the Theatre in Bondeni Hospital . It is complete but not operational. A Level  3 
hospital shou ld be able to perform minor surgeries but without equipment, we cannot. Let us say, 
Bondeni is a Level 3 Hospital. Naiva sha is a Level  4 Hospital and we only have one functional 
Theatre within that Hospital. You will remember  of a recent accident that happened involving one 
University bus and the major injuries that were there required that these students were to be 
operated on. Without a proper T heatre, we would not be helping our people. It is time that we ask 
us to be serious as a County  and manage our health in a way that will serve the people  well.  
I also want to note major achievements of the Bondeni Level  4 Hospital. On point number 13, we 
have Laboratory Services , includ ing biochemistry test, which  is full hemogram , liver function 
tests, kidney  functional test s, lipid profiles and also the HBA1C test. The HBA1C test is one test 
that is very crucial and more so  when it comes to pregnant mothers because this is one test that 
will save our ladies from diseases such as placenta previa . This is a test that will help us study the 
blood sugar levels between 2 to 3 months before a woman gets to the hospital that you can tell the 
profile of that patient.  
It is time that the Committee  of Health is function ed, because the Committee  of Budget  has made 
it clear that we shall give enough monies to different  Committee s and the different Department s 
so that within the time that God has given us within this Assembly, we serve our people well. 
Thank you for the chance and congratulations to the Asse mbly for the new Mace, the symbol of 
power that I see in the Assembly. Thank you.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Hon. Virginia  
Hon. Virginia Gichaga: Thank you Mr. Deputy  Speaker sir. First of all, I would like to welcome 
the pupils that we have at the Gallery. It is a good initiative coming to learn and to see what the 
Assembly does on its every day duties.  
I rise to contribute on this Motion , especially on the issue of N HIF. Most of our facilities, Level  
Threes  and mostly Level  Fours  depend on Facilities Improvement Fund and when the Committee  
had visited the facility, NHIF owes the facility Kshs . 27 million and by then, they had only paid 
Kshs . 4 million.  
Having said th at, how will our hospitals or facilities work if NHIF are not paying and yet, we are 
encouraging people in our community where we come from to pay NHIF so that they can go to 
the hospitals and be treated without paying anything  considering  our economy the way it is and 
considering most of the people are not employed ?  
As we hand this Report  to the Executive, we would like to urge them to get a committee  or form a 
small committee  which would be handling the issues of NHIF from the County  level so that they 
do not accumulate such debts whereas our people are suffering. You do not expect Bondeni to be 
able to buy drugs yet NHIF ha s not paid.  
The other thing is about the purchase of the generator. We know the issues of Kenya Power. 
Sometimes we have blackouts. The Executive shou ld be thinking of how  the facility can operate 
without power if there  happens to be a black out . It is high time we ha d standby generators and not 
only generat ors but generators which can serve the entire hospital even if it is both Level  5 and 
Level  4. I rise to support this Motion  as a Member  of the Health Committee . Thank you Mr. Deputy  
Speaker . 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  Hon. Muraya.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Asante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika  Kwa kunipa fursa hii niweze kuchangia 
Mswada huu. Kwa nza nataka kumpa pongezi Mwenyek iti wa Kamati hii ya Afya kwa sababu ya 
kazi nzuri mnayofanya, maana alianza na hospitali ambayo iko katika Ward  yangu na nafikiri ni 
vyema Mheshim iwa Njuguna  angekuwa daktari. Pia nataka kukaribi sha wanafunzi ambao 
wametutembelea, karibuni sana ili mkaweze kuona jinsi ambavyo tunafanya kazi hapa kwa Bunge.  
Jambo la tatu ni kupongeza Mheshim iwa Duale  na kumjuli sha Mheshim iwa Karanja  kwamba 
hakuna kukuru kakara hapa ambazo zinaendelea. Kiongozi, kijana mwenzangu ametunukiwa 
nafasi ya kuungani sha sisi vijana in different Political Parties . Ninaposoma habari hii na zingine 
ambazo zimeletwa kwamba hakuna hospitali ambayo inamilikiwa na Kaunti yetu because in the 
first place there are no title deeds . Serikali inahofia kupeleka wafanyakazi kwa hizi Zahanati na 
hospitali kwa sababu sio zetu . Hatujazimiliki . 
Na la pili ni kwamba ni kama kuna mzaha unaoendelea.  Tumekuja hapa tukapeana 
recommendations  kwa hospitali zingine lakini kuna watu ambao wamezembea katika kazi zao na 
sijui tuwafanye nini kwa sababu tunapo sema na tunapoleta uchunguzi wetu tunafanya kazi 
ambayo tumepewa na mwananchi.  
Juzi kama vile Mheshimiwa Karanja  amesema, tulirudi tena Naivasha  kuangalia kama tulivyo 
recommend ndivyo inavyoendelea na Mheshim iwa Spika sio sisi tulikuwa tunasema bali tulikuwa 
na media . Tulikuwa tunaita daktari mwenye anasimamia maternity, lab  na hao ndio walikuwa 
wanatupa hali ilivyo na vile wanahitaji ; lakini kufika hapa,  kila mtu anasema tulifanya vibaya na 
hatukusema vile hospitali kuko. Tulisema na hata sio sisi tuliripoti ni daktari wenyewe ambao 
wako kwa hiyo hospitali ndio walituambia. Pia wewe Mheshimiwa  nakumbuka kuwa ulikuwa na 
uliona vile hali ilivyo. Ningependa ku mshukuru Virginia  kwa sababu tulipofika pale tuliambiwa 
hata the fetal  doppler  hawana, something that is just worth Kshs  400. Nam shukuru kwa sababu 
tulipotoka pale alienda kununua mbili na tena akanunua five metallic stethoscopes  akapeleka kwa 
hiyo hospitali.  
Sio kwamba tunasema mambo ambayo hatujui bali tunasema vile tulivyoona na vile 
tulivyoambiwa. Sijui watu wanataka tufanye nini ama kuinamia wapi, tupitie njia gani ili waweze 
kuskia ma lalamiko ambayo tuko nayo kama wakili shi wa hizi Kata.  
Katika hizi hospitali zetu tumekuwa na usimamizi ambao umekuwa na watu ambao sijui kama 
hawafahamu kazi yao ama nini. Unakuta Medical S uperintendent  ameketi tu hataki ku shugulika. 
Kitu ya mia nne hamsini na haiwezi kununuliwa. Una shindwa ku ma anataka kupewa ruhusa na 
nani na amepewa mamlaka ya kusimamia hospitali lakini hawezi kufanya juhudi ya kuona vitu 
vikifanyika kwa hivyo kama vile Mheshimiwa  Karanja  amesema, tuna Hospital B oards  ambazo 
zitale twa na zitaidhini shswa zikifanya kazi. Hata pia Mimi nina recommend  ziwe zinaletwa hapa 
mbele ya hii Bunge ili tuwapiti shie na pia tuweze kujua ni kina nani tunapiti sha kwa hizi hospitali 
maana wamekuwa kero kubwa katika kuendeleza hospitali zetu. Ninaskia kuwa Bondeni  imekuwa 
under insecurity alert  na unakuta mwenye amepewa jukumu la kuendeleza hiyo hospitali 
anaendelea kujenga na kurenovate ICU ambayo ikiwekwa vifaa havina security so first things 
first. Tunafaa kuanza na ukuta ili tuweze kujua kw amba chochote kiko ndani kiko salama lakini 
wengine hapa hata sijui waelekezwa na nini na ndio maana ninasema lazima tuwe na watu ambao 
wanatambua kazi yao ni gani katika hiyo hospitali ama katika kila idara ili kila mtu ajue ni kazi 
gani ameletwa kufanya  kwa sababu sisi tunajua  kazi yetu ni kwenda kuangalia na t uje kufanya 
mapendekezo. Mwenye kiti wa Bajeti yuko na ametuambia kuwa kuna billioni saba. Ili tuweze 
kufanya kazi ningependa sote tuwe rafiki wa K amati ya Health  kwa sababu hii ndio kero kubwa 
kwetu. Ukienda kwangu watu wanalia hata sasa hivi ninapigiwa simu, Mhe shimiwa mwengine pia 
anapigiwa simu. Tunafaa pia kujua kazi ya NHIF  ni gani? Pesa imekuwa remitted  pale kwa system  
kuwa hiyo kadi imelipiwa kwa hivyo sio kwamba ninaenda kuomba pesa. Mimi ni melipia kadi 
yangu, wewe pia umelipia yako. Ukienda hospitali pesa yako inakatwa kwa nini ichukue mda wa 
miezi minne hiyo hospitali ilipwe , ilhali hospitali za kibinafsi hawana deni kwa system  ya NHIF  
hata ya shilingi kumi ? KEMSA  nayo, kwani hao Chemist Dealers  hutua wapi dawa zao? It is 
either they have a Manufacturing Industry ya dawa kwa sababu ukitibiwa katika hospitali ya umma 
lazima uende ununue dawa huko nje na utapata dawa same  na ile umeandikiwa kwa hospitali. 
Hao wanatoa wapi ambapo serik ali haiwezi kutoa hizi dawa ?  
Naunga mkono haya mapendekezo ambayo yamewekwa na hii Kamati na ninaomba sisi sote tuwe 
rafiki wa hii Kamati na wakati mwingine ningeomba Mhe shimiwa Mwenye kiti, tumefanya 
recommendation s mengi, tuitie Chief Executive Committee  Member  (CECM),  Chief Office r (CO)  
na the whole  Department  as a full House  ili tukae na o hapa na watueleze na kama hawawezi 
waondokee kwa hii kazi, watu ni wengi ambao wanataka hii kazi na watu wengi wamesoma. Asante 
sana.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Joseph N gware): Asante sana Mheshim iwa. Maybe before we proceed 
I want to take this opportunity to appreciate Carol academy once again and I do want to give them 
permission to go and engage in other things outside the Assembly kindly. Permission granted. The 
debat e continues, Hon. Francis Kuria.  
Hon. Francis Kuria : Thank you Hon. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to commend the 
good job done by my Chair  Health Committee  Hon. Njuguna. I am a Member  of the Committee  
and just a word to my Chair  that genuinely he is not a searcher for consensus but a molder of 
consensus ; keep the good work and we are in support.  
I was looking at this Report  hoping that we have a budget for health on matters concerning the 
ambulance. W e are going to make sure that we have a budget so that this facility can have a good 
ambulance. I do not know whether there was a typing error and I would like the Chair  to clarify 
whether Bondeni is a Level  3 or Level  4 hospital because according to our Report  here they have 
indicated that it is a Level  4 but he has stated it is a Level  3 Facility.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware):  Maybe before you proceed , Hon. Njuguna can react 
on that.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Thank Mr. Deputy  Speaker . According to  papers it is a Level  4 but 
according to reality it is a Level  3. Mambo ni tofauti kwa  ground.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Proceed.  
Hon. Francis Kuria : Thank you Hon.  Speaker, I have understood his message. It is very 
discouraging when a facility in on Level  3 or Level  4 but the services rendered there do not meet 
the status . As a Committee  we have a lot of work ahead of us in  making sure that if the facility is 
a Leve l 4 all the services offered there  shou ld be Level  4 standard and  if  a facility belongs to 
Level  3 we need to also make sure that the services that are being delivered there are o f a Level  3.  
I would also like us to support and have a Consultative Meeting with the County  Executive, reason 
being most of our  facilities, although they have employed more staff we are still running out of 
staff and still we have unqualified staff but through the gu idance from the County  Executive I hope 
that things will change. We are planning on how to visit those garages so that we can identify those 
service vans that have been stalled and that lie on my Department  of Public Works. We might be 
able to visit and id entify those ambulances. We have the same case in Naivasha  where there is an 
ambulance from the County  that has stalled there for a very long time.  
It is my humble request, I do not know and I would like to seek your guidance there, whenever a 
Committee  is going to do an investigation sometimes the media might destroy everything and the 
reason why I am saying this is we visited Naivasha  Level  4 Hospital and Hon.  Deputy Speaker , it 
is true the message that we got there was totally true but if through the gui dance of the Chair , once 
we do a research…  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Order! Order! Hon. Member  let us debate what is 
contained in the Motion . Kindly.  
Hon. Francis Kuria : Thank Hon. Speaker. Let me stop there. I have floated the idea in one way 
or the other. Thank you.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you the Hon. Member . Hon. Doreen.  
Hon. Doreen Korir : Thank you so much Mr. Deputy  Speaker . I would also like  to congratulate 
the Committee  on Health led by our able Chair . I am also a Member  of the Committee  and I visited 
the Bondeni Sub County  Hospital and also the PGH Hospital and what got me by surprise is the 
management issue at the hospital. The issue of the Hospital Management S ystem which is not fully 
automated.  
I was shocked because in this  era where people are moving from analogue to digital , the hospital 
is stil l using the manual way to offer their services. You realise  that most of the movement of drugs 
in the hospital are done manually so you can imagine the loss that we are encountering as a County . 
We nee d to move from the issues of m anual and go the digital way of management . At this point 
Mr. Deputy  Speaker, y ou realise  we are losing a lot of revenue in the hospitals that could have 
been generated and also serve the people at the County . So Mr. Deputy  Speaker sir, that issue of 
automation in the hospitals should be put into consideration because you realise  that we could have 
saved a lot and also improve on our services if you automate our services at the hospital.  
The issue of security also touched me at the hospital; you realise  that at the Bondeni Hospital we 
do not have  a perimeter wall and this is very crucial because in our Country at this point, you 
realise  that we are losing so many  babies, they are being stolen from  hospitals and we need to 
improve on the issuers of securi ty at the hospital by instal ling a  perimeter wall.  
Also, the issue of understaffing in the hospital is a matter that needs to be looked into because I 
realise d that most of the critical services being offered in the hospital like the issue of medical 
laboratory, physiotherapy, radio therapy we realise d that we only have one  staff that serves that 
purpose and we need to improve on that so that we can improve the  services being offered. I 
witnessed at the Physiotherapy Room we had only one staff and the que ue there was so long and 
therefore Mr. Deputy  Speaker sir those are the issues that shou ld be considered and looked into so 
that we improve our services at the hospitals. Thank you so much and I beg to support.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you. Hon. Tallam . 
Hon.  George Tallam : Thank you Mr. Deputy  Speaker for giving me this opportunity to discuss 
about Health Services . One , I want to support the Chair  Health Committee  for doing a 
commendable job. If you visit this hospital, you will find it is in a pathetic situation and you find 
that whereby the  In-Charge of th is hospital are running this facility as if it is theirs. I do support 
the Committee  fully so that the hospital can discharge their work effectively.  
Let me give an example of my place, Kabazi Ward , where  when you go , there is sabotage by staff 
or workers. So it is also good or we put it in a way that these hospitals can be run in a manner that 
they can also help and render services to the residents effectively. Another thing is that you find 
that the Board Members  and it is good also to involve the local Honourable  Ward  Members  when 
choosing these Boards. When you attend their meetings, the In-Charge tends to sabotage the area 
MCA and I do fully support the Chairman  of this Committee  so that local residents can get bet ter 
services.  
Another thing is about the availability of drugs; you go to these facilities you get that the facilities 
lack drugs but when you insist or talk to CO’s and CEC’s, they normally say they have delivered 
drugs to these facilities; then you wond er where do this drugs go? Who is accountable for them 
and so I do support this Report  fully Mr. Deputy  Speaker.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you, Hon Kanyere and then Hon. Nene . 
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Thank you so much Mr. Deputy  Speaker for this chance. First may I 
commend the good work that has been done by the Committee  on Health and also may I join my 
fellow Members  of this County Assembly  to congratulate the young brother Hon. Ali Hassan for 
being elected the President of the Young People in different Parties. Congratulations.  
 Also, may I say now according to this Report , personally it is nostalgic in a way ; firstly I was born 
in that facility, Bondeni, and recently just before I became the MCA, I was a Member  of the Board 
running that facility. Having engaged with the Report  and the observations and recommendations 
that have been put across by the Committee , to me I cannot agree more and say that indeed this 
facility like any other facilities in our County  need s to be helped by the Executive because one of 
the observations that we can see, I remember  I was in that meeting when we  were pu shing for Kshs  
27 million owed by the NHIF. You can imagine Kshs  27 million owed by NHIF to such a small 
facility ; they can hardly do anything with whatever is there.  
So, it is upon now the County  Government of Nakuru to formulate away on engagement with 
NHIF. It has been echoed by my colleagues that when you delay to  pay as an Institution your 
deductions to NHIF, there are some penalties that are there, but w hen NHIF delays to remit some 
revenues to our facilities, there is nothing that happens to them. So, I may want to support the 
recommendation that has been given and also to say in particular to this facility, Bondeni 
Maternity, it has a very big catchment area and it has been explained in the Report . As a 
Government, let us put more resources and promote it.  
Also in that Report , I may want to differ a little with  the Chair  when he says that on the ground it 
is a Level  Three but on papers it is not. This is a House  or records and I want to take this House  to 
Kenya Gazette Notice dated 30th July 202 1; this facility was among the Level -Four, that were there 
and you know if you say it is a Level  Three, there is an effect that can come out of that because 
when a facility has been graded as a Level  Four, there are some remittances that come from NHIF 
and if it is a Level -Three, there is no thing that comes from NHIF.  
So we need to be very careful when we say it is a Level -Three and yet on records it is a Level -
Four. So I want it to be on record that let us go by what is on Kenya Gazette until and unless the 
Kenya Gazette Notice is repealed,  that is when you can refer it to a Level -Three. So Chairman , I 
just want to support and to say that indeed in matters health in our County , there is nothing to smile 
about. Let us be serious, do our oversight role and particularity in my area I have a fac ility called 
Mirugi Kariuki and tomorrow in the afternoon I am going to ask for a Statement because there is 
nothing to smile about in matters  health. Thank you so much Mr. Deputy  Speaker for that chance.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you; Hon. Nene,  
Hon. George Nene : Thank you Mr. Deputy  Speaker for giving me this opportunity; first I feel 
very privileged that I am  given permission to talk when I even do not want to contribute, that 
means you take my comments very seriously. I was not even intending to talk because I think when 
Hon. Njuguna brought a Report  to this House , whatever other Hon. Members  have contributed, 
we are duplicating because the issue of drugs, understaffing it is the same thing that we have been 
repeating here; we ha ve visited those Department s many times  but nothing ha s been done. So I 
want to agree with other Hon. Members  that it is time for this Department  to act on these 
recommendations and if they will not act then we should  act as Honourable  Members  because we 
are the ones who vetted them and if they are not ready to work they should vacate those Office s. 
We can even sit on those Office s and Mr. Deputy  Speaker I do not want to talk much but let me 
conclude. Thank you, Mr. Deputy  Speaker.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you, Hon. Member , you know I always take 
you as an opinion and that is why I always give you  time to speak even if you do  not raise up your 
hand. May I take this opportunity before we end the debate, to welcome Hon. Dual e and you know 
he is blessed and we take this opportunity to thank you for the great steps that you are taking in 
the Leader ship of Youth in this Country. So, Hon. Duale may I give you this opportunity to 
interject on the Motion  of today and maybe say something . 
Hon. Ali Abdi:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy  Speaker, first of all let me take this opportunity to thank 
all Honourable  Members  for your goodwill messages that you have sent me. It is true over the 
weekend I was attending a Program called Program for Young Politicians in Africa; the Program 
is funded by EU through Program for Young Politicians in Africa and it brings together all young 
political players from Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania and Congo , of course East Africa. We were 
having the meeting  in Mombasa like for five days and Mr.  Deputy  Speaker , I was elected as the 
President of the Interparty Political Youth Forum of Kenya in Mombasa.  
(Applause ) 
So Mr. Deputy  Speaker, you can now call me President because I am the President of Young 
Political Players in Kenya and we will also have another election of course the East Africa 
elections. So maybe God willing I am still going to be elected as President again. So, Mr. Deputy  
Speaker we had a very  good time , the program is very important for young political players 
especially Members  of the County Assembly  here in Nakuru because it increases the participation 
of the youth in the political arena. This is something that we have always been told that siku yenu 
bado haijafika  so siku hiyo imefika ; this is our time, this is what young people are supposed to do. 
Mr. Deputy  Speaker I have invited the Secretariat that is spearheading that Program, I have invited 
them to come to the Assembly of Nakuru . I kno w we have young Members  of County Assembly  
here who are under 35 years.  
Mr. Deputy  Speaker I am going to confirm the time and the date that they are willing to come 
because they will be travelling from of course across the East Africa, Uganda and Tanzania  and 
some of them are in Kenya ; I have invited them to come to County Assembly  of Nakuru and of 
course through the Program that they took us from Mombasa to the Young P layers of Political 
Parties here at the Assembly and young Members  of County Assembly  of Nakuru.  
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker  thank you so much and thank you for the goodwill messages that 
I have received and while I am walking around you can call me Mr. President.  
(Laughter ) 
Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker . 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Congratulations once more. May I take this 
opportunity to maybe invite the Chairman  because I think we are all in agreement that we have a 
problem in Health Sector  in our County .  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : I just wanted to ask the President whether we can add the His Excellency 
or just the President.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Order Hon. Muraya ! Chairman  Health, the platform 
is yours to give your parting  shot.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Thank you Mr. Deputy  Speaker. Indeed, it is true that ambulance is old 
and we look forward  to seeing that if it is not about buying a new one, refurbi shing the one we 
have and servicing it to be for that status so that it can rescue our mothers and our patients while 
at that facility.  
Secondly, I would wi sh to respond to Hon. from  Nakuru East who has raised the issues of Bondeni. 
There is no single day I wi ll call a spade a big spoon and I have two facts. Let facts speak for 
themselves ; we might tend to negotiate and to beat around the bu sh while actually describing 
things , that is why the health status of our County  is nose -diving . It is because we have ref used to 
accept our true status. Let us go via true status so that tomorrow we can be challenged to improve 
from where we are to where we are supposed to be. I want to reiterate that and I would wi sh that 
we will be coming up with training one of this good days when we will be having a Whole House  
training. , we request the Department  of Health from the National Government to come and train 
us on the issues of status and accreditation of facilities because whoever accredited our facilities, 
I think there is a  challenge somewhere because a Level -Four that does not have a T heatre, that is 
not a Level  Four. A Level -Four that does not operate 24 hours, that is not a Level -Four facility. 
Therefore, there are many things that can be put on the table to substantiate facts and also to make 
sure that we have proper information that ought to be. That is why I said kwa ground mambo n i 
tofauti .  
On the issue of drugs, the Department  is saying that the drugs should  be purchased; they have 
already raised th e Purchase Order with the KEMSA and  we are waiting and I am requesting that 
when the drugs will be flagged off, it is the responsibility of every Member  to countercheck with 
their facilities whether the drugs have been delivered to their facilities because that is part of 
representation role.  
Mr. Deputy  Speaker the other issue pertaining health in our County , we are going to follow -up and 
make sure that all these matters will be put to rest because of the proper Leadership  that this House  
is going to show and the kind of oversight that this House  is going to show and actually to 
disseminate to the Executive s o that things can change. I have hope b ecause we have enough 
resources;  this song is going to change. I have hope because we have proper Leadership  in our 
County , the song is going to change and therefore the members  of public are going to enjoy the 
servic es that are going to be rendered by this County  Government.  
As a parting shot because Hon. Duale interjected, he said he is the President of Interparty , I and 
the rest here we do not belong to Parties and therefore they shou ld take us as equals. Thank you, 
Mr. Deputy  Speaker, we are independent minded and we stand for that.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Joseph Ngware): Thank you Hon. Mwaura for the good Report  and 
maybe before I put it to question; I want to direct that the Committe e on Implementation through 
its Chair , Hon. Mwangi, to follow -up on the implementation of this Report  and report  to the House  
on its progress within fourteen days. I will also liaise with the Office  of the Speaker for a meeting 
of the Whole House  to discuss matters of Health to the whole County  as a matter of urgency.  
(Question proposed that this House  adopts the Report  of the Committee  on Health Services  on 
the visit to Bondeni Sub -County  Hospital on 28th February, 2023 tabled on the floor of the House  
on Wednesday 19th April 2023 during the morning sitting ). 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
The House  stands adjourned up to today in the afternoon session at 2.30pm.  
The House  rose at 12.00PM  
 
 