COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday, 26 th September 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House Met At 3:30 PM  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): In the Chair].  
PRAYER  
PETITION (S) 
RESPONSE TO KIPLEMEIYWO RESIDENTS  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There are Petition s and there is a response to a  Petition  that will 
be responded by the Chairperson Committee on Lands, Housing and Physical Planning. The 
Report  on the Committee on Lands, Housing and Physical Planning on the Petition  by the residents 
of Kipleme iywo Village, Kiptagich Ward, Kuresoi South Sub -County, seeking the County 
Assembly, through the relevant County Executive Department to undertake a fresh Plot Allotment 
Public Participation  exercise of the Plots  in Kiplemeywo Village . Chairperson Lands Committee.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to believe that Members have this Report  
so that it can also save us time.  
COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP  
1. Hon. Peter Palang’a    -  Chairperson  
2. Hon. Eliud K. Chege    -  V/Chairperson  
3. Hon. Wesley Lang’at    -  V/Chairperson  
4. Hon. Alex Mbugua  
5. Hon. Ali Hassan  
6. Hon. Ann Wamaitha  
7. Hon. Bernard Gatuso  
8. Hon. Bethsheba Kerubo  
9. Hon. Catherine Mwangi  
10. Hon. David K. Muraya  
11. Hon. Degaulle Naburuki  
12. Hon. George Kanure  
13. Hon. Fadhili Msuri  
14. Hon. John Mwangi Macharia  
15. Hon. Joseph Nware  
16. Hon. Mary W. Njoroge  
17. Hon. Neto Sakwa  
18. Hon. Paul Lang’at  
19. Hon. Peter Njoroge  
20. Hon. Samuel Ngarama  
21. Hon. Samuel Tonui  
Acknowledgement  
Mr. Speaker , I take this opportunity to thank Members  of this Committee  for their commitment 
and contributions during the Committee Report  Writing . I also thank the Offic e of the Clerk  and 
the Speaker  for the facilitation during this visit.  
On behalf of the Committee, it is my pleasure and duty to present the Report  of the  Committee on 
Land s, Housing & Physical Planning . 
Introduction  
Mr. Speaker, t he residents of Kiplemeiywo  Village in Olenguruone, Kuresoi -South Sub -County 
petition ed the County Assembly of Nakuru concerning plot allotments at Kiplemeiywo  Trading 
Centre.  
The main Petition ers representing the residen ts of Kiplemeiywo  Village in this Petition  are Samuel  
K. Mibei and Samuel K. Lang’at. However, there are 94 other Petition ers in this Petition .  
The Petition ers in this  Petition  gave the grounds of their Petition  as follows:  
1. That, on September  2021, the County Executive Committee Member for Land s, Housing 
and Physical Planning set out in an exercise to allocate plots  within the newly established 
market  space in Kiplemeiywo  Trading Centre.  
2. That, the aforementioned exercise was undertaken in complete disregard of the relevant 
procedures and render ed the whole process a nullity.  
3. That, the County Officers in the Department together with the Sub -County Administrator 
and in the presence of the area Chief, oversaw a seriously flawed exercise where there was 
no Public Participation as provided for under Section 3 (c), (f) and 4 (f), (j) and (h) of the 
County Public Participation Act, 2016.  
4. That, the Sub -County Administrator failed to act in good faith by not conducting an all -
inclusive Public Participation during the allocation of plots  to the residents , leading to the 
locals failing to secure a reasonable number of allocated plots , whereas majority of the 
plots  were allocated  to non -residents.  
5. That, the Sub -County Administrator selected a Committee to oversee the process of plot 
allotment without a reasonable notice of  a meeting to the residents and therefore, they were 
not given a reasonable opportunity  to participate in the nomination  of the  village 
representatives in the said Committee.  
6. That, the Committee having be en appointed , proceeded to oversee an illegitimate process 
whereby all of them were rewarded with more than one unit of the available plots  as well 
as their spouses.   
7. That, efforts have been made to have the matter addressed by the Sub -County 
Administrator and it failed to give a satisfactory response.  
8. That, the issues in respect of which the Petition  is made are not pending before any Cour t 
of law, or any Institution or Legal Body.  
Mr. Speaker, t he Petition ers’ prayer to the Committee on Land s, Housing and Physical Planning 
is to set aside the plot allotment exercise conducted in the said date and order the County Executive 
Committee Member to undertake the exercise afresh taking into serious consideration the need for 
wide Public Participation  and considering the relevant laws and policies.   
LEGAL PROVISIONS ON PETITION S  
Standing Order 196(1) of the Nakuru County Assembly Standing Orders , A Petition  means a 
written prayer to the Assembly by a Member  of the public requesting the Assembly to consider 
any matter within its authority where any fundamental freedom provided for in the Constitution is 
allegedly  denied, violated , infringed or threatened .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Mr. Speaker, o n 28th March, 2022, the Committee members of Kiplemeiywo  Trading Centre sent 
a Counter Petition  to the Committee on Land s, Housing and Physical Planning refuting the grounds 
given by the Petition ers. This one, I want to emphasis e because I want to reiterate it later that after 
the Petition  that we had received with those background issues that I had raised on 28thMarch, the 
Committee has received another counter Petition  to the Assembly giving the facts as they all 
briefed. It is good to note that …  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Hon. Majority Deputy Whip?  
Hon. Leah Serem: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I arise to ask this Honorable House if Mheshimiwa 
Muraya is in decorum.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Mheshimiwa  Muraya, there is a question as to whether you are 
in decorum. Use your Microphone, kindly . 
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I am in full decorum. Maybe, she can 
elaborate what kind of decorum she is referring to.   
Hon. Leah Serem: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I doubt because I normally see our President 
wearing those clothes during functions.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Hon. Hassan?  
Hon. Ali Hassan: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I want to confirm before this House that 
Mheshimiwa Muraya is not in decorum. He is not appropriately dressed for this House. The  clothes 
that he has put on are not suitable  for this House. They are suitable  for Church  and a Mosque  out 
there. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable Member for Maai Mahiu  
Hon. Eliud Chege: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I think the decorum of this House you have 
repeated it not once or twice. I t is simply a good shirt and a tie. When I see Hon orable  Mwangi 
Muraya, he is not in a tie and if we encourage it, we are going to lose the dignity of this House. 
The Honorable Member is completely out of dress code.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Point of Order  Mr. Speaker sir. Two Members cannot stand on the floor 
while other Members  are deliberating  on an issue.  
Hon. William Mutai: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I think it is true that the decorum of this House 
is well described and when you fail to adhere to the same, that is  a sign of laziness, disrespect and 
I want to ask the Chair that you give direction for Hon. Muraya to leave  this House.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable Member for Lakeview Ward, previously, you…  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir . I know I speak for the devil. A Kaunda Suit is a 
suit. We must appreciate the diversity of this Nation. We cannot have the head of  State putting on 
a Kaunda suit and we the lieutenant and the soldiers that he leads cannot put  on the same. On 
Friday, we shall be having a Meeting  in Nairobi, Bomas of Kenya and I think everyone should go 
there in a Kaunda suit. He is in decorum.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honorable Member for Kamara.  
Hon. John Maritim: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. What Hon orable  Muraya has won is what we 
need to wear in future. It is very beautiful. I t is African and I believe that you cannot put a tie no a 
Kaunda suit . We can experiment it but the gentleman will look like a cartoon if he puts  on a tie. 
The best thing we can do is, for now, we adopt that clothing so that even tomorrow, I can come 
with one and it will be okay. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member for Eburu Mbaruk Ward.  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. As much as I am sharing in the sentiments 
that we are diverse and we have our African culture, I also think we cannot amend the Standing 
Orders just merely on the floor and as we are here today, the Standing Orders have described a 
different dressing code. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The last person and then the Honorable Member for 
Viwandani Ward will have an opportunity to talk.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honorable Member for Olkaria Ward . 
Hon. Peter Palang’a: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I hope I will resume my presentation after this. 
Just on this, I think we have had some serious discussions about the issues of decorum in this 
House. If my memory serves me well, I remember even outside this Assembly when we were in 
Kisumu, we really deliberated seriously on what  the decorum entails. It is my request that we 
should not at any given point have double standards until and unless this House adopts the way 
forward. We cannot apply double standards. Your memory which I know is very  fresh, you gave 
a direction. My point , please, can you jog your mind and get to know the directions you gave and 
you give the same direction that you ha d given. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Hon orable Member  for Viwandani Ward, are you in 
decorum?  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Mr. Speaker sir, I am in de corum  because they are referring to what I am 
wearing as  a Kaunda suit. If I get them well, you cannot wea r a Kaunda s uit with a tie and again, 
I want first of all to correct my brother, Hon orable  Eliud Chege that I am not in a  shirt. This one 
is not a shirt; i t is a c oat. He cannot differentiate between a shirt and a coat. I do not expect that he 
really understands  about the kind of decorum he is referring to.  
Secondly, I think what Hon orable  Members have been wearing in the floor of this House is not 
what I am wearing today and I am not saying that I am special. I am now shifting or entering into 
the new reality of where we are headed to as a Country,  being led by the Head of State . He cannot 
mislead this Country by what he is wearing. I think Honorable Members need to understand and 
to see where we are headed to because I would also wish to see Honorable Hezzy wearing a Kaunda 
suit tomorrow. I think I am in decorum and your ruling from your end will justify whether I am in 
decorum or not. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Honorable Muraya, you are attracting a lot of trouble. 
When you say that the Head of State cannot mislead us on matters of occasion and on matters of 
this House, we are not able to say that whatever Leaders would wear, then we are going to 
customi se and domesticate it for this House.  
 Honorable  Mwangi, today you are in a Kaunda suit. Members have agreed to that but to avoid 
this confusion, we are going to allow you for this Afternoon  but it need s to be noted very strongly 
that we are going to stick to what we have agreed on as a House. We are not going to have grey 
areas. It is either white or black. You are inviting us to look at the grey areas . As a House, we are 
not going to go to that direction but because the Members have agreed that you are in a suit, then 
this needs to be the las t time that such ambiguity is going to be presented to this House.  
Hon. Peter Palang’a: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. You remind me the days that I reminisce in my 
life under the Leadership of Hon orable  Kenneth Marende. I wish to move by saying that I had 
started saying the second Petition  from the Members from the same area and this time round, the 
Members  who benefited from the  allotments.  
Mr. Speaker, t he Report  I am giving was occasioned as the Report  or the Petition  from the people 
who purportedly lost within the balloting. We received the other Petition  and it talked of so many 
issues; the balloting exercise was fair and was witnessed by the area MCA of Kiptagich Ward and 
in that Petition , just to single out number (7) of it, that is on page 5, i t talks of those wrangles  that 
arose from those who did not succeed in getting the plots  during the balloting.  
Mr. Speaker, i t is important to note that the Committee received two Petition s from two different 
groups of people from the same area. The Committee on Lands,  Housing  and Physical Planning  
conducted primary Public Hearing and the Committee undertook a number of sittings. We have 
not attached the photos but we have very many photos because of the bulkiness of the photos. They 
are around 160. There were those photos that were taken during the Public  Meetings.  
Mr. Speaker, I wish to take note that those who were to ballot, we established that there was a 
Committee that was formed by the Members themselves. They elected some Members to oversee 
the process. Those Members who had been appointed were;  
1. Wilson Rutto -Chairperson  
2. Robert Rono -Secretary  
3. Emily Cheruto -Treasurer  
4. Daniel Bet -Member  
5. Richard Cheruiyot -Member  
6. Newton Kibet -Member  
7. Joseph Kibet -Member  
8. The area Chief Mr. Wickliffe Too was also in attendance  
Mr. Speaker, t his Committee, having been appointed was to oversee the  balloting process. We 
were also to establish that they had to collect some Kshs. 1000 for every Member for him or 
her to qualify to ballot. I think in their own understanding, they had to set a criterion  on how 
or who to ballot.  
Mr. Speaker, let us just go back a little bit. The land under sub -division was 20 Acres. Some 
land was set aside to be riparian land because that location has a River  that is passing there so 
there was land that was set aside, one and a half acres (1.5 acres) . There was an Open -Air 
Market that was set aside of one acre, an Open Park , that is for vehicle s parking , one a cre, tree 
nursery with one and a quarter acre then within the allocation, there were some 3 Churches 
that had complied by paying Kshs. 1,000 as the criteria set by the Committee  and so within the 
allocations, the three Churches; PEFA, SDA and Apostolic Church.  
Mr. Speaker, o ut of all the submissions by the Members, in summary, this is what we 
established ; that those people who  had registered for balloting w ithin the balloting process, 
there w ere 100 Plots . It was evident enough that everyone who had balloted could have gotten 
the plot or the space. In that regard, out of the 200, the 100 Plots  that were available, 6 of them 
were set aside for the Churches. Every church that benefited was given two plots  then there 
were 94 plots  that were left for balloting.  
Mr. Speaker, as we were going through this process, we invited different people, other than 
the Petition ers. We also invited the Planner, the Surveyor and contrary to the submission of 
the first Petition ers that this sub -division and planning was done by Private Owners, we were 
able to establish that this process was undertaken by the Lands  and Physical Planning 
Department by having the Planner and the  Surveyor undertaking that.  
Mr. Speaker, w ith all due respect, let me make an observation without getting word by word 
in terms  of what we got. We had to interrogate all the people, including the Surveyor, Planners , 
the Ward Administrator  and the Sub -County Administrator. It is worth noting that, in our 
establishments, those meetings  that were Public Participation which was coordinated by the 
Sub-County Administrator, w e could also get it very clear from the ground that Hon orable  
Rose from Kiptagich Ward was at the center of thos e conversation s and discussions. It is 
important to note.  
Mr. Speaker, t his is what we noted;  
1. That some residents of Kiplemeiywo  were not allocated plots . We had to establish that 
indeed, some of the Members from that Ward did not get the plots  and it was evident, 
considering the number of plots  that were available against the number of people who 
had balloted. It was evident that some of them lost in getting it and that necessitated 
the Petition s because people felt aggrieved.  
2. That Kiplemeiywo  Trading Centre was originally situated where the current 
Kiplemeiywo  Primary School is situated. There were some shifting and discussions 
where the  market is and where the plots  were allocated. They had shifted and that was 
agreed amongst themselves that they were to agre e to move from wherever it was an d 
it was push ed to a sloppy area , leaving a school on the other side where probably 
students can access education without any topographical problems.  
 
Mr. Speaker, w e also noticed that there was need to have a  school constructed by the CDF, actually 
this is what necessitated all the changes because through the then area Member of Parliament , they 
had to put up a school  and therefore there was need to relocate and do some rearrangements on 
what comes where. We were also able to establish that the Surveyors  surveyed one and half acres 
of the riparian land and that of the Trading Centre.  
Mr. Speaker, t he Surveyors reserved one hundred and fifty Lock -Ups. What we were able to 
establish within the market  that had been set is that other than the plots , there were those Lock -
Ups, those small kiosks  that were meant to be put up alongside the market  so that people could 
still do their small businesses, and we were able to note that this had not been done by the time of 
our visit to the area.  Therefore,  we came up with recommendations on how we can mitigate that 
situation.  
Mr. Speaker, v arious Public Participation meetings  were conducted and it was evident, everyone 
was confirming that indeed those meetings  were conducted by the Sub County Admin istrator . 
Members of the public were present and we have given photos to that effect. As I summari se, there 
were 94 Plots  and I have said that in bullet number ten. Of course,  94 Plots  against the six plots  
which I had already mentioned. Not all applicants , and this is where I want to draw your attention 
Members if you are moving with me. There was a typo error in number 12 and I want to make a 
correction that not all the  applicants who balloted got the plots .  
Mr. Speaker, i f you read that statement , it says that applicants  who balloted were not residents of 
Kiplemeiywo  but residents in the larger Kiptagich Ward ; that was the point but there was that point 
that was saying that the balloting publicly at the Trading Cent re, so it is important to know that. 
Members and Hon orable  Speaker through your permission, I want to say that summarily those 
were the observations.  
Mr. Speaker, a llow me to make the recommendations as per what we saw as a Committee.  I 
mentioned that there were Petition s from across, the two sides. We   observed that the Surveyor  
and the Planner of the County Government are the people who undertook the exercise contrary to 
what the first Petition ers had alluded. The result was that people who balloted and mostly those 
who did not get felt aggrieved because they felt that they should have gotten  the plots  and that is 
why they had petition ed.  
Mr. Speaker, t hat the members of Kiplemeiywo  community  should vet residents . We are now 
talking about the Lock -Ups; spaces that could be left. In our recommendation we feel that because 
there were  some allegations that balloting process was not restricted to Members of Kiptagich 
alone.  It was kind of open to Kiplemeiywo  and i t was left open to members of Kiptagich. We also 
established that the people who benefited were not strictly from Kiplemeiywo  village but were 
from Kiptagich so the members of Kiplemeiywo  village were of the opinion that this ought not to 
have happened.  
Mr. Speaker, t he only thing we can do is to allow the process as it is because as we speak some 
people are already paying  land rates to the County Government , so it was very cumbersome for us 
to undo the process. We uphold that the allocation of the plots  to remain  as they were only on the 
second phase of vetting for the purposes of Lock -Ups. People  of Kiplemeiywo  themselves should 
vet the members  before they do the balloting for them to benefit from the remaining spaces.  
Mr. Speaker, t o avoid such a thing in future , the County Government Lands  Department should 
really expedite the issuing of the Title Deeds so that again we do not open the Pandora’s box and 
this does not only mean in Kiplemeiywo  but even in other areas where people have done the 
process of planning, surveying and allocating.  The County Government needs to expedite the 
issuance of the Title Deeds.  Allow me to request Hon orable  Member s and a good  friend, I am well 
guided here that this is a Report  being tabled and therefore it does not require to be seconded. It 
was a Petition  so I beg to submit the Report . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Chair person . The Member for Kiptagich, 
the Hon. Rose, you were part of the process and you come from the ground. Are you satisfied with 
the findings and recommendations of the Committee?  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. First,  I would like to commend the Committee 
of Lands, Housing and Physical Planning  for visiting Kiptagich and Kiplemeiywo  to see what was 
happening there. I am  very happy because the Committee visited and were able to sit with the 
community  and listen to both sides, those for Kiplemeiywo  and those against. They were able to 
listen keenly, move around and they saw what was happening. After looking at these observations 
from the Members , I really support it because the people who had pain are the ones who had given 
out the one Kshs 1000 . Some of them did not give but during the voting , it was really very 
transparent, everybody sat down and one member  could go and remove the ballot but afterwards 
those who did not get the plots  are the ones who were in pain.  
I think this is the right thing. As we speak right now we still have 150  Lock -Ups. So those who are 
in the list should go for that. Let me thank the Committee for the good job they have done. Thank 
you very much.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. I will allow some few Members to make their 
statements  especially the ones from areas with perennial land and planning issues. The Hon orable  
Member for Elburgon.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I have listened to the Report  that emanated 
from the Petition  and if you followed the flow of that Report  you will notice that there many key 
areas that have been highlighted. I am neither pro those who got the plots  nor am I for those who 
did not get the said plots  but there are various areas that were assumed and in respect to the Member 
who is here,  one, a directive ought to have emanated from the Cabinet  authoris ing allotment of 
those plots .  
Secondly  Mr. Speaker , even before we go to the Cabinet, there ought to have been a change of 
user of that land because we are not told what the actual use of that land was before it was allotted 
to Private Developers.  
Mr. Speaker, I understand that it was for trading ; and this  was public land but now we are bein g 
told that it is being turned to  private use. There ought to be a Public Participation to allow for 
demarcation to go directly to that use. The grey areas are what are making some of the member s 
feel dissatisfied. We ought to also have  Minutes from the  Cabinet showing that the Cabinet  in 
Nakuru sat to approve this land to be demarcated.  
Thirdly Mr. Speaker on the issue of the Sub County, there is one lady from the De partment of 
Lands  who said that she was not the person who was receiving Money . We need to get an 
explanation on what was the use of the money , where was this money  going to , so that we can 
understand further as a House as to how we  approach this matter because issues concerning money  
and land are very emotive.  
Therefore  Mr. Speaker , we need an explanation because anywhere the Government is assigning or 
allocating , I do not believe that money  should be involved. It should be free and fair. It should be 
a process where by the Government  is assisting the Member s of the public to gain.  
Mr. Speaker, a nother issue , because this is a House that is going to set the precedence, I have some 
piece of land which is in Elburgon that belongs to the Government  and if we today decide as the 
people of Elburgon to allocate the land to ourselves the re is a process ; a lengthy one. 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to request the Committee that in future , it should  not confuse us or leave 
us more confused because in future , the precedence that you are taking will cause trouble. In a 
situation where we have two different communities  like in the area where we come from , if one 
community  will benefit and the other community  will not benefit then at the end of the day there 
will be skirmishes. What I request is , let there be given procedures as to how we can allocate land 
in future to the beneficiaries or to the members of the public because for this we have not been 
given any procedures as to how these people were supposed to benefit.  
Finally  Mr. Speaker , on the issuance of Title Deeds anybody who can go to court today will put a  
caveat to that land because that land as it stands is a Trading Cent re. There are many things that 
the Government can do with that land rather than changing the land to private ownership. 
Therefore, I pose the question to the Committee through the Chair person  to go further into that 
matter and explain to us now that there are these people who felt dissatisfied , how we are going to 
deal with them. There are many squatters  in the Country  and anybody in the Country  deserves to 
be compe nsated or be allotted that plot.  How  are we going to go about that matter?   
Thank you Mr. Speaker and I wish that the Chairperso n owing to the knowledge that he has been 
in this House for like 20 years or so, he is going to give the correct stand o n that matter.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Hon. Mwangi? Resume your seat. The  Member from 
the area . 
Hon. Rose Chepkoech : Mr. Speaker Sir, I just want to tell the Member that there are four things 
that were mentioned ; a p rimary  school , a secondary  school , a Dispensary and Trading Centre.  
Those  were public utilit ies but people just went there and subdivided at first and that is where the 
County Government came in and showed them where the Trading Cent re was supposed to be. 
Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Member for Maai Mahiu who is also the Vice Chairperson 
of the Committee on Lands.  
Hon. Eliud Kamau : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this chance. On this issue of Kiptagich, 
it was a matter that was very hard before this Committee and we might paint this thing in many 
ways but the actual thing is , and if you look at the Petition  they are not saying that the  land was 
not supposed to be subdivided. What they were saying is they did not get the chance and that is 
the matter that was before the Committee. They were petition ing that they were not given a chance 
to be a part of it so we wer e not dealing with the issue of whether it was right to give out the piece 
of land.  
Mr. Speaker, w e are all in agreement that they needed that piece of land but that land could not 
satisfy the whole  community ; that each and every one could get a chance. This is a ruling that 
required a lot of thinking. It is like a situation where one of the Kings in the Bible  called King 
Solomon. One of the prostitutes slept on her baby, the  baby died and the following morning the 
other one was saying that let us divide the baby into two. What we are saying here is that the land 
was very small and could not satisfy ever ybody , but due process was followed and therefore I urge 
this House that because those people who had brought this Petition  are supposed to be satisfied, 
let us just hope for a better tomorrow for them. They should allow those who got a chance to enjoy 
it because it could not satisfy everyone. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Mwangi.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to appreciate the Committee on Lands, 
Housing and Physical Planning and also to ask a question. The Hon orable  Chair person  told us that 
there were 150 Lock -ups which were set aside for trading. The recommendations here recommend 
that the County Government expedite the process of issuing and letting the people do the balloting. 
I am not getting it and when there is any change of user of any public  utility it must be thorough 
Public Participation. I was going through the same in my area and change of user from the one 
side of the Land Stadium to another one and …  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the information the Hon Chair?  
Hon. Peter Palanga : This will really assist us as a House because I think we are missing a point 
and it is not that we know but I would wish to let you know. Hon orable  Members there was no 
change of user in terms of the usage of the land. These people within this area  had a Trading Cent re 
allocated to a School, a Hospital  and a Marke t as it was before . So they were only relocating from 
where this Market  is. It was not a change of user in terms of the purpose of land under which it 
was being used for. It is important to note that there was no change of user ; there was only 
relocation like we have been trading from here and therefore we want to trade from this end same 
Market, same community  same people.   
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Hon. Mwangi.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Hon orable  Speaker, I do not understand what the Chair person  is telling me 
because if there was no change of user then the Marke t place could have remained where it was. 
It is like we have not relocated from the old Chambers  to this new Chamber . We need clarity on 
what criteria they used and I heard him say that there was no need to call those people who had 
petitioned . They called other  members of the public to come give their views so there is a problem 
and what we are going to set here … 
 Hon. Rose Chepkoech : Point of information Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Member for Kiptagich, Hon orable  Rose.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech : Mr. Speaker Sir, the w ay I put it and the Members of L ands Committee 
saw. These are the four Public Utilities . Wacha nizung umze Kiswahili kidogo ndio nieleweke . Kuna  
Primary, Secondary, Dispensary na Trading Cent re lakini kwa sababu haikuwa imepimwa watu 
wengine walikuwa wameingia  Primary , wengine wakaingia  Secondary , wengine Dispensary  na 
wengine  walikuwa wamejifiny ilia huko kwa  Trading Cent re. Wakati walipoambiwa waandike 
kirasmi ndio waende wakatiwe hiyo ya  Trading Cent re hapo ndipo wenye hawakupata wakahisi 
vibaya ndi yo wakaleta hii Petition .  
Jambo la pili  umeuliza kuhusu  Market  na Lock -Ups. Ninafikiri kila Mheshimiwa anajua wakati 
hizo Lock -Ups zilitenge nezwa hapo kwa Market, kuna  Lock -Ups ambazo zinagawanywa  na hizo 
hazijafanywa.  So that is why there is 150 Lock -Ups zenye watu hawajapatiwa. That is why I was 
requesting the Hon orable  House to  allow the ones who  had paid Kshs 1000  to be part of the 
balloting because the plots  could not accommodate everyone and you know that when someone 
does not get they always bring problems. That was the issue.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Viwandani kindly finish your 
submissions. Then Hon. Member for Keringet.  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I do not want to dwell on that matter because we 
are all in the field of politics and satisfying our electorates.  So Mr. Speaker,  I might end up wasting 
a lot of time and the Hon orable  Member is satisfied that her people will be satisfied with the 
process but the precedence that we are going to set in this is what is going to take us to the next 
level so let me rest my case and let the Committee recommendations work.  
The Speaker (Hon Joel Karuri): Thank you.  
 Hon. William Mutai : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I want to concur with what my 
colleague Honorable  Muraya has said concerning the precedence that we are going to set. As we 
move  forward , there are quite a number of replica situations that are going to occur if we do not 
handle this matter and  Petition ers nicely.  
Mr. Speaker f irst of all, let me congratulate the Committee for coming up with these Findings  but 
I still have a lot of questions that I want to ask. From the look of things  Mr. Speaker , it is like this 
Committee that is led by the Chair Wilson Rono had started collecting the money ; they had some 
vested interest s in the same because number (3) there, there is  somebody called Emily Cheruto 
who has been mentioned in this Report  collecting some Kshs 1000 from individuals.  
My question is, where was this Money  going to , who was the custodian of the money , and was it 
taken into the County Treasury ? These are the kind of questions we need to ask. Secondly Mr. 
Speaker there is also this issue that the money  was collected beyond the available  plots , because i f 
you know that the plots  are 100 and you go ahead collecting more than 100 then it means that there 
is some bit of corruption that is taking place because what are you going to give these people whom 
you have collected money  from.  
Mr. Speaker, I tend to believe what Hon orable  Muraya has said that there w ere some political 
interest s and he has asked the Hon orable  Member from Kiptagich to substantiate  more because if 
she is satisfied that it was so and the people are  okay with it , then she can go ahead Mr. Speaker.  
I want to believe that is the message but then this one is going to set a precedent that is very 
dangerous because we are yet to settle quite a number of issues concerning this . I come from 
Keringet and this issue is actually emerging and it is very emotive ; some people paid a lot of 
money , they are waiting for  Lock -Ups and I am very sure more Petition s are coming very soon. 
So, let us address this matter very seriously so that we can get a better methodology to address the 
same. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Member for Keringet; the Hon. Member for 
Maiela. Hon Jane.  
Hon. Jane Gituku : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for this opportunity and thank you for the team 
that conducted this business . It is very appropriate because our communitie s and us must liaise 
together especially over issues of land and there are many more that are coming up because our 
Institutions which are Sub County Offices have been the epitome of corruption  and confusing our 
wananchi  over issuance of plots  and if they feel you do not deserve, they just get into the system 
and remove you in favour of their friends.  
Now on the matters of this area of Kiptagich, Mr. Speaker when you look at the Petition  – which 
is a complaint from wananchi , you realis e that they had issues ; no. 1,2,3,4, and therefore the team 
that went to the site visit, I want to commend them for a good job. But just for concern and record 
purposes that when you have a Petition , it is also good to recommend depending on the number of 
issues raised by the community  and one that is very salient is one on number 6. There was a 
complain t that the plots  have been allocated to spouses  and friends of those people doing the 
allocation.  
Mr. Speaker, d id the Committe e ascertain whether actually the plots  were issued to spouses  or it 
was a fair and clean  deal? The other one is on Number 5 , the Sub County Administration which 
has been accused because I know there are many cases that you bring here concerning the Sub 
County Administrators. They are actually an Authority unto themselves. I have seen one in 
Naivasha refereeing to the Commissioner  in Nairobi and recommending for allocation  of plots  on 
leases, and you wonder where  the Ministry of Lands is, in th ese matter s. These people  are 
untouchable and they believe we are just a passing cloud and then they will be back very soon 
when we are gone to this heinous act that they have committ ing.  
Mr. Speaker, I am speaking this very seriously because we have our people crying outside there 
and when we see them coming with these Petition s, remember that they have been able to go 
through these systems and some have been very much affected. Mr. Speaker, w e also have the 
issue of money  collected and I do  not know why the Committee  did not address that issue seriously , 
because our Surveyors, the County Government and the Executive were using their resources to 
go and do this business for the Mwananchi , the Bottom -Up, and the  hustler s down there . And even 
without considering  that they did not know the many plots  that they were going to allocate , they 
went ahead and collected money . This money  should be accounted for. When you multiply 200 by 
Kshs 1000; I think that is what we were told.  
Mr. Speaker, c an we have a breakdown  of what was used with this money  because some of these 
activities should seriously reflect on the need to assist our people but not subject them to issues 
that will also affect their pockets. Why  these people come with such Petition s; the underlying and 
what you can read is the close hearing and also the issue of money , so as much as we would like 
to discuss this issue and we appreciate the work that our Chair man has done and even as he 
prepares for much more that is coming along the way, I believe we need to  up our game and let 
people understand that they have a responsibility of being accountable for every coin they collect 
from Wananchi . Do not collect money  to pay and then tomorrow you decide that Mwananch i has 
no voice in whatever you are trying to do. So , thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for this opportunity and  
I support the Report  believing that there are some issues that our Chairman will look into . I beg to 
rest my case.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, before the Chair  responds, we have two hon orable  
Members; the Hon orable  Member for Lake  View and the Hon orable  Member for Soin and then 
the Hon orable  Chair will be responding and of course explaining where the money  is. 
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Thank you Mr. Speaker ; that remains to be an emotive issue within this 
Country  and when I listen to the conversation here, I have also taken my mind aback and looked 
at the Chair Lands Committee. Mr. Speaker th is gentleman , has gone ahead even held meetings at 
the community  level and every now and then, he kept on brief ing us  with what was happening on 
the ground. Most of us in this Assembly might not have that privilege of knowing what was 
happening at the ground or even meeting these members of this community .  
Mr. Speaker, I hear someone saying that there are Petition s coming . The people who have settled 
on this land all of them came together and they looked for a procedure on how this land w ould be  
subdivided. The MCA was there who is the representative ; and this did not happen last year or this 
year but it happened during the former regime and when they settled, they invited the County 
Government for facilitation and also through the Surveyors. I remember at one point the Surveyor 
came up with very big maps and  he showed us everything that transpired and I think at the  
Committee level, we were satisfied that there is nothing much that could have happened apart from 
what happened Mr. Speaker .  
Mr. Speaker, w hen you engage in a process, when the rules have been set on the table, the citizens 
of this Country must always know how to respect the rules that have been set. It is not just today 
you will wake up and say I will bring a Petition , I will go to Court  because even the Court System 
today advocates for Alternative Dispute Resolution whereby you can settle things out of the Court. 
Mr. Speaker, o n the same note, I would  not know or wish to know why the residents of Lakeview 
Ward in Naivasha will go to claim land in Viwandani Ward in Naivasha because it is not proper 
and that one will just bring disharmony within the community . Members of Keringet should settle 
in Keringet and those of Kiptagich settle where they are located. They can only integrate thr ough 
marriage or buying of land Mr. Speaker.  
(Laughter ) 
Other things should be settled that way , otherwise Mr. Speaker, I support this Report  in totality. 
Thank you . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Hon. Member for Soin  
Hon. Degaulle Naburuki  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I want to congratulate the Chair and the 
Committee  for the commendable job thy have done in this issue of land. They even tried visiting 
the site Kaplemeywa Centre to see what was going on at the ground. For sure when we went there 
to hear what their complaint was, is that they had agreed after giving out the public utility, the 
remaining 94 Plots  all the 200  Members agreed that they have to do balloting and before one 
qualifies to ballot, you have to give a fee of Kshs 1,000 and that is what it was agreed. But nobody 
knew who was going to be allocated the 94 plots . 
Mr. Speaker, a fter balloting for the 94 plots , some  residents did not get and that is when the 
complain ts started. Otherwise we did not establish where the money  was and maybe the 
Chair person  or the area MCA knows where the money  is but it was something that was agreed on 
and to do balloting. After that Mr. Speaker those who did not qualify for the pieces of plots , start ed 
petitioning  the process.  I want to say the Committee did their best that they could do. Mr. Speaker, 
until there let me rest my case and I support this Report . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Chairperson . 
Hon. Peter Palang’a:  Mr. Speaker; thank you once again and I want to appreciate all the 
observations and the input from all the Members  who have contributed after going through the 
Report . There are a number of issues that have been raised  and I wish to run through them , address 
them , then I leave the House to make a decision. Remember a Committee is an extension of this 
House and therefore this Report  will eventually be a product of this House  
Mr. Speaker , there are a number of issues that ha ve been raised and I want to start by saying that 
on the issues of the money , I and my Committee  tried to interrogate to get where the money  is but 
again when we were told that the Committee  was established by the Member s themselves and they 
chose  their leadership, from Chairman  to the Treasurer  to oversee the process. When we tried to 
gather the information about that, we were told that  it was a criterion agreed amongst them on who 
holds first ballot because again within them, they could not have allowed any Dick and H arry from  
anywhere to come and ballot. So, from what we got from them, th ey agreed on the amount of 
money  as a Committee and that money  was not received by County Officers from what we 
gathered.   
Mr. Speaker, t hat was a set criterion  and from  our establishment  it was not taken by the Ward 
Administrator or the Sub County  Administrator  nor the Surveyor. If there was any backdoor 
arrangement s then the Committee  could not establish whether that money  was given.  
Secondly Mr. Speaker, I can see Members kind of saying that we are setting a bad precedence . 
When  you present the Petition , it is presented to the Committee  to look at the merits. We cannot 
just go because somebody has raised a Petition . In my view and m y Committee we were to look 
at the merits. For me we looked at this Petition  having been raised by the members. Yes, it had 
some merits but again we asked the person and the people around , I posed a question on whether 
they would have p etition ed if they had benefited, without answering, the answer was evidently no. 
This was coming up out of “tumeshindwa  na hatujapata na tungependa tupate shamba , na shamba 
ni tamu ukipata pia ni vizuri. Unanung’unika kwa sababu mtoto wako hakufanikiwa ”  
So, in terms of the list of the  members  Mr. Speaker , why we g ot more numbers than the plots; I 
was just looking at an analogy  probably the recruitment of the  staff. You start by advertisemen t, 
you do the shortlisting , you do the interviews then there will be beneficiarie s. Do you advertise the 
same number that you want to recruit?  In my view, the answer is no.  
So Mr. Speaker , the list being more than 100 was to have people to ballot so that out of that there 
would be those who would  benefit and these who would lose. That is why they had to have more 
in the list than the 100 that had eligibility for the plots.  
Mr. Speaker, i n terms of the  Lock -Ups, in our understanding and wisdom of the Members , we 
thought that these people who are feeling they have been aggrieved because they did not get; of 
course why we feel the County Government should expedite this process of balloting and the 
vetting should be done such that we do not go back to the complains that people balloting  are not 
residents of this area.  That they call themselves for a parade and say th ese are our residents so they 
vet themselves then they will go on for balloting for us to resolve that.  
Mr. Speaker, a gain, those aggrieved will be satisfied by getting a smaller place. The spaces 
available  are 150 and we established  that the spaces are smaller than that of a 50 by 100 feet plot. 
I want to say in terms of somebody saying , could we have established bibi na bwana , it was not 
possible, and it was cumbersome for us. We tried to ask people to provide us with marriage 
certificate s, we could not establish the marital status of the beneficiaries because our hands were 
tied and because those were allegations, c onfirming whether one was married to the other, we 
needed to reach the Registrar  of Person s which was difficult and therefore we could not establish 
whether one was married to somebody or a son to somebody. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you ; the Hon. Chair  for Health.   
 Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : [On a Point of Clarification] Mr. Speaker I would wish to further 
request for clarification . We still operate under the  African tradition s and also there are many  
rulings  and many cases that ha ve been given by the Courts  that if I engage in carnal knowledge I 
will be known to be associating with a certain lady, it will be presumed in the Court  of public that 
is my wife . Therefore Mr. Speaker, that one is usually suffice and therefore that of f the ca rt. 
Mr. Speaker,  I would wish to request that before you use your wisdom on this matter and before 
you make a ruling, let this matter be interrogated further because as one  Honorable  Jane Gituku  
said, that there are many emotive issues that h ave already been raised but have not been addressed.  
Mr. Speaker, i f you look at the petition ers question by question; they raised like nine issues for 
determination that the Committee  ought to have determined. This matter ought to have been 
adjudicated by this Committee  and the response given back. This is because the issue of giving 
birth does not start during labour.  It starts very early from the conception to the day the baby will 
be born. This baby that we are calling Kaplemeywo Trading  Centre,  the conception was the land 
itself and its registry to the p oint of actually adjudication , to the point of allotment so that the 
members can be comfortable.  
Mr. Speaker, I would wish you adjourn this matter . Some  of us who could have some input  that 
will not offend anybody, we can go to the Committe e and perhaps even the House can look into 
this matter so that at the end of the day, we will give precedence that will not ruin the reputation 
of this House. One of the Members  said there is Alternative Justice System which the member s of 
public sought other than going to the  Courts , let us go to the County Assembly; that is one way of 
good faith that this members of public have towards this House. Let us relook ont o this matter, let 
us look at the nitty gritt y of this matter and at the end of the day, the flag of this Assembly will fly 
high because I know everybody will be comfortable at the end of the day, otherwise Mr. Speaker 
as you make your ruling, I would wish to have certain grey areas relooked so that the issue of 
Chiefs, three of them being allocated plots, and it is not wrong  for a Chief to get, but knowing that 
they were  Administrators on that matter and they were also officiating those issues . 
Mr. Speaker, i f you look at that lady that I presume was a  Sub-County recanting everything and 
saying she was not involved, at some point also raises issues. The issues of money  also c ame up 
and therefore I do not wish that this Trading Centre to look like Elburgon Market where to the 
very day and those who have visited , the Trade Committee  visited that  Market and people said 
they will not go to that Market even at gun point because of that such issues of allotment that came 
up and money  exchanged hands and t o this very day they are trading along the road.  
Mr. Speaker, h onorable  Bernard can confirm he is a neighbor to my Ward today they are using the 
road as a Market because of such matters  and that is why I am saying for the future and for bringing 
harmony to these people, let this matter be relooked into further and I know you can invoke your 
powers and let this matter be relooked in another perspective , be one of the case that will give this 
House the proper name that it deserves. That in the future , all the member s of the public will run 
into this House for assistance rather than going to the  Courts . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Chair . 
Hon. Peter Palang’a : While I am seated there, I am standing here with your permission; I think 
there could be some levels of capabilities and I want to adhere here and admit on Hansard that as 
my Committee  and in my own wisdom, th at was the  best of the Findings . And Mr. Speaker, with 
your permission, if you so feel that you can also redirect  it to any other  Committe e under probably 
the H ealth  or anything  Mr. Speaker…  
(Laughter ) 
I will not be offended because that is my  Finding and the Committee Findings, and that is why I 
feel we have Committees  formed, and they gather information and we have presented what we  
gathered and what we  feel in our wisdom . We could be wrong but that is our position and that is 
what we found on the ground. But Mr. Speaker with your wisdom , you can also have honourable 
“Learned Friends ” like him and any other person ; they  can also  come up with a different opinion 
which can assist this County. Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the matter before the  Committee was a Petition  and 
to the best of the knowledge  of this House would be that the Member  for Kiptagich has sworn to 
take the best interest s for the members of the Ward  into consideration. So, to this extent, there has 
been no further Petition  to that. However, should there be further Petition s, the House will still be 
open to consider any other new Petition s. But as of now, the matter rests until such a time should 
there be need or any other Petition . 
PAPER(S)  
SHABAAB DIGITAL CENTRE  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Paper to be laid by the Hon orable  Chairperson 
Committee on ICT and e-Government , the Hon. Hezzy Kariuki . 
Hon. Hezzy Kariuki:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir I stand to lay the Report  of the Committee on 
ICT and e-Government on Shabaab Digital Cent re. I beg to lay . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): T hank you, t he Pape r is properly laid before this Hon orable  
House.  
 
 
NOTICE(S) OF MOTION  
SHABAAB DIGITAL CENTRE  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Notice of Motion  that is going to be given by the 
Honorable  Chair , Committee on ICT and e -Government; the Hon. Hezzy Kariuki . 
Hon. Hezzy Kariuki:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I stand here to give a Notice of Motion  that this 
House adopts the Report  of the  Committee of ICT and e-Government on Shabaab  Visit. I beg to 
give a Notice.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): On Shabaab  visit? You visited a specific  point . 
Hon. Hezzy Kariuki:  The Committee on ICT and e-Government visit to Shabaab Digital Centre . 
Thank you . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you , the N otice is given . 
ADJOURNMENT  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable  Members  this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 
9.30am.  
The House rose at 3.05pm  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 