COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 11 th  October 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3:25 PM  
 [ The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) in the Chair]  
PRAYER  
PAPER(S)  
NAIVASHA WATER AND SANITATION COMPANY LIMITED  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Paper  to be laid by the Chairperson Committee on 
County Public Accounts and Investments .  
Hon. Simon Kamau: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I wish to lay a  Paper  on the Report  of the 
Committee on Public Accounts and Investments  on the Auditor General’s Report  on the Naivasha 
Water and Sanitation Company Limited for the year that ended 30 th June, 2021. I beg to lay the 
Paper.  
NOTICE(S) OF MOTION  
NAIVASHA WATER AND SANITATION COMPANY LIMITED  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Notice of Motion by Hon orable  Chairperson 
Committee on County Public Accounts and Investments .  
Hon. Simon Kamau: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Cogni s ant that the County Assembly of Nakuru 
has gone D igital, of course u ntil when, as the Chairperson Committee on Public Accounts and 
Investments  finds under the guidance of this House, a proper name so that I can go completely 
D igital so that I stop carrying the P hysical Paper . Until that happens, I wish to use the P hysical 
Paper  that I am holding here.  
Mr. Speaker, I wish to give a Notice of Motion that this House adopts the Report  of the Committee 
on County Public Accounts and Investments  on the Auditor General’s Report  on Naivasha Water 
and Sanitation Company Limited for the year that ended 30 th June, 2021. I beg to give the N otice 
of Motion.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Chairperson. The N otice is properly given.  
STATEMENT(S)  
PREPAREDNESS FOR EL  NINO  RAINS    
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a  Statement response by Hon. Chairperson Disaster 
Management and Emergency Services.  
The request for  Statement was done by Hon. Anthony Kanyere concerning County preparedness 
for the expected El Nino  rains. The Chairperson.  
Hon .  Moses Koros: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. On 20 th September, 2023, Hon. Anthony Kamau 
Kanyere,  MCA Nakuru East Ward sought a S tatement from the Chairperson on the S ectorial 
Committee on Disaster Management and Emergency Services regarding the County’s 
preparedness for  the forthcoming El Nino  R ains.  
The Committee further sought more information on the following issues;  
1.  The County Government’s preparedness for the upcoming El Nino  rains projected to be 
around in October and December 2023.  
2.  We also sought from the Department ,  the Mitigation Measures that the County Government 
has put in place to decrease the menace that could be posed by the upcoming El Nino  rain s .  
Mr. Speaker, t he Executive Member Committee on Public Service, Devolution, Citizen 
Engagement and Disaster Management responded to our request for the answer a nd they have 
reported  as follows.  Just  like the rest of the Country, the County Government of Nakuru received 
alerts from the Metrological Department indicating a thread of extre me rainfall in line with the El 
Nino  Phenomena .  
T o enable the Country to prepare and adequately mitigate and respond to the harmful effects of 
the anticipated phenomenon, the County Government has taken the following measures;  
1.  Establishment of El Nino  Preparedness and Report  Structure and the Structure  has been 
organi s ed as follows;  
We have a Steering Committee, which  has been established to provide D isaster P reparedness and 
R esponse D irection. This Steering Committee is charged with the task of setting goals, objectives 
and  to ensure that the D evelopment and I mplementation of a joint W ork P lan, including its 
Monitoring, T racking and Report ing of the performance of a C omprehensive W ork P lan. The 
Steering Committee is convened jointly with County Secretary and Head of Public Service plus 
the County Commissioner.  
So Mr. Speaker, b oth of them convene such a meeting and the Committee includes County 
Executive Committee Member  for Infrastructure, County Executive Committee Member for 
Public Service ,  Devolution, Citizen Engagement and Disaster Management; County Executive 
Member for Education, ICT , e - Government and Public Communication. County Executive 
Committee Member for Environment, Water, Energy, Climate Change and Natural Resources, 
County Executive Member for Health, County Executive Member for Lands, Physical Planning, 
Housing and Urban Development, The City Manager, Municipal Manager s  for Gilgil, Naivasha 
and also  Molo.  
W e have the  Committee on Security  also included, the Kenya National Highways Authority, The 
Kenya Urban Roads Authority, The Kenya Rural Roads Authority, The Kenya Railways, The 
Kenya Power and Lighting Company and the Water Resource Management Authority.  
T he Steering Committee meets regularly to consider progress in implementing the joint W ork P lan 
and find solution to any emerging or potential challenges to the D isaster P reparedness and 
R esponse I nitiative.  
Mr. Speaker, t o ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of the Disaster P reparedness and R esponse 
P lan, the Steering Committee is working along three Sub - Committee as follows;  
I.  The Surveillance Team. This team works with all structures of the County 
Government of Nakuru to gather, analy s e and disseminate data to enable 
decision making by Steering Committee . Such infor mation includes sets of 
proposed actions .  
II.  The surveillance efforts relate  to the areas that are covered, including blocked 
Water Ways and Storm Water drainage, Water Levels on all Wate r bodies 
including Lakes, Rivers, Dams, Water Pans and even incidences and risks of 
falling rocks and Landslides. The Team  also monitors disease outbreaks, the 
potential risk of displacement or any actual displacement; risk and virtual 
destruction of Public Infrastructure including bridges, ECD C enters, Hospitals 
and any other areas.  
We have got also risks and substantial destruction of KPLC posts that may pose further danger to 
life and property.  
Mr. Speaker, a nother area that is looked into includes risk and virtual destruction of roads by 
rainfall, including the appearance of Fault Lines and even blocked  Culverts . The potential threat 
to Food Security, Human Vulnerability Assessment.  
The Sub - Committee will provide daily briefs to the Steering Committee  on progress  in 
im plementing these Terms of R eference.  
The S ub -  Committee includes:  
  County Executive Committee Member, Public Service  –  Team L ead  
  Chief Officer for Public Service and D evolution  
  Chief Officer for Livestock, Fisheries and Veterinary Services  
  Chief Officer for Public Health  
  Chief Officer for Environment, Energy, Climate Change and Natural Resources  
  Nakuru City Manager  
  Liaison O fficer –  O ffice of the Governor  
  Director Administration  
  Sub - county Administrator , Nakuru Town West representing Sub - County 
A dministrator  
  Convener of the Ward Administrators – Ward Administrator, Subukia  
  Assistant County Commissioner coordinating the Nyumba - Kumi initiative  
  The Water Resources Management Authority  
  The National Youth Service.  
ii.  The Public Education and Citizen Engagement Team  
This Sub - Committee is D eveloping and I mplementing a W ork P lan enabling robust and 
meaningful citizen engagement in the spirit of Publicatio n and Civic Education .  
 The Public Education Sub - Committee is constituted as follows:  
From the County Government ;  
  County Executive Committee Member for Education, ICT, e - G overnment, and 
Public communication –  Team Lead  
  Chief Officer for Education  
  Chief Officer for Public Participation  
  Chief Officer for Agriculture  
  Chief Officer, Social Services  
  Director Communication  
  Director ICT  
  County Access to Information Officer 9 Also Sub – County Administrator, Kuresoi 
North  
  Convener of the Ward Administrators –  Also, Administrator, Subukia Ward  
  Representative of the County Commissioner  
  National Youth service  
  Kenya Wildlife Service  
  The Water Resources Management Authority  
iii.  The Response Team  
This is the engine of the El Nino  preparedness and response initiative.  
This Sub - Committee will apply all resources within and beyond the County Government to ensure 
that data obtained from the Surveillance  and Public Education Team is utilized, to enable the 
County  to mitigate against and respond to any threats emanating from the impending El Nino  
phenomenon.  
 
The Sub - Committee is;  
  Undertaking R apid R esults I nitiatives on the unclogging and desludging drainages 
and culverts.  
  Repairing damaged infrastructure, including roads and bridges.  
  Un burdening any W ater P ans and D ams that may be at risk of breaking under the 
weight of flood water.  
  Working with S takeholders to open up any blocked W aterways.  
Mr. Speaker, t he  Membership of the Response Team includes:  
  County Executive Committee Member for Infrastructure - Team Lead  
  Chief Officer, Roads  
  Chief Officer, Public Works  
  Chief Officer, Disaster Management  
  Chief Officer, Social Services  
  Chief Officer, Public health  
  Chief Officer, Water  
  Chief Officer, Environment  
  Representative of the County Commissioner  
  Representative of the NYS  
  The Kenya National Highways Authority  
  The Kenya Urban Roads Authority  
  Kenya Railways  
  The Kenya Power and Lighting Corporation  
  The Water Resources Management Authority  
From N on  S tate Actors  
  Kenya Red C ross  
  World Vision  
Mr. Speaker, t he County Government has cascaded these teams to the Sub – County and Ward 
Levels . The teams include all sectors and team  Members represented at the Headquarters Level 
and the National Government Team Members.  
The Teams  are cross - referencing, ensuring that alerts received are actioned within a reasonable 
time.  
Mr. Speaker, t he budgetary constraints also have made the Committee prioriti s e mitigating the 
highest disaster risks as M edium and L ong - T erm and are laid to resolve broader challenges.  
Because of the budgetary constraints the danger s or threats have been categoris ed into H igh - R isk 
A reas, M edium and L ong - T erm ,  so that they can be addressed differently.  
Mr. Speaker sir, I would like to encourage our Hon orable  Members that because this is an issue 
that is cutting across all the Departments and is affecting everybody, let us be involved in 
mitigating and also r eport ing all issues of threats to human life. The work of the Committee  has 
been cascaded down to the Ward  level so we are encouraging the Hon orable  Members as T eam 
L eaders at the  Ward s,  to take the lead and ensure that we do not lose lives in the event of the El 
Nino  rains. Committees have already been established in some of the Wards  and I know the 
program is ongoing for those Ward s that have not formed the Committee ,  you will soon be 
involved. I am requesting that you take the lead in deciding who the Committee Members will be 
and will help in straightening everyth ing at the  Ward level.  
Mr. Speaker, a s I conclude ,  I hope that the Hon orable  Member who requested this  Statement has 
been dully answered. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon orable  Chairperson. Is the Member who had 
requested for that Statement in the House? You can say whether you are satisfied with that Report .  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Thank you so much Mr. Speaker.  Let me take this opportunity to thank 
the Chairman  for  Disaster Committee for the job well done but I have some concerns. My only 
concern is that you have said that the  Committee has been cascaded down to the Ward  level, it is 
good to involve Members of the County Assembly so that they can know. We hear that these 
Committe es are in place and as Members of the County Assembly from the Ward , we have not 
been involved. What I wanted to hear from that Report  is ,  if you have the Budge t and if there is a 
Budget  then how much do you have? Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Any other Member with views or comments on that 
response? The Hon orable  Member for Kihingo?  
Hon. Simon Kamau : Thank you Mr. Speaker. From the onset and as Honorable  Member from 
Nakuru East has said, I want to commend the  Chairperson for the Committee  on Disaster . I have 
a few reservations on the same because as long as the Chairperson is saying that the Members of 
the County Assembly from specific Wards  were involved, I want to confirm that I was not 
involved ,  instead it has gone to another step of tainting my name negatively.  
Mr. Speaker, t he person who was directly involved was the Ward Administrator . In Kihingo Ward, 
the Administrator  who is currently there is standing in for the deceased Ward Administrator. 
Therefore,  this Ward Administrator does not even have a clue of what Kihingo looks like or even 
the people in Kihingo. What this W ard A dministrator did was to share the names of the Village 
Elders  across the Ward  but luckily or unluckily ,  the said Ward Administrator shared names of the 
Village Elders from where I come. I w as getting this information from the Social Media .  
And of course  Mr. Speaker , now you can try to guess as a politician ; you can guess what was 
happening because I was told El - Nino is only in where I come from specifically .  It  does not affect 
other areas in Kihingo. It was that bad Mr. Speaker and I want to say it has tainted my name .   
Yesterday ; I was trying to clean my name because of something I was not involved in. If this had 
happened before and the Members  of the County Assembly, the 55  elected  Members of the County 
Assembly were involved ,  I believe this would not have happened.  
So  Mr. Speaker , it is good to inform the Chairperson,  if he is not aware that in some instances and 
in some Wards, the Member s of the County Assembly were not involved at all and it is good to 
involve them because they know the area s of concern in as far as this Di saster M anagement 
R esponse is concerned.  
Mr. Speaker, if we are involved then I believe everything and even the Chairperson  h imself,  things 
will be easy but  if it goes the other way round,  I am sorry ,  I do not want to be part and parcel of 
something that I was not involved. I am going to disown like  nobody’s business. Thank you  Mr.  
Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Member for Kihingo; the Hon orable  
Member for Turi Ward .  
Hon. John Mwangi : Thank you Mr.  Speaker, I concur with what Mheshimiwa  for Kihingo is 
saying because also in my Ward , I did not receive any communication .  I just heard in  the Ward 
there that all those activities were being conducted by the Ward Admin istrator  together with the 
members of Provincial Administration . Therefore, I think that the Chairperson  for the  Committee  
on Disaster should take this right and communicate to the relevant D epartment that the Hon orable  
Members were never involved ,  and bearing in mind that when the Disaster or El Nino  comes, it is 
the Hon orable  Members who will be given information by the electorates and therefore I think 
something requires to be done so that we can be part and parcel of that particular plan that is in 
progress. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; The Hon orable  Member for Kaprures .  
Hon. Robert Rutto:  Thank you so much Mr.  Speaker ,  for record ’s  sake I represent the good 
people of Kapkures Ward. It is very unfortunate that the Committee  on El - Nino did  not involve us  
as the County Assembly Members ,  because in my case in Kapkures, I came to hear that there is 
some Committee working on the same. Unfortunately  Mr. Speaker, they are not conversant with 
our Wards. That is why we are the chosen people to represent our various Wards  and we should 
be informed of anything going on in our Wards.  
Mr. Speaker, a great Greek Philosophe r by the name of “ Socrates ”  once said “Human  Wisdom 
begins with the recognition of one’s own Ignorance .”  Mr.  Speaker, my opinion is that this is a 
turning point in our Assembly .  We  have to be informed and know what is going on in our Wards  
because for heaven’s sake, if anything happens with this rain of El - Nino phenomenon, we might 
be held liable by our constituents .  Unfortunately, we were not involved in the decision - making 
process which is against the law. I wish we co uld revisit this issue and be given a chance to 
represent our people properly. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the  Chairperson ; your response?  
Hon. Moses Koros : Thank you  Mr. Speaker, I have heard .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Chair person  come in front .  
Hon. Moses Koros:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker, once again, I am the C hair person for the Committee 
on  Disaster Management and Humanitarian Assistance. The contributions of Hon orable  Members 
to this phenomenon is of paramount importance and the  Members have a role to play and they 
must be involved at that level of the Ward . If there are Members  who have not been contacted, I 
am asking that as we go ahead, they contact the Sub - County Administrator who is in charge ,  but 
we are going to take this matter to the Executive to ensure that all the M embers are involved.  
Further to this  Mr. Speaker , we are also insisting that whenever there is any disaster menace at the 
Ward  level, whenever any assistance is being given, the Hon orable  Member of that respective 
Ward  should be made aware of the presence of the team in the area. That is what we have done in 
the past; there was some kind of a lapse but as much as possible, when the assistance is being 
given, the Hon orable  Member should be available or if you are not in, send your representative 
just to stump your foot in everyt hing that is taking place in the Ward.  S oon  we are going  to have 
a Consultative Meeting between the Executive and the Disaster Committee Members so that we 
can also come up with ,  especially on the issue of budgetary allocation to the El - Nino . From now 
on, I thank the Hon orable  Members for your sentiments and I am also requesting before we have 
the Consultative Meeting , I would like you  to  give us  suggestions that  we will give to the team so 
that we can have an effective Disaster Management Team across the Ward.  
Otherwise, thank you Members  for your contribution, we are going to take this one seriously and 
the Committee Members are serious about this and we thank everybody for their contribution. 
Where situations or  Members have not been taken seriously, where they have not been involved, 
we want to say that is not the right thing but it will be rectified. Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
Thank you  the Hon. Chair; next order?  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Mr.  Speaker sir; I stand on Standing Order 205( 2 )  Mr. Speaker ,  if you 
can allow me to...  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What about it?  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : There is a Petition  that was laid in this Hon orable  House sometime back 
in February 2022 and this Petition  concerns my area whereby the  Petitioners sought the 
intervention of this Hon orable  House on matters to do with the Quarry in my area. I would like to 
request the Committee  on Environment, Water and Natural Resources to give us the status of that 
Petitio n because up to now, we have never heard about it Mr. Speaker. Thank you .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Chairperson  Committee on Environment  or  Vice - 
Chairperson?  
Hon. Isaac Rottok:  Yes, I am present  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is the status of that Petition?  
Hon. Isaac Rottok:  Mr. Speaker I request to be given several days to follow up about the situation 
and bring back the Report .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the Hon. Vice - C hairperson, it is good to reiterate the 
reason why  Members of the public that we represent in this House ,  t he reason why they had 
engaged this House in a manner of a Public Petition, is because they believe that this House 
represents the best interests of their welfare. However, I am sad that you have not lived up to that 
expectation in that particular Petition  because a  Petition is given a maximum of 60 days for the 
public to get a re sponse and now this one is more,  from the month of February .  That  is up to nine 
Months.  The  Chairperson  of the Environment, Energy and Natural Resources Committee needs to 
present a detailed status Report  to this Hon orable  House on Wednesday next Wee k. The  Vice - 
Chairperson note and pass that information to the Chairperson  of that Committee .  We  will be 
expecting a full status Report  on Wednesday.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok : Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Welcome; we a re done with  Orders of the day.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members this House stands adjourned until next week on Tuesday at 9.30 AM  
The House rose at 4.05 PM  
 
 
 