COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 25 th  October , 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03:30 PM  
 [The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYER  
PAPERS  
MEDIUM - TERM EXPENDITURE FRAMEWORK, SUPPLEMENTARY FOR THE FINANCIAL 
YEAR 2023/ 2024.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Paper to be laid by the L eader of the Majority Party 
the honorable Alex Langat.  
The Majority Leader (Hon. Alex Langat): Thank you Speaker. I rise on Order No. 5  to lay a 
Paper on the Nakuru County Government Medium - Term Expenditure Framework , which is 
Supplementary  for the Financial Year  2023/ 2024. Mr. Speaker, I wish to lay the said Paper  before 
this honorable House. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the honorable Majority Leader. The  Paper is hereby 
committed to the Committee on Budget and Appropriations f or onward action ;  Mr. Chairman take 
Note. next order!  
MOTION  
COMMITTEE ON COUNTY PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND INVESTMENTS  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Motion by the honorable Simon K a mau , Chairperson 
for the Committee on County Public Accounts and Investments. Chair! The  Vice Chairperson of 
that C ommittee! Any Member of that Committee? T here are no Members of the County Public 
Accounts Committee and investment in the House.  
Hon. Ann Njaguara:  Mr. Speaker, I am here.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri):  So, is there any Paper to be laid maybe the Chairperson, had 
delegated  that to the membership of that Committee?  
Hon. Ann Njaguara:  Mr. Speaker Mwenye Kiti wa Kamati anashughulikia .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri):  There is no R eport to be laid. The Chairperson did not delegate 
s o that any Member can lay it , or is it just the Chairperson who can lay it?  
Hon. Ann Njaguara:  The Chairperson.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Okay. Then we bypass that Order.  
MOTION  
SHORT RECESS   
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Motion by Hon. Alex Lang’at, the Leader of Majority 
Party.  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang’at): Thank you  Mr. Speaker, I rise to move a Motion That 
pursuant to the provisions of Standing Orders 31, ( 3 ) , this Honorable House a djourns from today 
25 th October 2023 to 7 th November 2023. This one is in accordance to the Calendar of this 
Honorable Assembly. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. You have an Honorable Member to second?  
Hon. Alex Lang’at:  Mr. Speaker sir, I request Hon. Alex to second the Motion.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. This is a House of rules and as the Majority 
Leader has stated very well that this House has a Calendar, and this Calendar has to be followed 
for the purpose of why the Calendar was set. I stand to support the Motion. Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Motion has been seconded. The Motion is that 
Pursuant to the Provisions of Standing Order 31, this House adjourns from today, 25 th October 
2023 to 7 th November 2023 in accordance with the Assembly Calendar. The Motion is open for 
Debate. I am going to allow a maximum of 4 Members then I put it to question. Hon. Minority 
Leader and then the Member for Shabaab Ward in that order.  
Minority leader  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion 
as put forward by the Leader of Majority and seconded by the Honorable Member for Naivasha.  
Mr. Speaker, i t is true and it is within the Calendar that we are supposed to have a break. We have 
run this Assembly concurrently for very many days and in order for us to avoid Mental Stress and 
Depression, we need to have a break to go and stay with our f amilies. Mr. Speaker, a t the same 
time, you know there is information that is saddening our C onstituents that El Niño rains are not 
coming and the Members do not understand. We have to go back and let them know that El Nino 
rains are not coming and we ar e going to have no more rains and also advise them on the crops to 
plant because we had given them some other advisory information. I support the Motion  Mr. 
Speaker .  
Hon. David Wathiai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I stand to support the Motion that we go for 
Recess. Mr. Speaker at this time from my area, Shabaab Ward, we have lost one of our Community 
L eaders who was also an A spirant. He has succumbed to Cancer. This will give me enough time 
to go be with my p eople in Shabaab, mourn, and prepare for the send - off of our friend the late 
Jimmy Garang.  If I had not been in this House, then this man would have been the MCA for 
Shabaab because he came second.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Honorable Member, we regret and share with you the sadness of 
the moment. Now what is the reality, are you in the House or not in the House?  
Hon. David Wathiai : Mr. Speaker, I am in the House and that is why I am supporting the Moti on 
for us to go for recess,  so  I can assist in the preparation for the burial of my good friend Hon. 
Jimmy Garang. I rise to support this and pray that we are not going to lose more young men and 
future leaders. God to be with us and guide us. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Honorable Member. My concern was that if you were 
not the MCA then he would be MCA. So, I was trying to compare the two. I wanted to know the 
reality but you have confirmed that the reality is that you are the MCA now.  
Hon. David Wathiai : Yes Mr. Speaker. I meant that if the great people of Shabaab had not chosen 
me to be the MCA maybe Jimmy Garang would be the MCA today but God gave me this chance 
and that is why I am here today. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Honorable Member for Mauche then the 
Honorable Member for London.  
Hon. Moses Koros:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the Motion that we proceed on 
recess so that we can interact with our electorate. As you are aware, several projects are going on 
in our Wards. This will enable us to oversight efficiently, and interact with the c ommunity now 
that the Government has announced that we shall not have El - nino rains and we shall still have 
heavy rains. This will allow us to contribute to the En vironmental Conservation in our County by 
spearheading planting of t rees an d also encouraging the c ommunity m embers to form various 
groups, especially for planting t rees  and  especially t ree Nurseries so that in the next rainy season 
we shall have a lot of t rees to plant. So Mr. Speaker, I support the Motion that and we proceed on  
R ecess. Thank You, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, now before Mheshimiwa  for London comes for 
debate ,  the Honorable Member for Mauche has just said something about El - Nino rains, and the 
Honorable Member for Lare who is also the Minority Leader said that people are asking him when 
it is going to rain. Did you promise at any point that maybe you could know  when it could rain or 
they heard that in the Media and want to confirm it from you? Maybe you can expound.  
The Minority Leader  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Mr.  Speaker .  T he Hon. Koros and I 
come from the same Constituency  and also the damage that is done by waters in my  Ward comes 
from Mauche .  W e had promised our farmers, we were to do Dams  and d esilting ,  and all that in 
order to receive rain s.  B ut now they are worried after doing all that work, now the rains are not 
coming and also we had told them to plant long term crops because the rains were to go up to 
January and February .  S o now we have to go and re schedule the program and tell them to do short 
term crops. So Mr. Speaker ,  that is the message we have and we have now to adjust our 
information. Thank you Mr. Speaker  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you .  The  Hon. Member for London .  
Hon. Bernard Gatuso:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity .  I rise to support 
the Motion for us to proceed  on Recess.  This  is a House of rules and order, and we have a Calendar 
that we are supposed to follow ;  I believe it is in order. Also  Mr. Speaker , we will be able to reali s e 
emerging challenges within our Communities  as we continue walking around and  evaluate projects 
that we have been able to do, explaining to our c ommunities and also to some extent, we will be 
explaining to them the changes that we have been effect ed  to  our Ward s  Budget regarding what 
we were able to do as MCAs in various Wards. Thank you Mr. Speaker, I support .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you ,  I now want to put it to question.  
(Question put and agreed to)  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members be upstanding .  This House stands adjourned from today 25 th  October 2023 to 7 th  
November 2023 at 9.00 am  
The House rose at 3.50 PM  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 