COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 12 th April 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03:20 PM  
[Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage ): Next order.  
STATEMENT  
GIOTTO DUMP SITE  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage ): There is a Statement  from Hono urable Rose 
Chepkoech.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: I want to give a Statement, the response to smoke emission emanating 
from Giotto Damp Site . 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage ): What is it Hono urable Wathiai?  
QUORUM  
Hon. David Macharia: I want to say that this House  does not qualify to continue transacting it s 
business because I do not think we have the quorum. I stand guided if we have the quorum to 
continue or we adjourn until we attain the quorum.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage ): The Hono urable Whip to confirm for us whether 
we have the quorum ; the Sergeant At Arms to confirm for us whether we have the quorum. I will 
invoke Standing Order Number 37. The Sergeant  At Arms to ring the bell for five minutes.  
(The Quorum  bell was rung)  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  We can now proceed because we have attained  
the quorum. Hono urable Rose.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: I want to table a  response to a  Statement concerning smoke emanating 
from Giotto Dump Site.  On 1st March 2023, Honorable Simon Kamau Karanja, MCA Kihingo, 
sought a  Statement from the Chairperson of the Sectoral Committee on Energy, Environment and 
Natural Resources  regarding smoke emissions emanating from the ongoing fires at Giotto 
Dumping Site in London Ward.  
The Committee  sought more information on the following issues:  
1. Whether the County Government is aware of the fire burning garbage at Giotto dumping 
site. 
2. The plans the County Government is undertaking to protect the rights of the residents to a 
clean environment  
3. The short term and long term measure s the Department has in place to curb the spread of 
smoke to the environment.  
 
Honourable  Temporary Speaker,  in the response, the Department observed that it was aware of the 
fire burning sections of Giotto dumping site and it is worth noting that the situation was being 
cataly sed by the current harsh climatic condition in the Country. Secondly, the County 
Government of Nakuru is undertaking the following plans to protect the rights of the residents to 
a clean environment.  
a) Pursuing private -Public partnership to r ecover waste to other useful products through 
recycling.  
b) Set up a waste recovery Centre  in Gilgil where the County has procured 25 acres of land.  
c) Enhance solid waste recovery by Small Holder Firms to reduce the amount of waste 
reaching Giotto Dumpsite.  
d) Increase awareness on reuse and segregation of waste by members of public  
e) Increase tree cover around all landfills to sink as much Greenhouse Gases as possible  
f) Institutionali se waste management in the County for efficient and effective service delivery  
Hono urable Temporary  Speaker , on the short -term and long -term measures, the D epartment has 
put in place the following plans to curb the spread of smoke to the environment  
a) Putting out fires using Fire Extinguishers and Water Bowsers  
b) Ensuring compliance from Solid Waste Service Providers that no burning waste will be 
brought to the site  
c) Ensuring that there will be no onsite burning of solid waste at the dumping site  
Lastly, as a way of long term measure , the County Government will recover Giotto dumping site 
altogether within the shortest time and reasonable time possible in collaboration with Private 
Sector.  
Hono urable Temporary  Speaker,  as I conclude, it is worth noting that the fires at the dumping site 
have been completely put -off by the ongoing rains hence no more smoke emissions are emanating 
from Giotto Dumping Site.  
Hono urable Temporary  Speaker,  I hope that the Hono urable  Member who requested for the 
Statement has been duly answered.  Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage ): Thank you Hono urable Rose , I will give two 
Members to give their input concerning the Statement . Hono urable Kamau.  
Hon. Simon Karanja: Mr. Tempor ary Speaker , I think I was not the one who sought this 
Statement . I was doing it on behalf of another Hono urable Member who was not present during 
that time ; so I may not have so much to say about Giotto  because I even do not come from that 
area. Maybe the Hono urable Member who sent me during that particular day maybe  he is not 
convinced. I may say I am convinced whereas the answer  that have been given by the Chairperson  
for the Committee on Environment is not convincing to the Hono urable Member who had sent me 
during that particular afternoon. Thank you, Honorable Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage ): Thank you, Hono urable Jane from Maiella.  
Hon. Jane Gituku: Thank you Hono urable Temporary Speaker and thank you for the Report. 
There is something that I have just reali sed in the answer especially on the resolutions that have 
been put down ; we do not have a time frame, if we are speaking of setting up a waste recovery 
center in Gilgil , the Count y has procured 25 acres of land and we should be given the time that 
Hono urable Ros e is referring to because we have time that is not limited on when this Gilgil 25 
Acres will be put to use.  
I want to request that whenever these answers are given to us we put timeframes so that we do not 
continue waiting until we bring up the question again when the drought season is back. Right now,  
we have been told because of the rains they have been saved but I do not believe that we will not 
have drought again and we will have to bring up the same quest ion. I think this information requires 
some timeframe. Thank you Honorable Temporary S peaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  Hono urable Alex.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Honorable Temporary Speaker, this issue on management of waste within 
the County should not be taken lightly because these wastes are all over. The situation in  Giotto is 
witnessed in other Sub Counties within this region like in Naivasha in my own area I have a 
Dumping Site and you find that the conditions of these Dumping Sites are w anting.  
In this reply, the Chairperson for the Committee on Environmen t stated very well that there is 25 
Acres of land  procured in  Gilgil but even if Giotto  was to be transferred back to Gilgil  and the 
dumping is done there, I assume that these 25 Acres  have been procured because may be that area 
is sparsely populated considering that where Giotto is, the population is very high. The County  
and the Department  of Environment should come up with ways on how to recycle all these 
materials instead of just sh ifting on e problem to another community . I am very sure that the Gilgil 
people will not want to receive the dump waste from this other side of town but each Sub-County 
can manage their own waste. This is because if we keep on transferring my problem from h ere to 
the other person, I think there will be a problem in future.  
In his response, I think our Chairperson  representing the  Department here today should give us 
concrete ways on how this waste will be managed. This waste  should either be recycled or 
managed in a better way because we have companies that are doing this waste management 
business in a better way. The Department  should even p ay a cou rtesy call to a Country like China 
whereby Waste Management has been done so well considering their population  of almost  a billion 
people  and that Country has never complained about Waste Management .  
I think the Department ought to do a Benchmarking  Visit and involve some  Members of this  
County Assembly  and the Executive  and we will foster a good society. One can not do his business 
well because of the smell emanating from the Dump Site. I ask the Assembly to consider a proper 
Report from the Committee  on Environment stating ways to manage the Dump Site.  
Today , Nakuru County has a population of  around 11 million residents . What about the next 50  
years ? We shall be creating disasters here and we will be so old then and if we will not manage 
this very well , I think we will be the first casualties of these Dump Sites, years to come. Thank 
you Hono urable Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage ): Hono urable Kanyere . 
Hon. Anthony Kanyere: Thank you Hono urable Temporary Speaker, I just want to rise and say 
that I concur with the Members who  have spoken before  me in that we require  more time on this 
issue of Waste Management because there is a saying that goes as “Waste is Wealth ”. Going by 
that saying, I expected the  Chairperson for the Committee  on Environment to elaborate on this 
issue if the County Government of Nakuru has an elaborate pro gram to manage her waste. G oing 
by what Hono urable Alex has said, we need to take care of the next generation . If we do not take 
care of our waste, we would  be jeopardising the next generation in that  I expected her to tell us 
there is a program whereby when you look at how other Countries are doing their waste 
management . Waste management start s from the house level, whereby the waste is divided into 
the biodegradable and th at which cannot, like plastics and the che mical wastes. And having be en 
in Nakuru for a while, I know a lot of waste that goes to the dump site  comes from our local 
industries and our markets. I expected her to say that we should also think about our market waste , 
manure production and all that, a nd that should go away even bringing revenue to the County. I 
think I beg to say that we need more out of this Report. Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Elijah Murage):  I think he will be the last . Honourable Mutai  
Hon. Wiliam M utai: Thank you very much, Mr. Temporary Speaker. I support this Report given 
by the Chair Environment. However, I have some reservations, especially concerning the question 
that was asked ; the question was basically on smoke. And I want to ask some few questi ons. 
Whether the Chair managed to go to the site to establish the real causes of fire that produces the 
smoke . 
Two, whether the area is protected against any intruders who might as well go and light the fire. I 
also want to know the real source of fire . Is the fire being carried along with the waste in the lorries 
because that one can also be very dangerous? I believe this issue or the waste management  is also 
another very pertinent issue just as my colleague ha s also alluded ; that we need to actually do  the 
management properly. And we decentrali se so that at least we can be managing in smaller units.  
So Mr. Temporary Speaker, I want to say that is also another area of interest that we should discuss 
in this House and find ways and means of managing the waste in our city and also in our small 
towns. Thank you very much Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Elijah Murage):  Next order.  
MOTION  
COMPREHENSIVE DATABASE OF ALL EPILEPTIC CASES IN THE COUNTY AND PROVIDE 
FREE MEDICAL SERVICES  
Hon. Grace M wathi:  Mr. Temporary Speaker Sir, I wish to move the Motion THAT  aware that 
Epilepsy is a serious condition affecting the nervous system leading to unprovoked repetitive 
seizures and often results to a loss of consciousness ; Noting that epilepsy can affect  any person 
irrespective of age, sex, economic, or geographic location ; Concerned that majority of the families 
affected are from low -income families  hence lack of accessible and affordable health care ; Further 
concerned that a significant percentage of ch ildren with epilepsy are likely to develop a behavioral 
or mental health problem, including attention deficit, hyperactivity, anxiety, depression, 
aggression, and autism spectrum disorder, which effect s lead to low self -esteem ; Cognis ant that 
epilepsy trea tment drugs should be given immediately on diagnosis to control seizures and improve 
the quality of life.  
Now T herefore, this House or just the Department of Health in consultati on with Members of the 
County Assembly develop a comprehensive database of all epileptic cases in the County and 
further provide medical services to such patients.  
Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, as we have seen, epilepsy is a very serious disease which affects very 
low-income  families. T he serious condition  affects the nerves due to:  
Head injury during childbirth  and they were affected in their brains. And that one causes epilepsy.  
Others were diagnosed with meningitis  and which  also causes epilepsy. Others just got epilepsy 
as they were growing up and they  are really affected because some of them have no money to go 
to hospitals, they have got no money to buy medicines, hence, they fall every now and then we 
know that when these people fall down, some of them have very low self -esteem.  
Mr. Speaker, Sir, we  have seen even many ladies kill themselves, because they see that their life 
is being a shortened or their ambition is being cut. And so, by so doing, they see that they have got 
no future. Mr. Speaker, sir, the falling or the epilepsy disease damages the  brain cells, which causes 
so many conversions. And after every that happens to the patient, it damages the brain. And it 
causes very low self -esteem to our people.  
One thing, Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I would wish these Hono urable Members to understand,  I 
know there are some of them who have these patients in their Wards. Because it is not one ward 
or two, it affects almost every ward in our place where we live. And by so doing these drugs are 
not accessible to these people because one, these patients do  not have any policy, guiding them 
from the National Government. And so, by so doing the NHIF caters for the drugs, but the low -
income family members cannot afford to buy the drugs for the epilepsy patients, thus damaging 
the whole life of these people.  
Another thing is that Mr. Temporary Speaker, sir, when these people fall, the epileptic patients, 
some of them tend to bite their tongue. And healing that tongue is very costly. And it is very 
painful. And when that person wakes up, most of you have seen th em. They first of all, look around 
whether there is somebody who have seen them, that shame. The traumatizing. The stigma causes 
those people to neglect themselves. So much.  
 Mr. Temporary Speaker, these people have got two types of drugs which they take, and they must 
take the drugs either in the morning, or at night when going to sleep. They have some tablets called 
Tegretol  and Cinna bidiol . When these people take these medicines, they tend to reduce  the number 
of times that these patients fall. I know of  some people in my Ward;  there is a lady who can fall 
even four times a day  because this lady is an orphan  and has nobody to take care of her. She l ives 
all by herself a nd sometimes she falls on fire. I remember there was a time she was cooking tea, 
and when convulsion s came she could n ot control herself  and she fell on that Jiko and the water 
which was boiling  got poured  on her and she sustained serious burns .  
Last week I went to see her and when I asked what was wrong  with her, s he told me ni huu ugonjwa  
wangu,  I asked her which ugonjwa she said  today I f ell four times. Mr. Temporary Speaker , the 
lady said if she can take her medication consistently,  it will reduce the number of the conv ulsions .  
Another thing Mr. Temporary Speaker, we know that in our Country, we have TB patients  who 
are given drugs for free. We have the HIV positive patients; they are given drugs for free. Now 
that we do not have a policy in the National Government that caters for the epileptic people  my 
request is that our County Gover nment through our able Governor  Madam Susan Kihika, we can 
have these patients g et the drugs for free in our County Hospitals, reason being that the medicine 
is expensive  and those people cannot afford.  
Secondly, these people feel sidelined s o we can embr ace them through  CHVs  in collaboration with 
the MCA s; we visit or we have a data that tells us how many  people  in our Wards have epilepsy 
and after that they  be given a card which they will be using . They can carry the  card in their pocket 
so that if he /she falls, any person coming to rescue him or her can know what to do with the  patient.  
Otherwise, Mr. Temporary S peaker, if we just leave these people like that, if we do not take action, 
we are going to lose lives. I ask this House t o adopt  this; w e support this Motion so that we save 
lives in our area rather than receiving phone calls  because everything that happens in our Wards  it 
is the MCA who is  called . And rather than being called to come and attend the burial  or contribute 
something when one dies, w e do something as Honourable Members of this House that can save 
the lives of these people, because we need them.  
They are our brothers, our sisters ; they are our daughters and sons. But they come from very 
humble backgrounds . So, Mr. Temporary Speaker, I request my colleagues, these Hono urable 
Members to support this Motion so that we may help these people and they will one time remember 
that the MCA s who are in this regime helped them and saved their lives in a very special way.  
Thank you Mr. Temp orary Speaker, and with that I would wish to call upon Mheshimiwa Kanyere 
to second. Thank you.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker , I stand to second the Motion on 
free treatment for epilepsy patients.  Having heard what our able Hon. Mwa thi has stipulated, we 
gather that epilepsy is a condition like any other and it is a disease that is curable. Going by studies, 
it has shown that 70% of people with epilepsy are able to successfully manage epilepsy seizures 
with medication and certain typ es of surgery.  
Going by what I have come to realise about epilepsy is, it happened in my family and I lost one of 
the members of my family through epilepsy. What Hon. Mwathi is saying is good but I would like 
us to take it further and bring awareness to t he larger community in that when a person has 
epilepsy, the seizures can attack any time and it is being said that if a person suffers from this 
disease, he/she should not be in contact with water. If in an event a person has that seizure and 
he/she gets i nto contact with water, it can lead to death.  
We need to have awareness and bring it to the larger community to understand what epilepsy is. 
Hon. Mwathi has just put it clearly that we need to put aside some money to provide medicine. 
Going by experience, it is a lifetime condition whereby a patient will live with it for the rest of 
their lives. We need to provide the medicine.  
In the morning, when one of the Members was contributing, I heard even them asking us to provide 
condoms for young people. If the Government can provide condoms for young people, why can it 
not provide medicine for people living with such a condition? When somebody suffers in the 
community, it affects all of us. We need to think about those people that do not have money to 
purchase t he medicine and it is upon this Honorable House to think about those people and allocate 
some money and to urge the County Government of Nakuru to provide free medicine for people 
living with this condition.  
With those few remarks, I would like to second. Thank you.  
(Question proposed that the House urges the Department of Health to, in consultation with 
Members of the County Assembly, to develop a comprehensive database of all epileptic cases in 
the County and further provide free medical services to such  patients ). 
The Motion is open for Debate.  
Hon. Evelyn Chepkirui: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion on 
free treatment for epilepsy patients. Epilepsy is a very individual condition. Some people may have 
it throughout their l ives, for some it may just take a short period of their lives.  
This Motion has reminded me of my colleague whom we were together in standard six long time 
ago. There is that one Sunday he was preparing to go to church. Unfortunately, this disease came 
and it took away his life. I wish he could have been treated. Maybe he could have lived longer.  
At some point, if this disease is not treated, it turns to a disability. However, when this disease 
goes to this level where it is labeled as a disability, it real ly comes with a lot of stigma where you 
may find people sleeping in their houses, some may not even interact or socialise with others as 
per the equality Act of 2020; it is a law that aims to ensure that people are treated fairly and not 
discriminated agai nst. 
Epilepsy is considered a disability when it greatly affects someone’s ability to do day to day 
activities such as concentrating or remembering things over a long period of time. However, it is 
sometimes described as a hidden disability because it is n ot usually obvious that someone has the 
condition unless they have a seizure.  
I would really support that this free treatment for epilepsy patients is given to our people. For those 
who have the chronic condition of epilepsy, I would really request that a ll our Hon. Members to 
make these people aware that they should register as people with disability so that they get more 
help. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): The Honourable Robert from Kapkures  
Hon. Robert Rutto: Thank you Mr. Tempo rary Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion and 
congratulate and thank Hon. Mwathi for this very crucial Motion. Many families go through hard 
times because of this monster disease called epilepsy. Once epileptic patients convulse, they have 
got no cont rol over what is around them and they are endangered. I rise to support the Motion and 
urge the County Government of Nakuru to consider buying drugs for this condition. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): We are going to have Hon. Gathui ta then Hon. 
Gatuso, then Hon. Maritim in that order.  
Hon. James Gathuita : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion brought 
in by Hon. Grace Mwathi on this condition on the spirit of Universal Health Care being one of the 
agenda on  Sustainable Development Goals and Universal Health care is key in every aspect.  
First, on this issue of seizure, a healthy citizen leads to a healthy Nation. To have a healthy Nation, 
we need to curb this effect of seizure because it will affect even the memory of those students 
because once the seizure is not treated on time and not administered with the right medication, it 
may end up to one having memory loss or terminal brain damage.  
Secondly, it is the reduction of accidents. Most of the people who ha ve seizures, some of them 
have home accidents, farm accidents or even road accidents. We need to have the medical aspect 
of that so that we can control accidents that can happen to our families.  
The other thing is about the cost implication. Most of these families are low -income earners. The 
effect is stigma or oppression against those families. Those low income earners cannot afford the 
cost of medicine  because today, if you go to the PGH, the only medicine you will get for a person 
with epilepsy is Tegret ol. Tegretol is not that expensive. The likes of medicine that are behind that 
are very expensive. Medicine like Keppra are very expensive.  
It is in the spirit of having Universal Healthcare and supporting this Motion so that the families 
that are affecte d by the disease can have good medical care. Thank you.  
Hon. Benard Gatuso: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I also take this opportunity to 
commend Bahati Ward Mheshimiwa for having observed and realised that this menace is supposed 
to be taken into c onsideration.  
One thing that I believe we are supposed to do is to have a way on how we can make awareness to 
our community, especially encouraging them to come out so that we can realise the menace and 
the extent that it has already taken place so that we can have a database. With a database, we will 
be able to know how we can procure the numbers that we are supposed to secure so that we can 
be help our people.  
The other thing is access to health which is a right of every citizen in this Country. I belie ve we 
can have the insurance cover that we usually pay NHIF be considered and have it take care of that 
so that we can minimise costs for our people.  
If NHIF can cover that, I believe that it will help reduce usage of resources from different families 
or our parents. With those few remarks, I support the Motion. Thank you  Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
… 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): The Hon. Maritim.  
Hon. John Maritim : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker for giving me this time. I rise to support 
the Mo tion and also talk more of epilepsy. Today I have realized from Hon. that epilepsy has some 
causes .I thought epilepsy was hereditary in that you can inherit it from your parents. One of the 
causes of epilepsy can be drug abuse or alcohol misuse. I want to  urge Members who misuse those 
things that epilepsy is around the way. Secondly, we need to create awareness about this disease. 
Most of these people who are suffering from this disease are people of low income generating 
families. One of its treatment cou ld be food. If these people can get a good diet then I believe 
epilepsy will be something of the past. People should also be trained especially women that when 
giving birth they should take a lot of care so that they do not cause any injuries to these inno cent 
babies because those are some of the causes of epilepsy. Where I come from, there are some 
families like an entire family are all epileptic. I do not know whether it is a curse from heaven or 
is it just a disease. What the Hon. has raised is great and  we can do wonders so that we can still 
manage these people and save their lives too. Thank you very much.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Point of order Mr.  Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Yes  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Is it in order fo r the Chair finance to mislead this House?  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage):Hon. Kanyere which point of order are you 
standing on?  
Hon Anthony Kanyere:  I do not have the ….  Rather point of information. I stand guided you 
know we are still learn ing these things. It is a learning process.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon Elijah Murage): Hon. Maritim do you want to be informed?  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : I just want to inform him that it is not in order to mislead this House that 
through drug abuse and alcoho l taking you can get that disease. This is a serious disease which 
needs to be given a lot of consideration. Thank you.  
Hon. John Maritim : Mr. Temporary Speaker let me respond to my fellow Member. While in 
school, we learnt that the causes of epilepsy was  head brain tumor, drug abuse and alcoholism. 
That is what I know. You can as well google to get more information. Thank you very much.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Thank you Mr.  Temporary Speaker. I think today we have had one of the 
best debates. Debates that touches on the lives of the citizens mainly in this Nakuru County. What 
Hon. Grace has presented here today is one thing that this House needs to resonate w ith and work 
forward in helping the people of this County. From the medical perspective you will find that each 
and every person here is a candidate of epilepsy because we all use our vehicles, we all engage in 
fights. When you get any head damage anyone i s a candidate. Epilepsy occurs when your brain 
cells are hit. The brain works inform of electricity passage and when one of the brain cell is 
disconnected with the other, the information is not passed to the next brain cell then that becomes 
one major caus e. If we do not take care of such people today then who will take care of us. As we 
have stated previously, we have had people who have lost lives with this…  
Hon. Robert Rutto:  Point of information Mr.  Temporary Speaker  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon Elijah M urage): Which point of information Hon. Rutto?  
Hon. Robert Rutto : I am on the floor chair budget please.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): You may resume your seat chair.  
Hon. Robert Rutto : I want to inform Hon. Alex that he is misleading this Ho use by telling us that 
everyone engages in fights. It is not everyone who engages in fights maybe some. Thank you Mr. 
Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Alex you want to mislead this House.  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : Mr. Temporary S peaker you only choose what you want to hear because 
when you give an example for instance today, Hon. Ruto has put on a mask. If I want to get 
information that he has Covid that will be my own thinking. It depends with the literature class 
one attended. N ot everyone engages in fights but we also have children who engage in physical 
things. Hon. Ruto can be in the bath room and then falls down. He was not fighting anything but 
the force and the impact on his head brings seizures to him. Let us not reduce th e debate to 
something else. When you look at the drugs that these people must use the emergency drug 
Phenobarbitone is one of the most expensive drug that will help calm the patient down. You find 
that not many patients can afford this and I believe that a s much as we talk about People Living 
with Disability within the country and they are even given a card. We even have a fund for them 
within our budget. We should have these members known and established from each and every 
ward because this is not a norma l disease. If have heard Hon. Grace state that one person said that 
this is my disease. They possess that disease. If you go to a pediatric ward you will realize the 
trauma that these people go through. These people cannot do anything else in their entire life. They 
cannot drive as many of us can drive because they fear that the next minute they will get an attack. 
They cannot be employed in stable jobs because of that stigma. Most of them do not even go past 
class seven because when they start realizing th is is how I behave even the teachers do not want 
these children from the young age to interact with other children. They are like that ukicheza na 
mtoto wa Fulani atakuwa, atafanya hivi. This is one of the biggest thing that is so sentimental to 
us and as a county and a country we should take care of these people. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): We are going to have Hon. Wathiai, Hon. Francis 
Kuria, Hon. Rose, Hon. Morogo, Hon. George Tallam then we put it to question.  
Hon. David Wath iai: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker. I rise to support this Motion brought 
by Hon. Mwathi. The cost of medication should be catered for by the county government of 
Nakuru. We should be the first county in Kenya to take care of our epileptic residents. We need to 
be leaders in supporting our people whenever they are sick. After the county government takes 
over purchasing and distribution of the drugs, they should be distributed in health centres and clinic 
that are in our wards so that these people can be a ble to get the drugs effectively from mashinani.  
As I sit down, I would like to also inform my brother Hon. Anthony Kanyere that what Kamara 
MCA was saying about some of our people getting this disease from misuse of drugs and alcohol 
is true. In my ward t here is a certain drink that is been sold there. It even has a name called 
“mbaya”. Hii pombe imekuja hadi ikapatiwa jina mbaya kwa sababu vijana wetu pale wameingilia 
kukunywa hii pombe na wengine wameanza kuanguka.  Some of my very close friends who we 
used to do a lot things are engaged in drinking this drink and as of today I have a friend who has 
epilepsy. Yeye huanguka tu hata tukiwa na yeye. Kazi yetu nikumwangalia na tunashindwa jinsi 
ya kusaidia kwa sababu hata tukimchukua na kumpeleka hospitali ana enda anapatiwa dawa , 
akitoka anarudi pale kunywa hiyo pombe . Hon.Kanyere it is a reality. Kemikali imetumika 
kutengeneza hiyo pombe ikiingia kwa  brain za watu wetu inafanya wawe wagonjwa. Tunaomba 
Serikali pia itusaidie kukabiliana na hizo pombe mbaya amba zo zinaharibu vijana wetu pale 
mtaani.  I stand to support Hon. Mwathi’s Motion. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Francis Kuria.  
Hon. Francis Kuria : Thank you Mr.Temporary Speaker sir. I rise to support this Motion kno wing 
very well the mover of the Motion is a mother and she has pain on what patients affected with this 
disease undergo. It once happened that a motorcycle rider was affected by this disease. I had 
stopped to give way but all of a sudden as he was cycling his motorcycle, he was attacked by the 
disease. For sure this is a disease that needs to be taken care of. I therefore second this Motion and 
thank God that I am personally healthy and my family is healthy. Even the honorable Members 
here, the little that I know about them is that they are healthy. From the good health we have, we 
then are supposed to support this Motion. Without saying much I support this Motion. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Rose.      
Hon. Rose Chepkoech:  Thank you, Mr. Temporary  Speaker, I want to support the Motion free 
treatment for epilepsy. This is because most of the affected are the low -income families. Some 
cannot even afford to buy the drugs and some of them use herbs from the forest and they cann ot 
even go for regular checkups.  
Another thing is we have heard that the main cause is mishandling may be during delivery. Mtu 
aweza zaa akiwa nyumbani mtoto aanguke na aumie . So, we need to sensitise our mothers to go 
to hospital to deliver. And then mos t of the people suffering from the disease need a lot of care for 
example in my Ward, there is a young man aliangukia kwa moto na miguu zote zikachomeka.  So 
now he is a disabled person without limbs so we need to support the Motion. I support it fully.  
Hon. Leah Serem:  Mr. Temporary Speaker your eye is catching the other side and not this side.  
Hon. Jane Gituku : Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I just want to add something because 
most of these victims are viewed by community as something to do with wi tchcraft. Our 
communities do not accept this disease and so when we are discussing it, we should also encourage 
our schools maybe members of the CHV to continue sensitising communities on the fact that these 
diseases have nothing to do with witchcraft.  
 Lastly, I have a gentleman, a boda boda rider, who committed suicide because of this condition 
and left a note and he claimed that he could not live with the shame and the laughter he was 
receiving from the fellow boda boda members when he used to fall at hi s place of work. Even in 
our schools we should encourage those people who are in a position to come up with policies that 
can sensitise the children and the community because you also notice that those people who supper 
from this disease ni watu wa chini k abisa ; why, nobody knows. I thank the mover of this Motion 
and I want to insist that we should go beyond just providing medicine but also information that 
will allow the community to accept these people and integrate them in the society so that they can 
reduce the shame and embarrassment that they go through. Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage ): So, you may have the floor Hon. Morogo, then 
Hon Tallam and then I will call the mover to reply.  
Hon. Leah Serem : Hon. Than k you Mr. Temporary Speaker I was wondering and I was to search 
a reflector to wear so that your eye can catch this side  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage ): You may take the floor. I forgot your name and 
I was about to call you Mama Triplets.  
 Hon. Leah Serem:  You are the Speaker and you are not supposed to forget our names. Thank 
you for the chance you have given me. Ningependa kuunga mkono mjadala umeletw a siku yaleo 
na Mheshimiwa Grace.  Asante sana Mheshimiwa  Grace kwa sababu huu m jadala ni w a maana 
sana katika K aunti yet u na Kenya  kwa jumla. Ugonjwa wa kifafa ni ugonjwa mbaya sana. Ni 
ugonjwa amboo wamama wengi pamoja na wazee na familia nyingi zimeweza kuficha watoto wao 
ambao wamepitia katika shida.  Huu ugonjwa naulinganisha sana na maybe ulemavu katika Kenya  
yetu kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Grace  amefanya jambo  la maana kwa sababu katika mara nyingi  
tumeona watu hao wakiwa wamepitie makubwa katika maisha yao. Changamoto ambayo 
wameweza kupit ia mara nyingi ni kwamba hao watoto huwa wanakosa hata k wenda shuleni kwa 
sababu ya shida nyingi ambazo wanapitia. Mara nyingi huwa wanaanguka k wenye moto na hata 
maji hivi kwamba wakiangukia moto, itabidi waponyeshe kwanza vi donda na mara nyingi 
majeraha hayo huchukua muda mrefiu kupona . Niko na mfano wa mtoto  mmoja anaishi upande 
wa Keringet  sehemu ya Bararget  msichana mdogo wa miaka kumi na kitu lakini ukimwangalia uso 
wake uliweza kuharibika sana kwa sababu ya ma jerah a ya moto hivi kwamba anatakiwa 
kufanyiwa upasuaji wa uso wake. Ukiona mara nyingi hao watoto hukosa marafiki kwa sababu 
wakijaribu kukaa au kucheza nao wanaogopa kwa sababu kama ushashuhudia vile watoto wenye 
mara dhi haya  ya kifafa wanaanguka hata wewe ukiwa Mheshimiwa , utashtuka na utasonga kando.  
Kwa hivyo wanakosa marafiki hata wanakosa kuoa  au kuo lewa. H uwa wanachukua muda mrefu 
kama mwanamume huenda akose kuoa kwa sababu hakuna mke atakubali kushughulikia mtu 
ambaye anaanguka mara nyingi. Pia kama ni msichana huwa  wanaogopwa kuolewea kwa sababu 
hakuna mwanamume anaweza kuvumilia hiyo shida  ambayo itapatikana ki la siku. Hawa wanaume 
unaona hapa wote watatoroka na wataacha huyo bibi katika nyumba. Pia sura zao zikiwa 
zimeharibika, hakuna mtu ambaye atakubali.  
La mwisho ni kwamba hao watu hupitia changamoto kwa sababu mara nyingi wanajisahau na 
unapata wanapoanguka hata wanapokuwa na haja, hujipata wamejisahau na hiyo hufanya watu 
wawatenge. Kwa hivyo naunga huu mjadala mkono kwamba matibabu ya huu ugonjwa yawe free 
ili watu waache kutumia madawa ya kienyeji ambayo huenda yakawa sumu katika mi ili zao. 
Asante.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage ): Hon. Morogo  
Hon. Nixon Morogo : Asante Mr. Temporary Speaker kwa kunipa nafasi kuchangi a Mswada 
ambao umeletwa na Mheshimiwa Mwathi.  Nitachangia kwa kusema naunga mkono nikisema 
amefanya vizuri na  amefikiria kwa niaba ya wengi , ili tuweze kusaidia  wenzetu ambao wanapitia 
magumu katika maisha . Hii ni kw a sababu ya shida ya kiafya.Nasema kwamba wao niwachache 
katika jamii na haitagharimu serikali pesa nyingi kama watashughulikia kwa kuwapatia matibab u 
ya bure.  
Sana tunapata kwamba ni ugonjwa unaokabili jamii walio chini kifedha na kama serikali ikiweza 
kuchukua jukumu hilo, itakuwa imeondoa mzigo kwa jamii n a hata sisi kama waheshimiwa , kwa 
sababu mara nyingi utakuta sisi ndio tunawasaidia kupitia kw a harambee , ambazo tunafanya ili 
waweze kupata pesa za kununua dawa. Kwa hayo machache , nasema naunga mkono. Asante  
TheTtemporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Tallam  
Hon. George Tallam : Think you Mr. Temporary Speaker for giving me this opportunity to also 
discuss this Motion about epilepsy. The most important thing is getting free treatment especially 
in local dispensaries. I want to support this Motion that has been brought by Hon. Gr ace Mwathi 
who is my neighbor down there. I believe this disease is hereditary the way our Chair for Finance 
Hon. Maritim has said. It might be from drug abuse, I do not believe much unless he elaborates 
well. I think this is very important that the Motion  brought by Hon. Mwathi, is of concern because 
I know even down there where I come from, I have several victims who they have epilepsy and 
when we get this free treatment, I know most of their families cannot afford these drugs. So, I 
stand to support Hon.  Mwathi for bringing this Motion. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage):  Hon Grace you may now reply  
Hon. Grace Mwathi:  Asante sana Bwana  Spika wa Muda. Kwanza ningependa kuwapa hongera 
wenzangu kwa sababu ya kuona ya kwamba ni jambo la bu sara hawa wagonjwa waweze 
kuhudumiw a. Tu ko na bahati sana katika Nyumba hii kwa sababu mmoja we tu ambaye ni daktari , 
Mheshimiwa Alex  ametueleza kwa upana sana mambo yanayohusika na huu ugonjwa. pia najua 
ataniunga mkono nikisema k wam ba wakati mwingine hao wagonjwa wanaanguka usiku, umelala 
unajikuta amean guka. Hao watu wametharauliwa, hawaoni kupendwa and hawaoni mwelekeo wa 
kimaisha. Lakini tukiwachukua kama wenzetu maana kuna me thali inayosema if you are not 
infected  you are affected . Hao watu wanatuafect  kwa sababu tuko nao.  
Pili ningependa kusema ya kwamba hata kadi za NHIF  ziwasaidie lakini hawana namba ya kukata 
hizo kadi kwa sababu wengi wanatoka katika familia zisisojimudu. Kwa hivyo mimi nashukuru 
kwa hilo jambo mumesema,  Tumetoa mifano mingi na tu najua tume afectiwa  
Kwa hivyo tuendelee kuunga mkono huu mjadala na ttujue kwamba vile ambavyo  wengi 
wamesema, mambo ya kusensitize tunapoenda mikutano, kwa barazaa tuweze kuwaelimisha hao 
watu. Zaidi tuwaambie wafichue hao watu maana wengi wame dharauliwa na hawajulikani  ili 
waweze kusaidiwa. Hii kazi itakuwa rahisi kwetu sababu hao watu tunawahitaji sana. Asanteni 
sana Waheshimiwa na Mungu awabariki.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): I now propose a question that;  
(Question proposed that this House urges the Department of Health to in consultation with 
Members of the County Assembly develop a comprehensive data base of all epileptic cases in the 
County and further provide free medical services to such patients ). 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
This House stands adjourned until next week Tuesday, 9.30am  
The House rose at  4.25pm  
 
 
 