COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 5 th April 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:40 AM  
[Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
SACHANGWAN SECONDARY SCHOOL  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): We recognize the  Students from Sachangwan Secondary  
school  in Molo Sub County. This is the House where we s it to talk about the matters affecting 
our County  and you are welcomed.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
EPILEPSY TREATMENT DRUGS  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ):  There is a Notice of Motion  by the Honorable Grace Mwathi, 
MCA  for Bahat i Ward.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi: Thank you honorable Speaker, I represent the people of Bahati Ward in 
Bahati Sub County and I wish to give a Notice of Motion ; THAT  aware that Epilepsy  is a serious 
condition affecting the Nervous System leading to unprovoked repetitive seizures and often result 
to a loss of consciousness;  Noting that epilepsy can affect any person irrespective of age, sex, 
economic or geographical  location; Concerned  that majority of the families affected are from low 
income families hence lack of accessible and affordable Health Care; Further concerned that a 
significant percentage of Children  with epilepsy  are likely to develop a behav ioral or Mental 
Health problem including Attention Deficit, Hyperactivity, Anxiety , Depression , Aggression , and 
Autism Spectrum Disorder which i ts effects leads to low self -esteem; Cognizant that Epilepsy 
treatment drugs should be given immediately on diag nosis to control seizures and improve the 
quality of life.  
Now Therefore ; this House  urges the Department of Health  to, in consultation with Members  of 
the County Assembly,  develop a comprehensive database of all Epileptic Cases in the County , and 
further provide free Medical Services to such Patient s. I give the Notice of Motion, thank you.  
 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you Honorable Mwathi, the Notice of Motion  is 
properly given. What is it Honorable Muraya?  
MOTION  
MATTER OF COUNTY IMPORTANCE  
Hon. Joseph Muraya: Thank you Honorable Speaker , I wish to thank the Hono urable Member 
and I wish to ask the Honorable House that before we commit any Business of the House, that we 
suspend the Business of today and discuss a weighty matter concerning our security as  Members 
of County Assembly concerning the death of one of our colleague s Stephen  Maloba, MCA for 
Kisa East in Kakamega County who was sta bbed by a group of young people . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you the Hono urable Member for Viwandani . That is a 
proposal that the Honorable Member is giving and now it has be adopted before the floor of the 
House; it is a Motion or something and I am going to put question. Honorable Member do you 
have a Member  who can second the proposal?  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Hono urable Stanley Karanja will second the Motion.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Hono urable Speaker, let me start by saying I stand here to 
second the Motion  because it is a matter of concern. I thin k this is not good that when a Member  
of Parliament feels threatened by the political acumen of an MCA, then that Member  results to 
fights. I think Member s have read about the case and we were also asked through the County 
Assemblies Forum whether and I do not know whether the Member s representi ng County 
Assemblies Forum (CAF) are here so that we come together and request that the Government does 
provide  security just the wa y it does to the Members  of Parliament ; it does to the Excellenc y 
Governors and the  Senators . I think honorable Speaker , it is only the MCAs who ha ve been left on 
their own.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honorable Karanja now you are seconding that we put that 
question . 
Hon. Stanley Karanja: I think it is an issue of Welfare, it is an issue of national concern.  
(Question put that the House  adjourns its business to discuss the matter of Security  for 
Honorable Members.)  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  You have the floor honorable Member. Honorable Mwangi  what 
is it?  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Thank you Honorable Speaker , before we continue or discuss this matter 
I want to ask the honorable  Members  to give a minute of silence as mourn  our honorable Member , 
Stephen Maloba . Honorable Members stand up for a moment of silence.  
(Member s stood up for  a moment of Silence ) 
Hon. Joseph Muraya: Bwana Spika mimi nakushukuru na pia hawa Wabunge wa Bunge hii ya 
Nakuru kwa sababu ya kuitikia na kuja kwa pamoja ya kuzungumzia mambo ambayo yanatuhu su 
sisi wenyewe kama Wawakilishi wa Wadi popote tunapotoka. Pia nataka kuwakaribisha wageni 
wetu ambao wametoka Shule ya Upili ya Sachangwan, karibuni sana hapa Nakuru mimi naitwa 
Mheshimiwa Muraya Mwangi, nawakilisha Wadi ya Naivasha Mjini; Viwandani Ward. Bwana 
Spika hili ni jambo ambalo linahu zunisha sana kuona ya kwamba hata mimi nitatembea kwa 
Mkutano au Shughuli ya Mbunge wa kwetu au ya mahali pe ngine na awe amesema nisiingie na 
awe amenipangia kwamba sitaingia bila mimi kujua. Mimi nitaingia bila kujua na pengine ndio 
itakuwa siku yangu ya mwisho humu duniani. Mheshimiwa Spika tunaomba kama sisi ni 
Wawakilishi wa wananchi hata sisi tupewe ulinzi unaotufaa. Kama hii jamii ya Maloba sasa 
imeachwa bila baba na mke bila mume. Familia imeachwa bila mtoto wao; wazazi wamempoteza  
mwanao.na nikwamba mtu alipangia tukisoma kwenye mitandao unaona tayari ilikuwa 
imepanagawa na  area Member of National Assembly alikuwa anajua nahii inaamanisha 
hatutaweza kuelewana kwa mambo yeyote na Wajumbe ama Senata ama na  anybody else tofauti 
zitakuweko na haiamanishi kwamba tukitofautiana naondolewa kwa hii dunia ndio mtu aweze 
kuendeleza agenda  zake za kisiasa.  
Mheshimiwa Spika naomba sisi kama Waakilishi wa Wadi pia tupewe security ndio tukuwe  
guaranteed tukienda mahali  maisha yetu pia iko sawa. Mimi hata nimeanza kuogopa ninapokuja  
Nakuru kutoka  Naivasha naweza pata nimetegewa bomu huku kwa barabara kwa sababu labda 
Mjumbe wangu anaogopa mimi ndio nitamtoa. Hata hawa wengine unaona hapa, hata kunywa 
chai itakuwa ngumu m aanake mtu hawezi kuwa na amani. Kwa hivyo naomba hata sisi tuangaliwe 
na tuhakikishiwe na serikali kwamba itatulinda na ilinde maisha yetu kama wale wengine. Asante.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) : Thank you, Hon. Maritim from Kamara.  
Hon. John Maritim:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I also rise to support the issue of security amongst 
the MCA s. I do have a question that I should ask myself ; how safe are we? When is the next MCA 
going to be  maimed? So those are the questions that trigger many of these Hono urable Members 
in their brains. I believe this is the time you know it usually happens far away;  it is just like the 
way the corona virus started . It was all the way from China before it came  to Kenya. And this 
death that is being aimed at our MCAs only started in Western Kenya. So  I believe we are  the 
target group as we are MCAs. I also urge Mr. Speaker that if there is a way that we can be trained 
on how to use a gun, we can still appreciate  because you know our lives are more important than 
other people. So I believe if we can get those guns or anything like any weapon, we be allowed to 
carry any weapon ourselves, but cannot be a machete but good weapon in a manner that can be 
easy to use fo r us to guard our lives it would be great. Thank you, Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ) Thank you Hon. John ; Honorable Alex Mbugua from Lake View. 
Hon. Alex Mbugua:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also rise to support the 
Motion  that we need to enhance the security or the State need to enhance the security of Members 
of County Assembly. And not just the Members of the County Assembly, but also the citizens of 
this Country Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker  it is a sad day that a family tod ay in Western Kenya has 
lost a father , a family has lost a husband Mr. Speaker , and maybe a mother and a father have lost 
their son. Mr. Speaker a kin has been taken  within this Country.  
Mr. Speaker, business cannot be as usual because when blood is spilt , Mr. Speaker, it begs for 
more blood within the Country. Mr. Speaker, what precedence are we setting Mr. Speaker, if we 
can find Members of the County Assembly being killed at that level? Mr. Speaker, there should 
be a Petition to the National Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that there should be placed measures to 
protect all the State Officers Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker, it is very saddening when I look at the circumstances that be held or bedeviled the 
young MCA Mr. Speaker on th e other side, who fell helpless at the hands of a gang in a group that 
had orchestrated his murder Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker, it is high time the State provided measures to protect us Mr. Speaker because failure 
to do that Mr. Speaker, you will find that m ost of the Members here will start recruiting groups 
and gangs to protect them Mr. Speaker because Mr. Speaker like for instance, when I go to my 
area and I feel threatened Mr. Speaker, I will always protect myself. And by means of protecting 
myself Mr. Sp eaker, the people who I will use Mr. Speaker or might be used by any Member of 
the County Assembly or any other Member of the  State might not be well trained on how to handle 
people Mr. Speaker. On the issue of gun s Mr. Speaker, I think each and every citi zen within this 
Country is free to own and possess one as long as you know how to use it Mr. Speaker, and I think 
that one I will advise the honorable Member if he feels threatened that much he should go and get 
himself one.  
Thank you very much Mr. Speake r. And also to the young Kenyans who are the future voters of 
this Republic  who are seated in the G allery Mr. Speaker, I tell them that this world is full of dreams 
and you can make it , to do and to be whatever you want in this world. As long as you follow  your 
dreams ; never give up. And always ensure that what you mark to get in this world do it and always 
remember that Kenya needs you in a better way and in an educated way. Thank you very much 
Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) : In order of prece dence , Hon. Fadhili the Majority Whip, and 
then the honorable Rotok from Menengai and then the honorable Karanja.  
The Majority Whip (Hon. Fadhili Msuri):  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity. 
I take this opportunity to send my condolences to the family of our beloved MCA. I am standing 
here to co nfess one thing that my brother  has said ; that MCAs will fall into the trap of organi sing 
gangs to protect them selves . I confess , I have already started na nimejipanga kwa sababu usalama 
unaanza na mimi na kwa sababu najua serikali itajikokota kunipatia usalama nikaona ni vyema 
vijana wangu kule Bondeni niwape ajira na wanapata kitu kila Friday, ndio  mwenye anataka 
kunikujia aje tu. Lakini pia niseme serikali inafaa kutuangalia na itupe usalama  because these 
boys need to be organi sed and sorted out and with the current weight in our pockets it is 
unsustainable for that.  
So at the end of the day, secu rity is very important not just for us but also for people. Because If 
today it has happened in a political event or a social event where two Senior L eaders who are 
attending and one has lost his life and you know here in Nakuru we have so many social even ts 
that we attend and we interact with the Leaders na hatujui ni nani au nani ameaanza haya . Luckily, 
most of us have not declared intentions to unseat some of our Senior Members except for my 
brother s from Molo and Elburgon . They are the ones who have alr eady  started doing some 
campaigns here and there, even the area MP is complaining. Vile mimi nimejipanga,  I will also 
urge my brothers there pia wao wajipange kwa sababu ukingoja serikali ikupange,  we are 4, 000 
MCAs in the Country.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel  Karuri): Hon. Majority Whip, who are those Members of the County 
Assembly who are campaigning? Are you able to mention them?  
Hon. Fadhili Msuri: Mr. Speaker sir, kwa sababu ya kiusalama, siwezi sema.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Rottok.  
Hon. Isaac  Rottok: Asante sana Bwana Spika. Nimesimama kukubaliana na huo mjadala kwamba 
MCAs wanafaa kuwa na ulinzi ulio bora. Tunahuzunishwa na hicho kisa ambacho kilifanyika 
upande wa Western kwamba tulimpopteza mwenzetu, Mheshimiwa Maloba  kwa kuvamiwa na 
majamba zi. Kwa hakika, tukiangalia historia ya hapo awali ni kwamba kuna sehemu tofauti 
ambayo tukiangalia  MCAs wamekuwa wakipatwa na hio changamoto ya kuvamiva . Kwa mfano, 
wakati Mheshimiwa Obado alikuwa na vurugu kule upande wa  Homa Bay. Tunapata ya kwamba 
kuna  MCA ambaye aliweza pia kuvaamiwa na kuumizwa . Pia kuna Mheshimiwa ambaye anaitwa  
Danson kutoka upande wa  Thika, December mwaka jana aliweza kupata majeraha baada ya 
kuvamiwa na akaumizwa vibaya.  
Kuna sehemu zingine ambayo  MCA amekuwa akidhulumiwa haswa kw a mikutano. Ningeomba 
serikali iweze kujali maslahi ya hawa  MCA kwa kuwapatia  security. Sio lazima kumpa leseni hata 
ya kushika bunduki lakini pia awe na askari kama vile  MP anavyokuwa na askari wake kila wakati 
anapotembea katika mikutano.  
Kando na kupew a askari mwenyewe, pia apewe ulinzi na wale askari ambao wako pale mashinani.  
Tuko na  AP Centres na Administration Oolice Offices ambazo ziko pale vijijini. Tungeomba 
serikali itupatie wao  kila mahali ambayo MCA anahudhuria mkutano, tuwe na  askari pale. Sina 
mengi ya kusema ila ningependa kuwapa pole familia ya  Maloba na mwenyezi Mungu aweze 
kuwafariji na aweze kuwapatia nguvu wakati huu wa huzuni. Asante.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Karanja.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Spea ker sir. They say they went for the hawker; I kept 
quiet because I was not one. They went for the teacher, I kept quiet because I am not in the 
classroom. They went for the farmer, I still kept quiet because I was not a farmer. When they came 
for me, I had  nobody to run to because the rest had died.  
There is one thing that really astonishes my thinking. When we started Devolution, we thought 
that Assemblies will be treated the same as the Senate and the National Assembly. With time, I 
have found that I was living in the world of utopia whereby people think that an MCA is not 
learned, therefore he needs no protection. Most of the time we either protect property or brain and 
if you do not have money, nobody will protect you. If you have nothing between the two  ears, 
nobody will bother protecting an empty head that is only used for balancing.  
Assemblies should be treated as the Senate and Parliament. Therefore, we should not be begging. 
It is legal that we should be getting one. If we do not get, the Counties h ave got askaris; hawa 
wanaokota kodi  and they are very good when they are running after hawkers. If the National 
Assembly cannot provide, then the County should provide the askaris  and they get trained.  
There was one incident where Sonko, when he was a Go vernor, alikuwa anakagua gwaride ya 
hawa askari na walikuwa wanamlinda hapo nyuma.  Therefore, I think some of these things need 
a revolutionary mind. Some of the things that we go through as Christians and Muslims is not 
good.  
Killing is an abhorrence. It  is not good. Why should you kill? This is not the first time that 
politicians have been killed. From the time of Kenyatta, Moi and every other time. Therefore, we 
should be protected. The government should come up and condemn and to open a file so that th ose 
Members can be protected. If we are opening a file for that boy who was thrown from the top of 
the building by a certain DJ, why are we not doing that for a politician? We need to have that case 
recorded.  
The other thing that I will not stop saying; C AF. This body is like a bulldog without teeth. What 
this body should be doing is that it should come forward and do prosecution because all Assemblies 
are represented by CAF. The only thing that I saw them doing is to put a statement and that ended 
there. Because you are also a Member of CAF, can they be told that we need private prosecution 
if the government will not do the same so that we get to know who killed this MCA.  
Lastly, I do concur that nobody should lose their life and therefore we ask because we are doing a 
legislative duty just like others; we get protection just like others. I do finish by say ing Mr. Speaker , 
we have Fadhili there who has confessed that he has goons. We need to stand as an Assembly…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): He does not  have  goons . That is something serious.  
Hon. Msuri Fadhili : Honorable Member, I wish to retract those words. I did not confess goons. I 
said I gave employment to a group of boys so they are not goons. Stop profiling my boys.  
Hon .Stanley Karanja : Mr. Speaker not unless I am semantically wrong. When somebody says 
that I have given some boys some job to do the work of protection what do we call that. He is also 
confessing that he is a machinery.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Grace Mwathi.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker sir. Nami pia nasimama kupeana rambi 
rambi zangu kwa familia hii ya Mheshimiwa  Maloba ambaye amehaga kwa njia ambayo hauku 
kusudiwa na Mungu. Kwanza ningependa kusema ya kwamba vile wenzangu wanasema maisha 
ya MCA ni maisha kama ya yule mtu mwengine na  MCAs ni waheshimiwa  .Senators, MPs wako 
na security lakini sisi hatuna. Halafu hata ni mapema sana watu kuanza kutishiwa. Kwanza 
ningependa kuunga mkono Mheshimiwa  Duale aliposema wakati mmoja kuwa kiti hiki si c ha 
mama ya mtu kwa hivyo waache kutishiwa mapema hivi hata waache kutuogopa sisi bali waogope 
wale ambao wanajitayarisha wako huko mashinani .  
Pili, nataka kusema ya kwamba  our destiny lies in the hands of the Lord and it is good for us to be 
respected and be given the time to work as MCAs. I want to say that we were elected like any other 
person. In fact the MCAs are the ones who totally interact with the Wanjiku . Sisi ndio  wanatuamkia 
kila asubuhi na kutuletea shida zao.  Kama leo najua tukitoka nyumbani kuna wengine Walikuwa 
na wageni karibu kumi wakileta shida zao. Sisi ndio tunanagalia watu wa chini kabisa.  
Ningependa kusema ya kwamba hata sisi pia  tupewe  security na tuan galiwe vizuri na tuwe watu 
ambao wanajulikana kila mahali ya kwamba tunafanya kazi kama wale watu wengine.  MCA ni 
mtu ambaye ukweli ni kwamba katika hali katika kila njia sisi ndio tunaangaliwa tukiwa chini 
kabisa kwa hivyo ninaomba ya kwamba hata kama hat utapewa bunduki ama kufanya vile 
mheshimiwa  Fadhili alifanya basi kuwe na  policy ambayo MCA atakuwa analindwa vizuri. Kwa 
mfano ikiwa wanaume wanapata hii shida na kina mama je? Tutaogopa kwenda kuwaona wenzetu 
usiku. Tutaogopa kwenda kufariji familia za w ale ambao wamefiwa usiku maana haujui nini 
itakufanyikia kabla ufike kwako nyumbani. Kwa hivyo hata pia mimi naunga mkono  MCAs 
wapewe security na security ya kutosha.Asante . 
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri):  Asante.  The Hon. Wamaitha.  
Hon Ann Wamaitha : Thank you so much Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity. First of all 
I want to welcome the students who are here. These are our future leaders. Karibuni sana. Kwanza 
nataka kukubaliana na mjadala; wengine tulichaguliwa na wengine tukateuliwa kama m imi hapa.  
Just like any other person, we are not protecting a person but we are protecting the responsibility 
the leader has. That leader is representing a lot of people on the ground, representing future policies 
to be passed in the Assembly, protecting B ills that are supposed to be passed. The security is not 
for the individual but for the responsibility that person carries in their shoulders that is why we 
want the National Government and any other organization that is responsible for providing security 
to provide for MCAs just like any other person. Thank you.  
The S peaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member from Nakuru East.  
Hon. Anthony Kamau : Asante sana Bwana Spika. Nami pia nasimama kuunga mkono mjadala 
huu. Kwanza kabisa ningependa kuchuk ua nafasi hii kupeana rambi rambi zangu kwa watu wa 
Wadi ya Kisa East  na kwa familia ya mwenda zake mheshimiwa Maloba.  Kama vile wenzangu 
wamejadili ni jambo la kuzingatia sana kuwe na security kwa wabunge wa kaunti.Jamii 
inachukulia mzaha wabunge wa kaunt i kwa sababu kila kitu ikifanywa hao ndio wanakuwa wa 
mwisho. Ni jambo la muhimu sana haswa wakati huu tukizingatia mambo ya budget hata 
napendekeza tuweke katika budget yetu ya huu mwaka. Kila Mbunge wa kaunti apatiwe security. 
Kaunti ya Nakuru nadhani ik ifika hapa kwa bunge tutaipitisha. Jambo la usalama ni jambo la 
muhimu sana ambalo ningependa izingatiwe kwa sababu kwa siasa lazima kutakuwa na watu 
ambao wanatofautiana na maoni ambayo yanatofautiana. Sioni kama ni jambo la msingi kumaliza 
ugomvi na mamb o ya vita ama kuana. Ni vizuri watu wajifunze kuongeleshana wakati 
wametafautiana. Kama vile Mheshimiwa Grace  Mwathi amesema wakati wa siasa utafika na 
pengine yule ambaye unamdhania ndiye kumbe siye. Kwa hivyo yangu ni kuunga mkono mjadala 
huu na vile tum esema ya kwamba tupatiane mda kama hili jambo halitajadiliwa na serikali kuu 
kwa sababu ni jambo la kusikitisha. Jana tuliona katika runinga inasemekana ya kwamba hakuna 
hata mtu mmoja amefunguliwa mashtaka. Hili jambo lilifanyika siku mbili ama tatu iliyo pita. Kwa 
hivyo tunaona kwamba serikali haichukui hili jambo kama jambo la dharura kwa kuzingatia 
usalama ya wabunge. Tupatiane mkataa wa siku kadha na jambo lolote lisipofanyika tutajua yale 
ambayo yataendelea .Ningependa kuunga mkono Mwenzangu Bwana Fadh ili na niseme ya 
kwamba pia sisi tumejipanga. Asante.  
The S peaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): We do not want to get the details of vile mmejipanga . 
Hon. Anthony Kanyere : Bwana Spika  tumejipanga. Nimechukua askari bawabu ambaye 
ananichunga kila siku.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Okay. The Hon. Member for Kivumbini.  
Hon. Neto Sakwa : Asante sana Bwana Spika. Ninashukuru kwa kupata fursa hii ili niweze 
kuzungumzia swala hili ambalo linahusu maisha na usalama wa waheshima kwanza katika Kenya 
nzima na pili kama  Nakuru County. Mimi ni mzaliwa wa huko  Western, natoka hiyo  Sub-County 
ya Khwisero. Ukiyasikiza mambo ambayo unaambiwa kwenye simu na yale ambayo unasoma kwa 
mtatandao ni ukweli ya kwamba maisha ya  MCA Kenya nzima yako hatarini. Nafasi ambayo 
tunashikilia ni nafasi ambao unadhamaniwa na wengi, nafasi ambayo umeshinda wengi, nafasi 
ambayo mtu hawezi kuipata kama sio kupitia kwa kura ya kawaida.  Nafasi ambayo mtu akitaka 
na wakati haijafika ni lazima wewe utoke duniani . Tunaomba ya kwamba si ombi ya kubembele za 
bali ni lazima Mheshimiwa kwa nafasi ya  MCA apewe  security. Ukiangalia  Kenya nzima  MCAs 
ni elfu mbili na kitu na kwa sababu ya nafasi hiyo na njia yenye yule Mheshimiwa ameuliwa na yo 
wengine ambao huenda wakawa maadui wa kisiasa ama mt u ambaye atakuwa a meshindwa na 
njia ya kisiasa ; na waheshimiwa ni watu ambao hutembelewa maarea mingi kwa ofisi; ni watu 
ambao hufika kwa matanga watu ambao huenda mikutano mingi. Itakuwa rahisi mtu kutumia hiyo 
nafasi na  wanaendelea kuhatarisha Maisha ya waheshimiwa. Kwa hivyo naungana na 
waheshimiwa na ukiangalia mood  ya Nyumba, na mawazo ambayo kila mheshimiwa anatoa, 
naunga mkono waheshimiwa wapewe security.  Ni juu ya serikali kupeana security. Security , mimi 
nasema ha ta kama si through  askari wa County G overnment, security  kwa mheshimiwa kupata 
officer  mmoja wa ulinzi kutoka kwa serikali kuu ni jambo la maana  na ninaomba Nyumba mzima 
tutapitisha hiyo na kwa kushirikiana na Nyumba zingine kwa County level  ya kwamba tupa te full 
security  kama waheshimiwa wa National Assembly. Asante Bwana Spika  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Hon. Jane from Maiella and then the Hon. 
Muraya from Flamingo Ward.  
Hon. Jane Gituku:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker sir, kwanza kabisa ni kut oa pole kwa jamii ya  MCA 
mwenzetu ambaye actually passed without having done anything wrong apart from the normal 
political activities that we are all aware of.  
Secondly nataka nikaribishe wageni walio kwa Nyumba  because actually this is the right way to 
go to get our students and our children come around and see what we are supposed to do because 
it is our responsibility. One thing that I have noticed and I think is to first of all agree with every 
other Member t hat the MCA who seems  to be at the lower cadre of the political system is looked 
down upon and this has been manifested by what has just happened in Kakamega. I would request 
this House as Members of CAF to take this matter very seriously.  
Thank you so mu ch MCA from Viwandani for bringing it to notice that it is an issue that should 
be taken with the strength and the capacity that is within us. When we look at the House of National 
Assembly who are supposed now to take this matter seriously, you will note that we are clashing 
with them. The MP who was involved in this matter I   know will receive a lot of protection 
from the fellow MPs in the National Assembly. So it is upon ourselves plus all those who have got 
the goodwill of the MCA who one of us has said  carries the burden of the Ward and this is grassroot 
to make sure that this matter does not go under the carpet and that it is given the prominence it 
deserves so that we might be protected going forward.  
Some of us are victims of these circumstances eit her through media or social platform and you 
notice that if this is what is happening on social platform because of activities we undertake at the 
ground, what would happen if you happen to meet with these people face to face. So I would say 
that I wholly support this Motion and the idea together we will make the difference that is required. 
Thank you so much Mr. Speaker Sir.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Jane Gituku The last Member to contribute, 
the Hon. Muna from Flamingo.  
Hon. David  Kihumba : Joseph Asante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipea nafasi hii ili niweze 
kusimama hapa kwa hii Bunge niweze kuchangia h uu mjadala ambayo umeletwa na Mheshimiwa 
kutoka Viwandani Hon. Joseph Muraya.  Mimi kwangu nimekuja kusupport hii hoja ya sisi kama 
Wabunge wa Kaunti , tupoewe security  kwa sababu ni vibaya sana wakati tunaona mmoja wetu 
ambaye ni baba ya watoto, ni mzee katika familia na  hata ni mtoto wa familia yao ambaye 
amekuwa akitegemewa na watu wengi katika jamii yao akipoteza maisha yake, kwa sababu  ya 
kutoelewana baina yake na Mbunge na kufikia kwamba vijana ambao ni goons,  wanaweza kutoka 
from nowhere  na kuja wa attack  huyo mheshimiwa na ku muuwa. Mheshiuumiwa Spika ningetaka 
kukufahamisha ya kwamba na Wabunge wenzangu , ya kwamba seheme ambazo tumetoka 
especially  kwangu Flamingoe ward  ni pahali ambapo kuko na insecurity  sana. Ukiangalia vile 
mhesjhimiwa mwenzangu Hon.  Neto Sakwa amesema sisi tumetoka eneo linalo fanana na tuko na 
vijana wengi anbao ni wa genge la confirm  na hao vijana, huwa hawajali chochote bora tu 
mmekosa kuelewana ama umekosa kuwapatia kitu yenye walikuwa wanataka wanaweza kuatack 
any time  na unajua kwamnba sisi ambao tumepata hizi viti kama Wabunge wa Kaunti katika 
maeneo yetu, unajua tulikuwa na maad ui wengi wakati wa siasa za kabla ya uchaguzi mkuu 
uliopita , Hata sa a hiii wako wengi sana. katika area zetu ambazo tumetoka . Unakuta tuko na hali 
ya kwenda kuwatembelea wale wameadhirika kwa njia moja ama  nyingine, unakuta hata hatuwezi 
kutembea asubuhi maybe utembee usiku unapokosa nafasi mchana.  
Kwa hivyo ningeuliza ya kwamba vile mwakilishi wetu na wale wameteuliwa katika hii Bunge 
kutuwakilisha katika  CAF, Mheshimiwa Spika muhakikishe mumefikisha hiyo hoja mbele na mu  
make sure  sisi kama Wabunge wa Kaunti tumepata ulinzi kama wa le Wabunge wengine  katika 
Bunge la Kitaifa na Senate . Vile Mheshimiwa wa Malewa West na mheshimiwa WaMaria mu 
wamesema ati katika Bunge la Senate  na Bunge letu la National  hao Wabunge wamepewa walinzi 
na pia sisi tuilichaguliwa  pia tulitumia resources  na pia tunawakilisha watu wetu mashinani kwa 
hivyo hata sisi nauliza tupewa ulinzi wa kutosha, tupewe askari hata kama ni wa Kaunti moja ama 
kama tutapewa askari wa Regular Police  atuchunge. Mheshimwa Spika si lazima tupewe bunduki  
tubebe lakini tukuwe na ulinzi wa kutosha ili tuweze kuendelea kutetea watu wetu ambao 
wametuchagua katika Bunge hi ii. Kwa hayo machache na mengi Mheshimiwa Spika 
nimetamatisha hapo. Asante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Members the matte rs that have been discussed 
in the floor of the House are very significant; they are close to the hearts of the Hon. Members. A 
life is sacred and I want to tell you that we will as an Assembly write a statement based on the 
discussions that we have had in  this House to CAF for onward transmission to the relevant 
authorities so that now the Hon. Members of County Assemblies can have their security arranged. 
Thank you, Hon. Members, for that discussion and we take those sentiments and those points very 
serio usly.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members this House is adjourned until 2.30 pm this afternoon.  
The House rose at 11.25am  
 
 
 