MARCH 15, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Tuesday , 15TH   March 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 2. 50 pm 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi ): Honorable Members welcome to the afternoon 
session . Clerk next order.  
MOTION  
HOUSE ADOPTS THE BUDGET AND APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE REPORT ON  
THE COUNTY FISCAL STRATEGY PAPER 2022  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi):  Honorable Members we have a Motion from 
the Chairperson  for the Committee on Budget  and Appropriation Honorable Joel Karuri, that 
pursuant to Standing Order No 209(7), this House adopts the report of the Committee  on Budge t 
and Appropriations on the County Fiscal Strategy Paper 2022 tabled in this Hous e during the 
morn ing sessions.  
Hon. Joel Karuri: Thank you Honorable  Temporary  Speaker , I rise to move the Motion ;- 
THAT the House adopts the Report of the Budget and Appropriations Committee on the County 
Fiscal Strategy Paper 2022.  
 I gave  Notice in the morning . This is the report of the Committee  on Budget  and Appropriation , 
and without much ado, this Pape r was received and laid in this Hous e. Then  later forwarded  and 
referred to the Committe e on Budget  and Appropriation  and upon the receipt of it, as a 
Committee , we sat, deliberated,  and interrogated the Paper and this is our report.  
Honorable Temporary Speaker , the Members have had an opportunity to interact with the 
document since the morning session and of importance is to say that the County Fiscal Strategy 
Paper is a Paper that sets the ceilings of forward Budge t for 2022/2023 . This is the Paper that set 
how much is going to wh ich department and how the budget will be funded.  
Moving forward to page 43, so that we can move together with  Members, it is good to note 
Honorable Temporary Speaker that the revenue projections for the Financial Year 2022/2023 
MARCH 15, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 that is going to include the own source revenue is approximately Kshs 16.8 billion as shown in 
the table. The table shows how the revenue  and the projections that the Treasury  and the County 
Government have made. We can see that there is the IFMIS code, there is the revenue source, 
and there  are the approved estimates  for the Financial Year 2021/2022.  
There is also the C FSP, when you look at that for this financial year, this make s Kshs 16.8 
billion and there is how now the revenue is going to be used. It is good to note that amongst the 
major policies on this document, it includes Kshs 1.6 billion on page 44, which  makes up 46.4% 
of the development nets of conditional. This Kshs 1.6 billion  is going to be shared according to 
the law that we passed in this Hous e in 2018, according to the parameters that are set.  
It is also good to note  that the law and the Act that we usual ly use for revenue division in this 
County, across  Ward . The time is ripe to be amended but then we realized that for this financial 
year,  we had very different timelines and roadmaps and we were not able to include specifically 
the new populations as reported by the Kenya Bureau of Statistics . 
We are going to run the Kshs 1.6 billion across the wards in the parameters that are set in the Act 
of 2018. The other important aspect that we are going to look at in the County Fiscal Strategy 
Paper includes the Kshs 200 million for debts resolutions. We know that our County  has had 
debts and those debtors are suppliers from this  County . If they are going to be paid to a tune of 
Kshs 200 million then it means it is going a long way in helping our suppliers and business 
community in the county to be able to flourish businesswise.  
Of importance is also to note that the compensation to  Employees is expec ted to reach Kshs 7.2 
billion in the financial year 2022/2023. This makes a percentage of 42.9% of the total budget. 
This comprises of compensations for State Officers, Public Officers , and Contractual Employees . 
It is also expected that the use of goods a nd services is going to rise to Kshs 4.5 billion which 
makes up 27.1% for the Financial Year 2022/2023 Budget . It is good to note that the department 
of Healt h will have a total budget of Kshs 6.5 billion which makes up 39.04% of the total budget. 
This means that the department  of health is taking the big junk of the total budget.  
On this, we have had discussions on whether the future,  and what the future holds in terms of 
health and provision of health ser vices to the residents of this county . So far so good,  the 
executive has done quite some good job even after coming out from the COVID 19 pandemic 
and Nakuru County  was one that performed well in terms of provision of health services.  
However, when you loo k at that budget that is making Kshs 6.5 billion, which is 39.4% almost 
40% of the total budget going to the department of health. This shows that health is an expensive 
affair but we also realized that without good health then the county cannot run. The r esidents of 
this county cannot work however, it is expected that this money is going to rise because you 
realize that the many health facilities and dispensaries, the out patients and the hospitals that 
being built i n the county. As much as there is going to be the transfer of the existing labor force, 
MARCH 15, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 we also know that some of other dispensaries in rural areas and health centers require new staffs 
to be employed.  
The budget in the coming years is going to go up and this calls for proper planning in the 
department of Health  and Treasury and in the wards and rural areas. It is good to come up with a 
policy that says that in a certain ward how many dispensaries can th ere be in terms of 
geographical area and population. So that we do not have a dispensary in every polling station, 
which  is dangerous, unsustainable,  and going forward we need to see how as an Assembly and 
government together with the treasur y and the depa rtment of Health  to see how we are going to 
make health sustainable . 
There is a danger that in the future, if proper planning and proper allocation of resources is not 
going to be done , then this service can be costly. Development expenditure is expected t o rise to 
Kshs 5.057 billion and these translate  to 30% of the County Budget Estimates , which  is in line 
with the PFM Act 2012 .  
The other highlight of this CFSP is that in the next financial year budget, there is going to be a 
Bursary allocation of Kshs  110 million. This the one that  is located from the Department of 
Education. There is also going to be Kshs 27. 7 million that is going to go to the w ard sports. 
That is money for the provision of uniform and other sporting equipment.  
It is expected that there is going to be disability allocation for Kshs 27. 5 million. And it has to be 
very clear that this money  will go to do empowerment of people living with disabilities, in the 
coming year's budget.  Without much ado, I want to go to page 48. Where we  are going to look at 
the sectoral expenditure ceilings. This is how the money is going to be spent in the next financial 
year.  
In the department of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, the ceiling, the committee set the ceiling 
at Kshs  994,402,000 And this comprises of Kshs 384 million for compensation of employees and 
Kshs 138 million for goods and services. There is also going to be Kshs 461 million for 
development , this allocation is pegged at 5.9% of the total budget. And the chairma n Agriculture 
who also happens to sit in the committee, has always told us about the Maputo declaration that 
says that in the developing nations that the ceiling for agriculture need to be above 10%, we are 
still below that. And it is one thing to say that  Nakuru is an agricultural county and another thing 
to allocate resources. So, there is a question of whether this is a political statement. When we say 
that agriculture is the backbone of the economy of this county, or even this country.  We need at 
some p oint moving to the future, to realize that functions need to be followed by resources. But if 
you have been given so many functions without resources, then there will be nothing.  
In the Department of Lands, Physical Planning and Housing. the committee set  the ceiling at Kshs 
224,410,000. And these comprises of Kshs 86 million for compens ation to employees, there is 
Kshs 47. 4 million for the use of goods and services, and Kshs 90 million for development. This 
allocation is 1.33% of the total budget. This is another department that Treasury together with the 
MARCH 15, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 committee on budget, and even more emphasis need to be done at the Treasury. When they are 
forwarding the CFSP paper, they need to enhance money for this department. So much happens 
on land. Farming happens on the land, even new cities and new trading centres, happens on land. 
So, this are sector s that need to be empowered, even in terms of recruitment for the service 
provider s in that department.  
When we move to the department of Education, Vocational Training, ICT and E -government a 
total of Kshs 832 million has been targeted. Is a ceiling and Mr. Temporary Speaker Kshs 398 
million is going to be taken for salaries for employ ees. And Kshs 304 million is for use of goods 
and services for supporting the Service delivery also  Kshs  130 million that is going to go to 
development which comprises of 4.94% of the total budget.  
 In the Department of Youth, Kshs 343 million has been set  aside Kshs 107.3 million for salaries, 
Kshs 143 million for the use of goods and services and Kshs 92 million for development. The 
department of Youth has been allocated 2.04% of the total budget.  
 The Department of Roads the ceiling has been set at Kshs 774.7 million. This is because this 
comprises of Kshs  111.9  million for compensation of employees , Kshs  221 million for use of 
goods and services and Kshs 441 will be used for development. The Department of Roads has been 
allocated 4.60% of the total budge t.  
 The Department of Environment, Water and Natural resources. The committee proposes that the 
sub sector gets Kshs 408 million and out of these K shs 217 million will go to payment of salaries, 
Kshs 69 million to go to recurrent for use of goods and serv ices and Kshs 121 million will go to 
development which comprises of 2.42% of the total budget.  
Trade, Industrialization and Tourism total ceiling  Kshs 285 million, compensation to employees 
Kshs 61 million, recurrent for using of goods and services Kshs 133.7 million and Kshs 90.9 
million for development.  
In the Department of Health, they are going to get a ceiling of Kshs 6.5 billion, which comprises 
of Kshs 4.1 billion for the payment of employees in terms of salaries and other allowances  and 
Kshs 1.5 billion for use of goods and services and Kshs 869 million for development. As earlier 
mentioned, this department takes 39.04% of the total budget.  
 Office of the Governor will get a ceiling of Kshs 441 million. And this is Kshs 100 million for 
compensatio n to employees, Kshs 230 million for use of goods and services and Kshs 110 million 
for development , this allocation is 2.62% of the total budget.  
I am about to complete the document but it is important for recording and even for Hansard.  When 
it comes to  the County Treasury, there is a ceiling of Kshs 3.093 billion and out of these Kshs 
555.3 million will be used for the payment of employees and Kshs 666 million for the use of goods 
MARCH 15, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 and services , Kshs  2.1 billion will be used for development. This allocat ion is 18.35 % of the total 
budget. It is also good to know that in these Kshs 2.1 billion this is where the ward money is.  
Included in the County Treasury development  is the ward resource envelope of Kshs 1.6 billion 
and also the debt resolution that we sa id has been put at a ceiling of Kshs 200 million.  
Public Service Management (PSM) Kshs  770 million, Kshs 538m for compensation of employees 
and Kshs 174.6 million for goods and services and Kshs 57.3 for development. In the PS PSM, 
there is a n allocation of 4.57% of the total budget.  
 County Public Service Board  Kshs  79 million will be the ceiling out of this Kshs 30.8million will 
go to compensation of employees and Kshs 41.6 million for the use of goods and services, and 
Kshs 7.5 million for d evelopment, this is an allocation of 0.47% of the total budget.  
When Nakuru became a city, there was also these other entities called Nakuru municipality and 
Naivasha municipality and the monies that have been allocated in terms of ceilings have been well  
indicated.  
There is another office of the County Attorney, the one that litigates and defends the county 
government of Nakuru in the courts and in the legal arena, this is a new office that has been given 
a ceiling of Kshs 27.4 million comprising of Kshs  400,000 for compensation to employees and 20 
million for use of goods and services and there is also Kshs 7 million for development. And what 
you realize Mr. Temporary Speaker, every day the county is taken to court over land issues , 
revenue, of licenses and of fees and charges. This is a very important office.  
There is the Nakuru County Revenue Authority that has been recently created; a replica of the 
KRA at the National level. Every time present a budget with recommendations, we have always 
lamented ab out the lack of meeting the target in terms of revenue , and now the question of this 
Nakuru County Revenue Authority which is an authority in itself will go a long way if well 
managed to be able to alleviate the County from this systemic problem and challe nge.  
The County Assembly of Nakuru is one of the departments that is going to be funded by these 
ceilings. There is the indicated budget for that.   
In page 52, there is the other recommendation s and there are annexes to this document which is 
enumerated in a very clear way. If you look at that page 55, you can see that department, the 
compensation to employees, operations and maintenance, recurrent, total; monies for development 
the total per department and also the percentage. Annex 2 is also the budget ceilings and page 57 
is the revenue source; how the County is planning to finance the budget. In page 60, you can see 
how the development money is going to be shared. The total is Kshs  6.4 billion and out of this, we 
know that we less Kshs  1.4 billion whic h is conditional grant and the equitable allocation is Kshs  
3.4 billion and out of that, 45% goes to the Ward projects. This is according to the law that we 
passed. When you run the Kshs  1.6 billion across the various Wards, every Member can be able 
MARCH 15, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 to see  what amount of money would go to each Ward and that is clearly indicated. I beg to move 
that now this report be adopted so that it can allow the executive to proceed with the public 
participation and even our people can give their aspirations on the devel opment projects and even 
service delivery that they want to be  given and we know that this is a very important document 
even in the generation of the main budget. I pray and I want to request that Members adopt this to 
give way to the other steps and the o ther areas in the budget roadmap. I am going to invite 
Mheshimiwa Rotich to second. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. Joel Karuri. Member for 
Keringet.  
Hon. Anthony Rotich: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I stand t o second the report and I 
request our members to support it simply because the Ward kitty  ceiling for Financial Year 
2022/2023 has risen from Kshs 1.457 to Kshs  1.6 billion of which more money will be moved to 
our Ward levels. I also support the adoption o f this report and on the side of County Assembly, 
there is an additional of Kshs  310 million for mortgage and car loans which previously was not 
included. I pray that the National Assembly will enact the laws to include Member s of the County 
Assemblies to be beneficiaries of the car grant as they do for themselves in the National Assembly 
and also the Senate. I support the report. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Vice Chair of Budget for secondi ng 
the report.  
(Question proposed that pursuant to Standing Order 209 (7) that the House adapts the report of 
the Committee on Budget and Appropriation on the County Fiscal Strategy Paper 2022 tabled in 
this House during the morning session ) 
Motion is ope n for discussion.  
Hon. Isaac Wahome: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I wish first of all to appreciate the 
Chair, Hon. Karuri; the Vice Chair and my colleagues in Budget because we have burnt the 
midnight oil to come up with this Budget. Being a Membe r of this Committee, I am well versed 
with the content of the document. However, I thought it was very wise that I should emphasize on 
the issues of the recent population. As the Chair has reiterated on the same. This being the last 
CFSP in our tenure, may be some members will not be in this House in the next tenure. For instance, 
the Member for Kiptororo has declared that he will not be vying. I am so certain. However, …  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Honorable Member for Kiamaina, you are out  
of order.  
Hon. Isaac Wahome: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I am well guided. I wish because 
of the people we represent and the uncertainty that is ahead of us, part of the resolution as we adopt 
this document is that the Executive in the subsequent CFSP to consider the recent p opulation. For 
MARCH 15, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 instance, if we go to annex in the last page, whereby Kiamaina was considered a t population of 
31,000 people and right now, we have 66,000 people. Considering that next week, 23rd of this 
month of March, we will be going for public participa tion whereby this being a campaign period, 
all aspirants will be there and they know the population of Kiamaina. They will think that the 
Member who currently represents them is not competent and has not raised this issue in the 
Assembly. For instance, in page 32, Lanet Umoja Ward with Kshs  26 million a population of 4800 
unlike now it is 4500 and compare with Kabatini Ward with Kshs 29 million and this time it has 
decreased to Kshs  26 million. This issue needs to be addressed. Further to that, as we usher in the 
executive to conduct the expected public participation, I will also expect that it be accompanied 
with somebody who can give civic education  to the people we represent. For instance, they expect 
that the development vote head is too much. Like now, the Kshs  27 million for Kiamaina Ward, 
they expect that such a year and especially now that they have been in fluenced  by several aspirants. 
I have seen them in the WhatsApp pages and social forums, even requesting for primary schools 
because they are not i nformed that primary schools are not devolved. We ought to resolve that the 
executive comes accompanied by those good teachers that will give our people civic education. 
Finally, there was the resolution and the first resolution under the Committee and it is very 
important I thought that I should also say this that among the recommendation on page 52 that the 
following recommendations;  
I. As a matter of priority, the County is directed to focus on completing and operationalizing 
the already ongoing projects a s opposed to initiation of new projects.  
This is my advice to my fellow colleagues. As we a llocate funds to ward projects. Let us ensure 
that we seek consultation and information from maybe departments, engineers from relevant and 
respective functions. Maybe if its health so that we make sure we allocate funds that will complete 
the projects not  leaving hanging projects because some colleagues will allocate insufficient funds 
and expect that as we pass this CFSP will be considering having each and every time giving this 
resolution. Therefore,  as Honorable Members ensure that we seek guidance and allocate sufficient 
funds. Having said that, I wish to support that the whole House adopts this document. Thank you 
very much  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Honorable member for Kiamaina. 
Honorable  Member of Turi John Mwangi then I come to Hon. Member for Menengai  
Hon. John Macharia:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir for according me th is opportunity 
so that I can be able to stand and support the report  on County Fiscal Strategy Paper. I am 
supporting this document because I unders tand that it is going to be the foundation for the budget 
making process as well as to allow us the Members of County Assembly to be able to conduct the 
public participation where we are going to accord the opportunity to the electorates so that we can 
be able to prepare the ward project for the next financial year. Otherwise I support and urge all the 
Honorable  Members to support so that we can be able to move with speed. Thank you.  
MARCH 15, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon orable  Member fo r Turi for your 
contribution. Hon orable  Member for Menengai, Wajeff then Hon orable  Member for Gilgil you are 
next.  
Hon. Wilson Wachira : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker for allowing me to support this 
document. There are two areas that I would like to point  out. As one of the member s for Agriculture 
Committee , we have been having a very big problem in the allocation of the Agriculture budget. 
As the Chair Budget Committee has indicated, we have been having a very big problem of the 
finances and you know ever y time we stand and talk more about Agriculture, we say agriculture 
is the back -bone of Nakuru and as I have gone through this document, I have realized that only 9 
percent of the total budget has been allocated for agriculture. As you are aware, Nakuru Ci ty is 
going to have the issue of urban farming. Mr. Temporary Speaker we also have a Bill that is 
ongoing in this House and we need to make sure that we facilitate more on Urban farming to make 
sure that as we head the issue of hospitality and the issue of  city status alongside the airport, we 
need to identify areas that will make sure that urban farming which will be able to empower our 
farmers who will be in locality of the city in general. Also,  we need to have more allocation on 
research and development; we saw the other day a company that produces chips which is getting 
their materials from abroad which is so unfortunate. We need to have money allocated for research 
and development so that we c an have enough and quality material mostly in the potato industry 
and also in the horticulture industry. As we are aware that we have been having post -harvest losses; 
we need a lot of coolers and a lot of preservatives to make sure that our harvest or our produce 
from our farms does not go to waste. Also,  Mr. Temporary Speaker we have only one cash crop in 
this county which we can also say tea is also one of the cash crops in our county. We also have the 
revival of the pyrethrum industry and we need to have  research and development on these crops . 
As we speak now, we have the revival of this crop which is our local industry and thus we need to 
have material which is of quality and today we are ha ppy that one kilogram  of pyrethrum is going 
at Kshs  600 of 3 pe rcent pyrethrin content. This is something that can give our county revenue and 
also empower our farmers.  
In terms of value addition, we also need to have more allocation. As I wind up, we also have the 
issue of infrastructure, that is county physical and  social infrastructure and as we are now in the 
city status, we need to have a lot of money allocated for infrastructure and as you are aware, we 
have been having a very big problem of drainage in this city. I would opt for an increment of 
money for infras tructure and also, we are having problem of water in this city. We would like also 
the increment of money for water distribution and borehole drilling. With those few remarks I also 
say that this is a good document and I support it. Thank you  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. Member for Menengai Hon. 
Wajeff; Hon Jane member for Gilgil  
Hon. Jane Ngugi : Thank you very much Temporary Speaker , first I wish to register that I am a 
member of Budget Committee and going by the fact that I  am part of this Budget Committee, we 
MARCH 15, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 have sat for days going through this document. Though we have come to arrive at this  report o n 
County Fiscal Strategic Paper, there are areas which are a bit disturbing. There are areas such as 
FIF which has grown up t o 25 percent by the same period compared to Financial Year 2020/2021. 
And going by the fact that revenue  collection which was recorded in the month of August which 
was Kshs 137.1 million. Some areas like and when you look at local revenue collection, it is  a bit 
disturbing because there was only a slight improvement of the local revenue which was 5.8 percent 
which was the same as the financial year 2020/21, the month of August which recorded the highest 
collection of Kshs 115 million. We know very well that  if our county is under performing, we do 
not realize much development. So, going by th e fact th at the  county has never achieved her local 
revenue target as shown in the table on page 35. It is a bit disturbing because we should be moving 
forward. It is hi gh time that strict mechanism should be put in place to ensure that once we set 
targets we achieve them, otherwise we will not be seen to be moving forward because each and 
every financial year we set targets which are not realistic because we should be setting targets and 
ensure we achieve these set targets.  
However, going to the other departments, we may be seen as if we have tried but I want to point 
out that the county Execut ive should wake up and put mechanism whereby once the targets have 
been set we ensure that  we achieve th em otherwise we shall be left with very minimal 
development. Otherwise we look forward for our electorates so that they can be able to enjoy with 
whatev er we set and then we achieve. Thank you 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon Karanja member for Molo. 
Hon. Virginia member for Hells Gate. Hon. Sonis kindly put off your mic. Thank you  
Hon. Virginia Wamaitha : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker. First of all, I applaud the Budget 
committee and the executive for coming up with such a document. I will concentrate with the issue 
of Health. I see the Health department has been given the largest chunk of  the budget 2022/2023 
of Kshs  6 million.  Mr. Temporary Speaker the Health department has been given a lot of money 
and as a department, they should look at the  allocation from dispensary to level five hospitals to 
make sure they have enough drugs and all equipment for the health facilities to ru n. Because 
without a health people we will not have a healthy county . We put up a lot of very expensive 
buildings in wards yet we have not equipped those facilities. The first thing you should do in the 
coming financial year is to equip the facilities so t hat they become operational. Otherwise we can 
put a lot of money but without proper use, I do not think it will be of good use to our people. Thank 
you, Mr. Temporary Speaker , I support the document.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you H on. Virginia for your contribution. 
The mover, Hon. Karuri  
Hon. Joel Karuri : Mr. Temporary Speaker, thank you for the way the members have been able to 
support the document and to give sentiments in a way to support the budget process. We have 
taken keen n ote on the issue that have been raised and because planning is a ma tter which is 
MARCH 15, 2022                COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 
 
 continuous, I know we are going to the Treasury and even the Assembly which is coming  after 
this t o be keen on the amendment of the Revenue Act and also the other issues that have been 
raised. We hope the Nakuru County  Revenue  Authority will be able to heal completely this trouble 
and problem of lack of hitting the target of the own source of revenue. We want to believe with 
better mechanism they can be able to collect 300 time s of what has been done in the past. 
Therefore,  I want to thank the members and thank the office of the Speaker, the office of the Clerk 
and the office of the Budget Secretariat and the Hon orable  Members this afternoon for their input. 
Thank you . 
The Tempo rary Speaker  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Hon. Karuri, thank you members for 
your contribution  
9Question proposed that pursuant to Standing Order 209(7), that this House adopts the report of 
the committee on Budget and Appropriations on the County Fiscal Strategy Paper 2022 tabled in 
this House during the morning session ) 
(Question put and agreed on ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Thank you, Hon orable  Members the House remains,  adjourned until Tuesday 22nd of March 2022  
at 9.30am.  
(The House rose at 3.50  pm) 
 
 
 