COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 14 th March 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 02:40 PM  
[Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS . 
MOTION  
COUNTY ASSEMBLY SERVICE BOARD  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Motion by honorable John Macharia Gachiri . 
Hon. John Gachiri: Thank you honorable Speake r, I want to move a Motion  that Pursuant  to the 
provision of Section 12(3) (D) of the County Government Act , 2012  and the First Schedule of the 
County Assembly Service Act , 2017  this House  adopts the Report of the County Assembly Service 
Board  recommending Mr. Allan Omabe re Nyamache as a Member of the Board. I call upon 
honorable  Bernard Gatuso to second the Motion.  
Hon. Bern ard Gatuso: Honorable Speaker, I rise to second the Motion  that th ese were the views, 
opinions and the recommendation of the Board  but happening that we are in this honorable House, 
we give this honorable House  an opportunity to give their views and recomm endation s whichever 
the way forward they will give is what we will go by, thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honorable Gatuso you have seconded the Motion?  
Hon. Bernard Gatuso: Yeah, I have seconded.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Put that clearly.  
Hon. Bernard Gatuso: Thank you Mr. Speaker,  I second the Motion . 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Honorable Members , the Motion  is THAT  pursuant to the 
provision of Section 12  (3) (d) of the County Government Act 2012, and the F irst Schedule of the 
County Assembly Services Act of 2017, this H ouse adopts the Report of the County Assembly 
Service Board recommending Mr. Allan Omabere Nyamache as a Board Member. The Motion is 
open for debate. Honorable Karanja . 
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me first start by congratulating the Board 
for their work Mr. Speaker ; my prayer would b e you know, it is very simple, i f Members peruse, 
it is a t wo page document which has preamble , it has requirements, Mr. Speaker, it has 
recommendations, it does not require a lot of synthesis.  
Members can read through and I think they have done so. So I think Members if Mr. Speaker, my 
opinion would have been we do not want to discuss characters, we have read, we have synthesized 
we were gi ven this Report in the morning, we know what the Report has been . Can we go to the 
next level, mine would have been like that. Because already we have read, when you discuss a 
character from the head to the toe and then it is the same and it is divided her e. So I wish that we 
move to the next stage if Members do agree and from their faces maybe they will concur.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you the Honorable Member from Naivasha East. The 
Honorable Member from Eburu/Mbaruk.  
Hon. Michael Ngige:  Than k you Mr.  Speaker for the opportunity. I would love to associate myself 
with the sentiments of Mheshimiwa for Naivasha East. I think Members have had enough time to 
go through the  Report. I also second that you put it to question, thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honorable Mwangi Muraya . 
Hon. Joseph Muraya:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want first of all to congratulate the Hansard 
team. Now you can see Mr. Speaker I am up standing and the sound can be heard well, so I do not 
need to bend for me to be h eard. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate th e Honourable 
Members, including yourself  Mr. Speaker  as the Chair of the B oard for doing this and working to 
make sure that this afternoon we have a Motion on this floor of the House and as my colleagues 
have said  they were told you had gone through and we  had all gone through this Motion. I also 
wish to ask my fellow Honorable Members that you put this Motion into question so that we can 
proceed with other Businesses.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Mwangi  
Hon. Mutai from Keringet.  
Hon. William Mutai: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I can as well read the mood of the House and 
it is like they are humbly requesting that you put it to question and I think it is just because it is 
after lunch and people really do not want to do a lot of disc ussions. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Mutai, this afternoon session comes after lunch. From what 
we have heard in the floor of this House, we are going to proceed and we have confirmed that it is 
within the rights and the Standing Orders  for Members having satisfied themselves with the 
Reports and any matter that comes before the House and they have interacted with such a Report. 
Members are at will and within their rights to propose that a question be put.  
As such, we proceed with the O rder number 8 for the Motion. The Motion is that pursuant to the 
provisions ofSsection 12 (3) (d) of the County Government Act, 2012 and the First Schedule of 
the County Assemblies Services Act of 2017, this House adopts the Report of the County 
Assembly S ervice Board recommending Mr. Allan Omabere Nyamache as a Member of the Board.  
I am going to put the question. Those who agree will say aye and those that are of a contrary to 
that opinion would say nay.  
(Question proposed that the House adopts the Report of the County Assembly Service Board 
recommending Mr. Allan Omabere Nyamache as a Member of the Board ). 
(Question put and negated) . 
MOTION  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. John Macharia Gachiri . 
Hon. John Gachiri: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Once again, as I present the second Motion; no. 
9 that pursuant t o the provision of the Section 12 (3) (d) of the County Government Act, 2012 and 
the First Schedule of the County Assembly Service Act, 2017 Report of the County Assembly 
Service Board recommendin g Ms.Glaris Chepkirui, as a Member of the Board. I bring this Motion 
Mr. Speaker and as some of the Members have said, we can read the mood of the House and 
everything. I think it is not prudent for us to go through all these recommendations and everything . 
Hii karatasi ni ile tu mlikuwa nayo...  
The S peaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order! Order!  Hon.Member continue with the debate without 
asking Hon. Members to second.  
Hon.John Gachiri: Sorry Mr. Speaker. I withdraw and call upon Hon. Gatuso to second the 
Moti on. Thank you.  
Hon. Benard Gatuso : Mr. Speaker I rise to second the Motion. Those were the views, opinions 
and recommendations of the Board.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Members the Motion is that, pursuant  to the provisions of  
Section 12 (3) (d) of the County Government Act, 2012 and the First Schedule of the County 
Assembly Service Act, 2017 that this House adopts the Report of the County Assembly Service 
Board recommending Ms. Glaris Chepkirui as a Member to the Board. The Motion  is open for 
debate. Hon Member from Naivasha East.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Once again I would like to congratulate the Board for a job well done. 
We have synthesised the Report, read it and everyone has interacted with the Report. As we said 
what goes for M oses also goes for Peter.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Karanja unaongea Kwa mafumbo.Elezea kwa sababu 
tumeskia kwamba kuna Moses  na Peter  sasa hatujaelewa...  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Mr. Speaker what I mean is that we do not want to discuss individual s 
because the Board has already analysed. What do you discuss when you are told that a person has 
a degree. What else do you add? You cannot even add a full stop once you are told that someone 
has a degree yet you are not a professor. If you are told that somebody has worked for 10 years, 
he or she was not working in your company so what do you add? That is what I am telling Members 
that it is difficult to debate for individuals. It is not like Palang’a’s Motion.                                                                                                                                                                                               
Hon. Stanley Karanja : This one is completely different and that is why we have said we have 
read, understood and then we proceed to the next level. That one you put to question and then 
Members are here and you know Mr. Speaker we want when we leave this House, we live as  
what Hon. Rose always tells us that we must leave here with our heads high and th at is why I do 
propose that we put the question because this is not equivalent to Hon. Palang’a’s Motion  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Karanja, the Motion is open for debate; the 
Hon. Peter Maina PM from Morindat.  
Hon. Peter Maina : Thank y ou Mr. Speaker; I have three points to make. No I propose you put it 
to Question. Secondly, put it to question and thirdly, just put it to question!  
(Laughter ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Once again the Standing Order provides  for that; that a Member 
may arise and propose that a question is put. So that is within the rules of this House. As such Hon. 
Members, I am going to proceed and propose a question to the Motion.  
(Question proposed that pursuant to the provision of Section  12 (3) (d) of the C ounty 
Government Act 2012, and the First Schedule of the County Assembly Services Act 2017, that 
this House adopts the Report of the County Assembly Service Board recommending M rs. Glaris 
Chepkirui  as the Member of the Board ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Thank you Hon. Members the House stands adjourned until tomorrow 9.30 in the morning.  
The House rose at  3.00pm  
 