COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 11 th October 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House Met At 10:50 AM  
[ The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ): In the Chair ].  
PRAYER  
PAPER (S)  
AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT   
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Paper  to be laid by the Chairperson Committee on 
Public Accounts and Investment s . There are microphones that are on, kindly put them off.  
Hon. Robert Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. On behalf of the Chairperson Public Accounts 
and Investment Committee, I wish to lay the Report  of the Committee on County Public Accounts 
and Investment on Auditor General’s Report  on Naivasha Water and Sanitation Company Limited 
for the year ended 30 th June, 2019.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon. Member for Amalo Ward.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi:  Mr. Speaker?  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it, Leader of Minority Party?  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Thank you Mr. Speaker . There is a concern. Since we went digital in this 
Assembly, the procedure of the House has been that there is a  P hysical Paper ;  we no w reali s e that 
the Member for Amalo was holding a piece of foolscap ,  then he read through the system and said 
he ha s  read the  Paper . We did not see the Paper  read in this House Mr. Speaker, and we need your 
direction on that. Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it Hon. Member for Turi Ward?  
Hon. John Macharia: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. The reason why he is now standing on behalf 
of the Chair.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honourable Chair  for PAC , what is the reason that you 
delegated your duties  as a Chair ?  
Hon. Simon Kamau: Thank you Mr. Speaker .  Of course, I want  maybe  to inform the Honorable 
Member for  Turi Ward that there must be a good reason as to why I delegated that duty to one of 
the Member s  in my Committee.  
Mr. Speaker , I  am not feeling ve ry well and that is the reason why I delegated the duty to one of 
the Committee Members who I believe is more than competent to do what I was supposed to do 
there. Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  The  only challenge is that the Member who 
presented there said that he laid the Paper  …  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Member for Elburgon Ward, you are confiscating our time.  
Hon. N j uguna Mwaura: Not true Mr. Speaker . The Hansard will vindicate me. The Member said 
he has laid the Paper . He did not give the Notice  of Motion. Therefore, I would wish that the 
Member goes back there, retracts his S tatement  and say that he has given the Notice  of Motion on 
this issue  because he has said that he has laid the Paper  and he has not yet given the Notice  of 
Motion that  was the B usiness before the table. Therefore, I wish the Table Clerks will vindicate 
me.  
Mr. Speaker, t his is a House of order and rules and I am here and I am ready to be sanctioned by 
this House if they will be able to substantiate what I am saying. The Member had said that he is 
out to lay the Paper  and therefore, we need to be cogni s ant of that and our ears are  out to check on 
such mistakes. However, I understand the Member …  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honorable Member for Elburgon Ward, we are not yet there. 
We are still on Order Number 5. We are yet to be on Order Number 6, s o that we bring that to a 
closure .  T he Member for Amalo Ward, Hon. Robert, said very well that he is laying the  Paper  on 
behalf of the Chairperson and that is agreeable but then, the Honorable Member for Turi Ward 
went ahead to question why and the Honorable Chair person  has gone ahead to explain the reason 
as to why.  
We proceed to the next order.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Mr. Speaker sir, my issue has not been answered to. There was no Paper  
that was laid in this House. We did not see any P hysical Paper  that was laid. That is my concern, 
unless there is a different interpretation o f  the same.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Honorable Leader of Minority  Party, it is true 
that the House has gone D igital ,  has gone Paper less and if you look at your screen, there is the 
County Assembly of Nakuru, Second Assembly, Third Session, Public Accounts and Investment s  
Committee. That is the Report  that the Honorable Member for Amalo Ward, laid before this House;  
and it is properly laid.  
 
NOTICE (S) OF MOTION  
AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT   
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Notice  of Motion by Hon. Chairperson Committee on 
Public Accounts and Investment s .  
Hon. Robert Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I once again stand on behalf of the Chairperson ,  
Public Accounts and Investment s  to give a Notice  of Motion THAT  this House adopts  the Report  
o f  the Committee on County Public Accounts and Investment s  on the Auditor General ’s Report  
on Naivasha Water and Sanitation Company Limited for the year ended June 2019. Thank you.  
Thank you. The Notice  of Motion is given.  
 
STATEMENT(S)  
SIRIKWA HEALTH CENT R E  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a response from the Hon. Njuguna Mwaura, the 
Chairperson  for Health Services, who is issuing a response to an issue that was requested by Hon. 
Emmanuel Lang ’ at concerning the status of Sirikwa Health Cent r e in Sirikwa W ard.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I rise to give the response to the Statement that 
was sought by Hon. Emmanuel Lang’at  from Sirikwa Ward on  the status of the Sirikwa Health 
Cent r e ,  a Facility  in Sirikwa Ward . I would wish  to invite the Member s to look at their screen on 
their table about the information that we sought as a Committee and what we requested the  County 
Executive to furnish the information to the Committee. Allow me to take the M embers  through.  
BACKGROUND INFORMATION  
Sirikwa Health Centre stands as one of the most recent H ealthcare Facilities  in the Kuresoi North 
region and represents one of our largest  County E stablishments within Sirikwa Ward. At the  
proximity, there are Choronok and Gacharage Dispensaries , both serving our local citizens.  
The Centre maintains a dedicated Staff , including two  Nurses (with one presently on leave), a 
Ward Public Health Officer (PHO), Essential Support Personnel , and diligent Security Personnel . 
Notably, Sirikwa Health Centre continues to receive vital funding and supplies, effectively 
operating as a Dispensary , which makes it a  Level Two .  
A key distinction is its status as the  sole Facility  in the entirety of Kuresoi North equipped with a 
fully standardi s ed Laboratory. Therefore,  Mr. Speaker this one serves as a Level Four, and it is a 
Facility  that we are looking forward to having the  County Executive work on  it  and upgrade to a 
Level 4 ,  so that all the cases emanating from other Facilities  can be referred there. Members from 
that region can give their views concerning  this matter is because it is an emotive issue that perhaps 
Members  could have information from the ground as to where Level 4 is supposed to be 
constructed. This was one of the recommended Facilities  to be upgraded.  
 
STAFFING NORMS  
In accordance with Health  Centre Standard s, Sirikwa Health Centre currently falls significantly 
short of the expected Staffing Levels , which has resulted in its operational classification as a 
Dispensary. At the moment the Facility  is staffed with two Nurse s and two Support Personnel , 
which is below the following required staffing levels:  
  One Clinician  
  One Medical Laboratory Technician  
  Five Nurses  
  One Pharmaceutical Technologist  
  One Health Records and Information Officer  
  One Clerk  
  Two S ecurity P ersonnel  
  Two Cleaners  
Mr. Speaker, t hese additional positions are imperative for the Facility  to attain the status of a Health 
Centre capable of providing services around the clock, seven days a week.  Currently, they do it 
five days that is Monday to Friday.  
 
TARGET POPULATION ESTIMATES  
Sirikwa Health Centre serves a target population of 12,856.  
 
SERVICE AVAILABILITY  
The Health Facility  operates  as  an integrated Maternal  and Child Health Program five days a week, 
administering vaccinations as a routine practice. Additionally, it offers consultations for sick adults 
and c hildren  on weekdays, specifically from Monday through Friday. Periodically, the Facility  
conducts direct Outreach Services to reach a broader audience.  
Both Healthcare Workers (HCWs) at the Facility  are actively involved in delivering Vaccination 
Services and conducting Daily Growth Monitoring. This integration extends to services such as 
Comprehensive Care Centre (CCC) and Tuberculosis (TB) Managemen t. Moreover, Health Care 
Workers receive speciali s ed Training  in Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI) to 
enhance the quality of care provided.  
 
Table 1: Input Indicators  
  
 Indicator                 
                What works   
     Deficiency  
 
Staffing   
(2 Nurses) 100% staff who provide clinical 
services daily.   
Lab Technician and a Clinician.  
Infrastructure  60% of the essential infrastructure available 
(power, improved water source, functional 
latrine for patients)   
Part of the building needs finishing.  
Supplies  70% essential supplies –  HPTs (accessible and 
working scale for child, accessible and working 
scale for infant, oral antibiotic for pneumonia, 
first line oral antibiotic for dysentery, first - line 
anti - malarial, vitamin A cup/jug to administer 
ORS)   
 
 Height meter  
Availability of 
Guidelines  80% of nationally –  - mandated guidelines are 
available and accessible on the day of the survey   
Infection control    
All infection control supplies and equipment on 
available and used   
Burning chamber  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2: Sirikwa Health Centre Jan to Aug 2023 workload  
Period  
Name  OPD 
Atten 
dance 
<5yrs 
Fema 
le  OPD 
Atten 
dance 
<5yrs 
Male  ODP 
Attend 
ance 
>5yrs 
Female  OPD 
Atten 
dance  
>5yrs 
Male  MOH 
717 
Rev2 
020_o 
ver 
60yea 
rs  ANC 
Atten 
dance  CWC 
Atten 
dance  FP 
Atten 
dance  TB 
and 
Lep 
rosy 
atte 
nda 
nce  Total  
Jan  62  54  257  123  33  35  200  120  3  887  
Feb  81  60  446  18  25  38  237  98  5  1008  
March  87  46  371  190  19  44  233  84  0  1074  
April  61  43  312  131  13  41  327  92  7  1027  
May  53  53  192  152  15  35  251  174  8  933  
June  44  56  263  190  3  31  241  232  0  1060  
July  52  37  359  258  29  27  264  122  9  1157  
August  57  51  194  102  0  32  250  113  7  806  
Total  497  400  2394  1164  137  283  2003  1035  39  7952  
 
 
SUPERVISION  
There have been two instances of High Q uality S upport and I ntegrated S upervision within the past 
two weeks, and the recent spot check marks the third Consecutive O ccurrence.  
 
CHALLENGES EXPERIENCED AT SIRIKWA HEALTH CENTRE  
The presence of the following gaps within the Facility  act as impediments to service delivery.  
a) Maternity Renovation and Equipment: A significant challenge lies in the need for renovation 
and upgrad ing of  equipment in the Maternity  section, hindering the Facility ’s ability to provide 
optimal Maternal  and Child Health Services.  
b) Dispensing Area Shelves: The absence of prope r Shelves in the  Dispensing area  presents a 
challenge in organis ing and storing  of  Medical Supplies.  
c) Structural Improvements/Completion: The Facility  faces obstacles related to Structural 
Improvements and completion  of  tasks, including Repainting, Ceiling Installation, Flooring, 
Plumbing, Waste Management, Staff Facilities , and Electrical Work s,  all of which impede its 
overall functionality.  
d) Human Resources for Health (HRH): Insufficient staffing where the Facility  is in shortage 
of a Lab Technician, a Records and Clinical Officer (RCO), and an additional Nurse s . If not 
addressed, this might pose a significant challenge to providing adequate Healthcare  S ervices.  
e) Rainwater Management: Lack of PVC  Rainwater Gutters and a 5000 - Liter Tank, limiting the 
Facility ’s ability to utili s e this resource efficiently.  
Mr. Speaker, a s outlined there are the major challenges that are facing that Facility  and would wish 
that once th e  Statement  is tabled ,  we as a  Committee are going to visit that area plus other 
surrounding Facilities  so that we can give proper recommendations as far as the status of that 
Facility  is concerned. It is a larming .  
Mr. Speaker,  o ur Facilities  are supposed to have Five Nurses but currently, it has only  one and 
the other one is on leave. That means when that lady on duty ,  if she is on Medical Leave or has an 
emergency, it means p atient s in that area will have no Facility  to go  to and they will be forced to 
go to Kericho as we were told last week. Others will be forced to go to the Molo Facility  which is 
very far .  Therefore  Mr.  Speaker, something needs to be done  there . A lot of investment needs to 
be made in that area. Mr. Speaker , I also know that we have Kshs .  50 Million in our  Budget for  
the construction of a Facility  in that area  and how I we wish as a House , that we  can recommend 
that Sirikwa Health Cent r e  be upgraded to a Level  Four Facility  so that it can offer proper services 
to the members of the public.  
In conclusion  Mr. Speaker , the Department demonstrates an unwavering commitment to 
addressing these challenges by strategically diversifying Comprehensive Plans for Facility  
Enhancement, actively engaging in spectrum of Stakeholders  and channeling resources effectively. 
This multifaceted approach is poised to the c ommunit y in ensuring sustainable and improved 
Health Development for all.  
Furthermore  Mr. Speaker , it is imperative for the County Assembly to allocate funds not only for  
Staff employment and Equipment  in both new and existing Facilities  to align with Ministry of 
Health norms and WHO norms but also for the completion of stalled and ongoing projects; 
reinforcing the County ’s dedication to robust Health Infrastructure .  
T herefore  Mr. Speaker , I would wish the House and also the  Members specifically Members  from 
that area to set aside some funds to go into the improvement of the surrounding Facilities  because 
if the  County settles on that Facility  to upgrade it, then it means they need also to have another 
Level  Three Facility  whereby some cases will be referred to so that the only referral cases will be 
taken to Sirikwa Health Centre if it will be upgraded.  
Therefore  Mr. Speaker , I request the Membe r to invest some of the resources into the said venture 
so that this Facility  can be of great importance. However, we  are going to visit and recommend to 
the Department on the way forward .  Otherwise  Mr. Speaker , I am grateful and I wish to respond 
to the Hon. Member for Sirikwa. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Hon orable  Chair for the Commit tee on Health 
Services. Is the M ember for Sirikwa in the House?  
Hon. David Macharia:  Point of concern Mr.  Speaker  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it the Hon. Member for Shabaab?  
Hon. David Macharia:  Mr. Speaker, I have a point of concern in regard to these new ga dgets that 
we are using here.  Mr. Speaker, t he Hon orable  Member for Elburgon has u sed the gadget very 
well but the Hon orable  the Member for Amallo when he was at the podium, it took him five 
m inutes  to get his Documents  in the S ystem .  So,  kindly I request that if it is possible, you can take 
these Members  for Training  on how to use these gadgets because some of them do not how to 
switch them on.  
( Applause )  
As I stand here, Mr. Speaker, I have been assisting my friend over there to use the gadget that is 
on his table.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Do  you mention the name of the  Member that you were assisting.  
Hon. David Macharia : It is Hon. Mutai ;  “Kalamit”  Mr. Speaker  
( Laughter )  
So, Mr. Speaker if you can assist these Members in attending Training  to understand how to use 
these gadgets it will be of great help. Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Mheshimiw a Member from Keringet, were you assisted from the 
comfort of your seat?  
Hon. William Mutai : Hon orable  Speaker I was really assisted; I was fail ed  to trace where the 
Documents  we re ,  but at least I have been assisted and I think I concur with him if there will be 
some Training  S ession, it will be very helpful.  I got so worried when the  Member from Amallo 
took about five Minutes tracing the D ocuments. Thank you Mr. Speaker, I am well assisted.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you .  Is the Hon orable  Member for Amallo in the House?  
Any Member who would want to comment on that R esponse? The R esponse has been tabled on 
the floor of the House by the Hon orable  Chair for Health Services Committee . What is it the 
Hon orable  Member for Barut?  
Hon. Bernard Kirui:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, mine is just a request to the Chair for Health 
Committee ; I am requesting the Committe e to  visit my area to check on those Facilities .  I have 
Four Dispensaries ;  three  are functioning and the other one is non - operational. So I am just  
requesting that they do a Site Visit and bring a Report  to this Honorable House ,  if it is possible. 
Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  The Hon orable  Member for Menengai .  
Hon . W ilson Mwangi:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I think to respond to Mheshimiwa  from Barut is 
that ,  when we are visiting Sirikwa, we may pass through his Dispensary  and check on the status .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Hon Member for Menengai, you have lost  the Member for Barut 
completely .  Because  what happen s so th at the Committee would Respond, or that  the Committee  
can visit , a Member from  any W ard  needs to bring a substantive  Request for Statement to  this 
House, or before the Committee  so that the Committee , based on that Request  can plan in its Work 
Plan, to visit such a Health Facility.  
So the Hon. Member for Barut, you are free to Request for a Statement before this House, or before 
the Health Committee so that they can plan to visit your Ward.  
ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned to today at 2.30 pm  
The House rose at 11.20 AM  
 
 
 
 
 