NOVEMBER 30, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Wednesday 30th November 2022  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 3: 20 pm 
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri)  in the Chair].  
PRAYER  
STATEMENT  
DISTRIBUTION OF HAWKERS VOUCHERS UNDER YOUTH EMPOWERMENT PROGRAM  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a Statement  by Hon.  David Wathiai . 
Hon. David Wathiai: Thank you Honorable Speaker for giving me this opportunity to request for 
this Statement in front of this honorable House. Pursuant to Standing Order Number 47(2) (C ) I 
rise to request for a Statement  from the Chairperson  of the Committe e on Budge t and 
Appropriation s concerning the distribution of Hawkers Vouchers under the Youth Emp owerment 
Program in the  Office of the Governor.  
Honorable Speaker, the County Assembly appropriated Kshs . 10 Million in the Financial Year 
2021/2022 under the Offic e of the  Governor . This amount was later spent in form of Gift Vouchers 
to Hawkers in Nakuru Town especially in Biashara Ward. While this was a noble idea meant to 
appreciate the hardworking and Small -Scale Traders , the whole activity was shrouded in a 
mystery . It is there fore important that we interrogate the manner in which the fund was 
administered . In view of this, I request the Chairperson for the Committe e on Budget and 
Appropriation s to respond on the following: - 
1. Who were the beneficiaries to the Youth Empowerment Vouchers ? 
2. How many Voucher s were issued per person and how was the distribution structured . 
3. The total amount spent in the program . 
4. The Institutions, Shops, and Enterprises  where the gift or vouchers were redeemed or 
cashed.  
Thank you Honorable Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Thank you Honorable Wathiai.  The honorable  Chairperson  for 
the Committee  on Budget and Appropriation s or the Vice Chairperson to take note. Honorable 
Karanja.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you for giving me t his opportunity. When I listened to that 
Statement  very clearly and it touched on hawkers, I am also requesting that the Committee  on 
Trad e that really deal with those issues because those are Hawkers  complaining that things were 
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 not done well, whether the  Committe e on Trade  can be enjoined. It is my prayer because I can see 
it is touching on Hawkers  and they are the one s complaining. Through your indulgence and I know 
you have read the spirit of the Statement touches on the Committee on Trade, the body touches on 
the Committee  on Budget  and Appropriation s. 
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Honorable Karanja, thank you for t hat whereas the people who 
benefitted as was read by Honorable David Wathiai were  the Hawkers , however the mother 
Department was the Office of the Governo r and it was not a vote in the D epartment of Trade, 
Tourism and Cooperatives  as then. As such the matter rest s on the Committee  on Budget and 
Appropriation s. I am of the opinion that the Committee  on Budget  and Appropriation s takes this 
Statement  or the request for Statement  and they respond. When  matters that are specifically 
budgeted  within the Department of Trade  or any other Department that matter then stand s 
committed to such a Departmental Committee . 
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Honorable Speaker I thought you will deal with the spirit and that is why 
I was concerned because I thought the spirit is more provocative?  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): The issues of spirit in as far as the votes and Departmental 
Budgets are concerned, if for example a certain item was budgeted in the Department of 
Agriculture  and it touches on the issues students, we are not able to commit it to the Committee  
on Education because they were beneficiaries. We will get back to where the moth er Department 
where the money w as budgeted in so that we can get to the root of the issue. As such,  that is why 
now the spirit does not suffice. What is it Honorable Mwangi?  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya : Thank you for this chance, I was of the view that when you will be 
considering the Chairperson  for the Committee on Trade views also consider us the Committee on 
Finance because  what was misappropriated is the money that we have been looking for and funding 
the Budget. When the spirit now comes in let us also be there .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Honorable Mwangi we reali sed that a certain Committee  of an 
Assembly  and the Assembl y delegates power to that committee . You can imagine an Assembly of 
75 Members wanting it; it will be a Whole House looking to a certain matter. So, we risk as much 
as we want to entirety have a trail on how matters will be dealt with  or be investigated, we run the 
risk of having the whole House  investigating or looking into different matters, which m ay not 
really give us the desired  outcomes in as far a s specific issues are concerned.  
We also have to look at the mandate of specific Committees  and the reasons why we have 
committed  this one to the Committee on Budge t and Appropriatio ns is because it is concerned with 
their implementation of the Budge t. Honorable Mwangi, the Committee  on Finance , its mandates 
is about looking into new finances or  how to raise finances, new streams and the existing streams 
of money and  the mandate runs to that extent . When you collect the money the Committee on 
Budget and Appropriation s sits, budgets and oversees the Budget Implementation process for any 
Financial Year to the extent that may be the Committee  on Public Accounts and Investment has 
looked into issues or Reports from the Auditor General . If certain issue features  the Committee  on 
Budge t does not have the mandate,  then the Committee  on PAIC  will look into such a matter  so 
we have to give room for our committees. So that now we promote the committee system. Now 
that is how the Assembly works. Next Order!  
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 MOTION  
HOUSE ADJOURNS FROM 30TH NOVEMBER , 2022  TO 14TH FEBRUARY , 2023  
 IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE ASSEMBLY CALENDAR  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Alex Langat):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir, I raise to move a 
Motion; -  
THAT  pursuant to the provision of Standing Order, 31 (3) this House adjourns from today, 30TH  
November 2022, and actually resumes on 14 February 2023 in accordance with the Assembly’s 
calendar.  
We are aware that the House Business Committee had laid down a calendar which actually expires 
today. And according to the norms of the House members, we are aware of the good work that the 
Budget committee had done and any other sitting will be termed as a Special Sitting and it is well 
taken care of. Mr. Speaker,  I raise to move this Motion and request my good friend Hon. Fa dhili 
to second the Motion.  
Hon. Fadhili Msuri:  Mr. Speaker sir as presented by my good friend Hon. Majority Leader I do 
second.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you. The Motion is open for debate. Hon. Karanja  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Speaker, as I  read this Motion, and when I listened to the Majority 
Leader, he vaguely put in it that some of the committees have been kidding. Mr. Speaker, you 
know very well that the H ouse cannot adjourn leaving matters pending.  
 It is us who make the law, thinking t hat we will not lock this out. We have a very serious business 
on the Supplementary budget. I did not get, when we say that we are adjourning and that is why it 
comes as a Motion it does not come as a law. It comes as a Motion so that when members discuss 
and see that they have no business pending, then they adjourn.  
That is why it is my feeling that they are being told that there is something t o done tomorrow, if 
that something does not, please the administration or the speaker, then it means that it will adjourn 
because it will be a precedence. I presume and this is my humble request to the House, that first of 
all we defeated the Motion. So that we do first of all debate what brought us  here. Can you imagine 
going home while you have no budget? my prayer is that the Motion as it is… because the Majority 
Leader brought what is obvious . 
 I am urging the member s not  to run away from the obvious because sometimes is tricky. So that 
we first of all finish with the business. Why do we agree with the business that brought us here  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):   Hon.  Karanja, do you want to be explained what measures are 
there to cure your concerns?  
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The problem with the Motion and what the 
majority has said, is that the information was scanty and when the information is scanty and you 
cannot trace the head or the tail, because you cannot just say the rest have been catered for and not 
say exactly w hen. 
Before the Majority Leader comes, he ought to be prepared enough. Have a statement that he says, 
yes, we want to adjourn because we know we have ABCD. And then we have this one, but you 
cannot bring a summary of the summary.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): Okay, thank you, honorable Majority Leader.  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Alex Langat):  Thank you Mr. Speaker, sir. I appreciate what our 
teacher is actually talking about. And I think he is always been good in receiving summaries. I do 
not know why he i s not receiving the summary on this one. But it is well summarized. And I think 
I stated so well, that we are very much privy of the good work that the Budget committee has done. 
And I know the Whole House is sitting in anticipation of the approval of budg et.  
However, being my senior in this House, there are things that are actually catered for, by the 
Standing Orders and the laws and the precedence of the House. 
House Business committee had the calendar. And once you have a calendar unless they go and sit  
again to review the calendar  you have to follow it . And this one, you know very well, my friend 
Hon. Karanja, the business of this House expires today.  
That is what was brought and was approved before this flo or. So, any other sitting either perceived, 
assumed or anticipated, must actually be given a precedent, where we are going to set a time in 
terms of a special sitting.  
So, if I may digest it further. I am aware that the budget has not been committed. And they ar e 
silently we hear whispers from behind. We are supposed to have a sitting to be able to approve 
budget, possibly by tomorrow.  
So before going home, maybe I can put it to you or digested that We will have a special s itting, 
most likely tomorrow, so that w e can be able to approve the budget and it is already taken care of, 
the formalities  and the legalities to make that sitting official and legal, is already taken care of  
through administration.  
 So, I think you should not be worried about the small summary . But everything is in cause and 
just putting into consideration the business is supposed to expire and it is not peculiar to this House, 
but even to the rest of the assemblies. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Honorable current . 
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  You know this is the House of rules and regulations, Mr. Speaker, 
Majority Leader cannot insinuate that the Motion cannot be defeated.  
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  No, I  am seated here a nd I have not had any insinuation from the 
leader of majority party that the Motion cannot be defeated , that is farfetched, I did not get that.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja:  Mr. Speaker , you know what I am suggesting is this, tomorrow we will 
have the business. To morrow can be next year. And that business and there was a particular time 
when we people wanted to do away with the speaker and therefore the adjournment was brought. 
and because it was assumed that it is the precedence then you lock in the…. That is why I am 
saying that the law, and that is why we should know that this, as a word of caution. So that the 
Motion be debated and if the majority have it and they say that okay, let us continue with the 
business until it is over.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Hon Karanja even as you summarize,  from your experience, you 
are a senior member of this House, you know that there are Motions which are procedural and one 
of the examples  of a procedural Motion  is the Motion to adjourn the House for the long recess and 
you realise that if I would also refresh the memory of this House is that Mheshimiwa Karanja, 
there was a time you used to move such kind of Motions; Procedural Motions. I want to shed more 
light that after adjourning, should there be need for any business , the Assembly has secured 
tomorrow for a Special Sitting because the Assembly calendar as passed on the floor of this House 
is expiring today. The Supplementary Budget issue is taken care of.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. You know you a re generous with information. 
The Honorable Majority Leader wanted to footnote us into just mere voters. Therefore, I thank 
you for the information and that is why I am asking the Whip, you do not just come and second 
anything because it has just come from  your boss. You must first of all find time to look why. The 
issue of parroting should end. I think also Hon. Fadhili should be privy to what is coming; not 
standing up and sitting down just because your boss has said so.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): W hat is it Mheshimiwa Minority Whip?  
Hon. Virginia Gicanga: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I am standing on a point of order because I 
think Hon. Karanja is out of order. The Majority Whip has a right democratically to second the 
Motion. He cannot be asking Hon . Karanja what to second and what not to second.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Wathiai.  
Hon. David Wathiai: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I stand to support Hon. Karanja and I also stand 
to be guided as you have said that there are Procedural Motions.  What if the Procedural Motion  is 
defeated on the floor of the House? What will happen after that? I stand to be guided.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Hon. Majority Whip, you were mentioned. Do you 
want to exonerate yourself?  
The Majority Whi p (Hon. Fadhili Msuri ): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. At times, I like listening 
to my brother Hon. Karanja. He is a man who speaks with so much fury and so many words that 
signifies at times nothing. I have heard him loud and clear and I think being in the A ssembly for 
so many years is not a mark of understanding some basic principles of law. I think they can take 
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 advantage of this recess and through any of the Privileges Committee and have him re -oriented on 
what we need to do in this House. The Member has i nsinuated that I just follow my boss. He needs 
to be disciplined because he just defied his boss. My boss are the people of Biashara Ward who 
elected me and, in the House, my boss is the Speaker and you are also his boss; the Majority Leader 
is my boss and  also his boss; Hon. Wanjohi is my boss and his boss and I am his boss. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Mutai  
Hon. William Mutai: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. We have to be very aware of a wounded lion. 
Having been a Majority Leader, Hon. Ka ranja has a lot of experience and I know he is posing a 
very great challenge which brings us to a learning session. I want to believe that we are noting 
something because though we are still getting orientation, I want to believe that if this Motion, 
then there is some possibility that we are going for six months and we may not like it. Most of us 
may not like the scenario. Let us just support this Motion and we go on recess. Should there be 
any meeting, then we will refer to that one as a special sitting . Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Yes Hon. Karanja  
Hon. Stanley Karanja: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I do not know why Members keep harassing 
me. Now because we are all in agreement, I said I do support the Motion, you people go home and 
then wait until you are called again to come and second. It should not be assumed that this Motion 
can pass. What happens if it does not? That is why I am saying that whenever somebody stands to 
bring the Motion, he must make sure that it has information. Whenever you stand to second the 
Motion, you must have substance. That is what I meant. It i s not only that you sit and stand and 
then you say yes just for the Hansard  to capture that you said something.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I am here to support the Motion because 
recess will help us to move around  with our Engineers, some preparing BQs. Another thing, we 
have to visit the elderly in our villages. Also, we will go back to our communities to check on their 
priorities before the County Integrated Development Plan which will be there next week. Thank 
you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Kirui  
Hon. Bernard Kirui: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I stand to oppose what Mheshimiwa Karanja is 
doing here. I think Mheshimiwa Fadhili is very right since he is among the Leaders of this House. 
For somebody to pr opose or to second, I normally see you have to stand. I think Mheshimiwa 
Fadhili was doing the right thing by standing. Mheshimiwa Karanja must allow new Members in 
this House to at least learn more. Mheshimiwa Fadhili, you are very correct and I stand to support 
this Motion. If there is any need, we have Leadership in this House they will call us and we will 
come. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Alex  
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support Hon. Karanja because I feel  like 
this gentleman is a walking industry of knowledge. As such, we need to utilize him. I am aware 
that Hon. Karanja today is already eying another position out there. When we talk about seniority, 
I think he is already acquainted with where he is going.  The House Business Committee emanates 
from the floor of this House and from these Members and as such, I think they are and can always 
meet and reschedule any calendar we have if there need be. Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karur i): Hon Mwangi.  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya : Thank you Mr. Speaker. It is not that we do not want to go for a recess, 
we are much in need of it. We are approaching December, where we should be travelling but then 
again Mr. Speaker, there are some issues that need to be addressed. When we come out of this 
House today adjourned, the special sitting that will be called, we do not have a guarantee that all 
Members will be present unless you put in your powers to ensure that all of us will be here. I 
foresee a scenario where we shall adjourn the House because the calendar has ended and the 
Majority Leader and Mr. Speaker will themselves be waiting for us and not see us 
anywhere. Naomba tunapoendelea tujue ya kwamba sio kuunga mkono tu bali pia tunaweza 
kupinga.  Niliangal ia Mheshimiwa Fadhili nikaona alisimama kwa upole sana sababu hakutaka 
kusecond Motion. Uliona vile alisimama lakini kukaa alikaa haraka. Thank you  
(Laughter )! 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon Rottok.  
 Hon. Isaac Rottok : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I stand to support the Motion. This recess has come 
at the right time just after being elected as an MCA. I believe that most of the MCAs here never 
visited their village since they were voted in. It is now the right time for most of us to go and 
interact wi th …..  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya : Point of order Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): What is the point of order Hon Mwangi?  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya : Hon. Rottok cannot say that Members here have never visited their village 
or Ward because we have been there. W e come from where we were voted. So he is out of order! 
If he has not visited his area he should tell the House that he has never gone back to his people. I 
am with my people each and every day.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok : Mr. Speaker, I think I have not mentioned anyone. I just said some and I 
believe he is doubting himself. He might be the one who has never visited his people. I think it is 
now the right time to go out for these three months and go visit Wanjiku  down there. So 
Mheshimiwa Mr.…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Jo el Karuri): Address the Speaker.  
Hon. Isaac Rottok : Mr. Speaker, I believe my colleague here never visited his people in the village 
and now he is feeling guilty. Thank you.  
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon orable  Members, the issue of visiting the Ward, to what 
extent are we able to measure Members who visited and who did not visit their Wards? The 
direction the Motion is taking is which Member has visited more times and who are the Members 
who never visited even once. I do not know if by the end of this Motion we are going to classify 
Members based on the percentage of the many times or less times they have visited their Wards. 
Let us not take that direction because it can bring about acrimony. Let us stick to the  Motion that 
whether we support the Motion or to not for the sake of progress. Hon. Francis.  
Hon. Francis Kuria : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion putting in mind that 
we have many duties ahead of us and as we are breaking for a long recess. As House Business 
Committee anytime we are needed God willing for anything, we will be available. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Hon Gatuso.  
Hon. Bernard  Gatuso : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion, happen ing that 
majority of us are first timers in this House and maybe we have interacted with people before we 
were voted and now we are well orientated. I believe it will be possible for us to be able to engage 
with Wanjiku  because  we have gained the knowledge  on how we are supposed to approach issues. 
Much of what we have learnt is the theory part and the practical part we are supposed to go down 
to Wanjiku so that we can start implementing on issues. Not implementing as such but to oversight 
on issues that wi ll be implemented by the Executive. Thank you so much.  
Hon. Robert Lang ’at: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the Motion; being a Procedural 
Motion this will give us time to mingle with Wanjiku  at our Ward level. We have been very busy 
in this Hous e for the last three months and these two months of recess will give us a chance to be 
with Wanjiku and give our services as required….  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): There is a point of order from Hon Alex Bor.  
Hon. Alex Bor : Mr. Speaker I think Hon Robert...  
Hon. Grace Mwathi : Point of information Mr. Speaker sir.  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri): Hon. Grace Mwathi, you want to inform Hon. Alex or Ho n 
Robert?  
Hon. Grace Mwathi : Hon Alex.  
The Speaker  (Hon Joel Karuri):  So you inform him then he brings a point of order on Hon. 
Robert.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi : What I want to ask him is what point of order is he standing on?  
The S peaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Ho n Alex Bor.  
Hon. Alex Bor : Am asking i f Robert is in order because he is neither in official or in African attire.  
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Alex Bor, you are bringing an issue of decorum. I can see 
that Hon. Robert s eated  with the Minority Whip . This issue keeps coming. My eyes  are not able 
to see whether Hon. Robert is in decorum. Hon. Minority Leader you could help us?  
Hon. Viginia Wamaitha : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I think this is like the tenth time we are talking 
about decorum and about the d ress code for Wednesday. We agreed as a House that we are going 
somewhere where we shall discuss on how Members will be dressing on Wednesdays. Today I see 
a lot of people especially men, Honorable Members who do not have ties but because we are going 
for recess let us sh elve this until we sit down in a…  
Hon. Stanley  Karanja : Point of order Mr. Speaker!  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Kindly allow Hon Viginia to finish her submission because there 
was a question addressed to her from the Chair.  
Hon. Viginia Wamaitha : Yes. Mr. Speaker I think Hon. Karanja is not the right person to be 
standing on a point of order bec ause some time back he was not in decorum. He was not in a tie. 
Now today because he is in a tie he wants to bring up questions which are very irrelevant in this 
House. Therefore Mr. Speaker, please protect me from Hon. Karanja . I think we agreed and as a 
House of rules and regulations, we stick by that. So we need to go for kind of training on etiquette 
and dress code. I rest my case Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The point of order was raised by Hon. Alex Bor and it was on 
whether Hon. Rober t is in decorum. Hon. Robert was on the floor submitting his discussion for 
the part of this debate. Therefore Hon. Robert finish up your submission  
Hon. Robert Rutto : Thank you Mr. Speaker,  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon Karanja . 
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Yes Hon. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it?  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : You know and Mr. Speaker we still insist this is the House of rules and 
regulations; we cannot have a Whip who prete nds not to see … 
(Laughter ) 
…when that neighbo ur does not prescribe to the rules of the House . Mr. Speaker you very well 
know that when a Member is not in decorum, he is even not supposed to talk . The other thing is 
that there is the Speaker’s Guide Book and therefore I urge and since the matter has been brought 
to your attention, that the Hon. Member sited next to the Minority Whip, who m she is  pretending 
not to see, Mr. Speaker I urge you to use yo ur powers to send the Member out to dress well and 
then come and sit. You know they are in the same party…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order Hon. Karanja; Hon Minority Leader and then Hon 
Macharia  
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 Hon. Virginia Gicanga : To satisfy Hon Karanja’s ego, Ho n. Robert you go and get the tie but 
despite him or the other Members are calling him a senior Member, we cannot be going by him on 
what he wants to satisfy his ego in the House. We want to conclude this Motion and then we can 
forge the way forward but Hon  Robert go get the tie.  
Hon. Robert Rutto : Mr. Speaker, as you know today is on Wednesday , we put on African attire . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order Hon. Macharia and then the  Leader of Majority Party.  
Hon. John Gachiri:  Mr. Speaker this is not a Hou se of mercy and therefore I stand to object the 
statement of the Minority Whip because if we continue this way, this House will be like a market 
and we need order. Even Hon. Karanja is out of order including Hon. Nene who is seated close to 
me is also out of order. This is because we have to put on suit s according to our Standing Orders . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Order Hon. Member. The issue of decorum comes to an end. 
There is no substantive Communication from the Speaker that has described what is official or 
what is not official. Therefore for this one last time I will give Communication when we sit next 
as to what is official in terms of decorum and what attire to put on not only on Wednesday but 
because that issue was raised and debated upon, from what is forgoing in this debate, it looks like 
Hon. Macharia said that some Member seated next to him are not in decorum, other even Hon. 
Karanja who has been contributing a good part of this afternoon is not in decorum, the n it begs the 
question as t o who is in decorum today? Does decorum go to the extent of having a tie or we have 
some other attires that will be termed that we are in decorum? On this, we will have a 
comprehensive Communication next when we sit on what to put on  by the Hon orable  Membe rs 
when we are in plenary. We proceed, Hon. Majority Leader you want to contribute?  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Alex Lang’at): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I really do not want to 
add because you have made the ruling exactly what was in my mind. At least the Ho use forget 
what you have just repeated today, is the same thing you had same time back when this issue  came 
and I do not know why Members keep on forgetting.  
I just wa nted to remind them what you have actually already said that we had not made a ruling 
but at one point, and it is in Hansard,  you had actually said you are going to make a ruling and let 
us agree as a House what is decorum and what is not decorum. I remember one time one of our 
colleague just dressed the way Hon . Karanja is dressed today, he had a tie but he never had a coat 
and we said it was not in decorum. And he was also very busy actually bashing the Hon orable  
Member and I think he has also forgotten again.  So lest we suffer from selective amnesia we should 
actually w ait. You had made a r uling sometimes back and I wish to support what you have just 
said that you will make a ruling so that we all know what is decorum and what is not , but currently, 
we do not have one and what we are referring to was the previous Assembly but this is a new 
Assembly Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Majority Leader; this is a Motion I want to put it 
to question . 
NOVEMBER 30, 2022                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU DEBATES   
Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Assembly Hansard Report is for information purpose only. A 
certified version of this Hansard Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor, County Assembly of 
Nakuru.    
 (Question proposed that pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 31( 3) this House adjourns 
from today 30th November 2022 and resumes on 14th February 2023 in accordance with the 
Assembly Calendar ). 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Thank you, Honorable Members ; before we break, I want to put it straight forward that you will 
be getting information from the Whips about what happens next about the businesses that are 
pending in this House. So the House stands adjourned until when we will be informed by our 
Whips.  
(The House rose 4.10pm ) 
 
 