COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 11 th April 2023 
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:10 AM  
[Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
PETITION  
UTIL ISATION OF BURSARY FUNDS IN NAKURU COUNTY  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri ): There is a  Petition which is a Response, which is the Report of 
Early Childhood and Vocational Training on Utilisation  of Bursary Funds in Nakuru County . It is 
going to be laid by  the Honorable Peter Maina who is the Chairperso n for the Committee on Early 
Childhood  and Vocational Training.  
Hon. Peter Maina: Honorable Speaker, I am here on behalf of the Committee  on Early Childhood 
and Vocational Training in submitting a report on the Petition  of Utilisation  of Bursary Funds in 
Nakuru County . I take this opportunity to thank the  Members of this Committee for their 
commitment and contributions during the process of interrogation of the aforementioned Petition . 
On behalf of the Committee, it is my pleasure and duty to present the report on the  Findings on 
Public Petition on mater of Bursary Allocation to functions of National Government.  
The background - Pursuant  to the provision of Standing Orders 205(2), the Committee  on Early 
Childhood Development  and Vocational Trai ning received a Petition  from Grassroot Civilians 
Foundation  on matters concerning Bursary Allocation to Secondary Schools, College s and 
Universities, the Petitioners  had a prayer that - 
1. The Assembly  in its Constitutional Mandate should disapprove of any Funds in form 
bursaries intended to facilitate functions of National Government as stipulated in Schedule 
4 of the Constitution.  
2. That Funds of the County Government including Bursaries  should only advance functions 
of the County Government as espoused in Schedule 4(2) of the  Constitution of Kenya, 
2010  
3. That further deliberate violation of progressive Constitution  on the above matter will 
inform us to seek redress gestures from the High Court . 
Provision of Public Petitions - Public Petitions are provided for under Standing Order 198 of the 
County Assembly of Nakuru. Pursuant to Standing Order 205(2) of the Nakuru County Assembly, 
the Honorable Speaker committed the Petition  the Committe e on Early Childhood Education and 
Vocational Training for consideration on 15th November, 2022.  
Submission by The Petitioners - Honorable Speaker, the  Committee upon receipt of the  Petition 
wrote to the Petitioner  Laban Omusundi and Benson Oluande to  ascertain the issues raised in the 
Petition. The petitioner s were invited via a letter captioned vide CAN/CM/1/2(10) on 1st March, 
2023 and appeared before the Committee  on Wednesday 8th March, 2023. The Committee 
accorded the Petitioners a fair hearing as provided for in the Constitution  of Kenya, 2010. Mr. 
Laban Omusundi stated th at The Grassroot Civilians Foundation is a Human Rights group and 
their prayer is that the County Assembly to intervene  and stop the County Executive from issuing 
Bursaries  since Schedule 4 of the Constitution  of Kenya 2010 mandates  the issuance of Bursaries 
to be the National Government function. The  Petitioner also cited that the aforementioned Petition  
was still pending at Nakuru County Executive which had not yet be acted upon and their prayer 
was the County Assembly of Nakuru in tervenes. Lastly, he told the Committee  that their above 
matter was not pending in any Court  or any Constitutional body. Additionally, Mr. Benson 
Oluande stated that the County Governments are only allowed to issue Bursaries  to Technical 
Institutions  and ECDs. He further stated that the County Government funds including Bursaries 
should only advance functions of the County  as espoused in Schedule 4  (1) of  the Constitution  of 
Kenya, 2010 and not use for facilitating Secondary, Universities, Colleges  among o ther i nstitutions 
of Higher Learning as the  County Mandate  clearly states that  Bursaries should be given to Early 
Childhood and Vocational Centers only. He added that it has come to their attention that the 
County Executive  has been overstepping its role i n Education by offering Bursaries  to facilitate 
functions of the National Government and their prayer was that the  Assembly to bar the County 
Government from allocating Bursaries.  
COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS AND FINDINGS  
Honourable Speaker, the Committee having  considered the submissions before , it observed that 
bursary issuance is guided by the following;  
1. The 2010 Constitution of Kenya  
The 2010 Constitution of Kenya recogni ses that “every person has the right to education” (Article 
43 (1) (f) and stipulates that “every child has the right to free and compulsory education” (Article 
53 (1) (b). 
 
2. The Nakuru County Bursaries Fund Act, 2019.  
     The object and purpose of the Act is to provide for;  
a) The establishment of a Fund to provide bursaries to financially disadvantaged or needy 
students in the County, including Persons With Disabilities, who deserve support to pursue their 
education in recogni sed schools and Educational Institutions;  
b) Provid ing education grants or bursaries to eligible students enrolled in primary schools, 
secondary schools, special primary schools, universities, colleges and polytechnics;  
c) To establish procedures and guidelines for efficient, verifiable allocation and dis bursement 
of the Funds and other related scholarships by the County Government of Nakuru;  
d) Provide for the procedure for application of and requirements for access to the Fund;  
e) To ensure equitable distribution of the Bursary Fund;  
f) To foster, pro mote and advance the right to Education pursuant to Article 43(1)(f) of the 
Constitution;  
g) To reduce disparities and inequality in the provision of Education;  
h) Promote and increase enrollment, retention, completion and transition rates in schools; an d  
i) Improve education standards and literacy levels and reduce poverty and inequality.  
 
3. Public Finance Management (Nakuru County Bursary Fund) Regulations 2015  
The object ive and purpose of these Regulations is to provide for the establishment of a Fun d to 
provide education bursaries to financially disadvantaged or needy students in the County including 
Persons With Disabilities who deserve support to pursue their education in recogni sed schools and 
educational institutions and to provide for efficient allocation and disbursement of the funds . 
The regulation also clearly states that;  
Section 10  (1) state that, ‘‘Any student who wishes to benefit from the Fund shall make an 
application to the relevant Ward Bursary Committee in a form set out in the Schedu le and the Ward 
Bursary Committee shall consider all applications submitted to it and may accordingly accept or 
reject any application for a bursary. Where  it accepts any application, the Ward Committee shall 
recommend to the County Bursary Committee, the grant of a bursary to the qualifying student.’’  
 
4. International Human Rights Standards; Every Child has a Right to Education . 
Education is a basic right enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child 
(CRC).  
International Human Rights Law makes it clear that all children have a right to free, compulsory 
primary education and free from discrimination.  
State Parties also ensure different forms of secondary education are available and accessible to 
every child, and take appropriate meas ures, such as the progressive introduction of free education 
and offering financial assistance in case of need.  
 
5. Progressive Reali sation of the Right to Education  (PRRE)  
Education, an economic, social, and cultural right, entails state obligations of bo th an immediate 
and progressive kind. This set of rights is subject to progressive reali sation, in recognition of the 
fact that states require sufficient resources and time to respect, protect, and fulfill these rights.  
 
6. Global Education Efforts  
In thi s regards the United Nations member States agreed to work together to “ensure inclusive and 
quality education for all and promote lifelong learning” by 2030 as part of the new Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs).  
7. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) , which aimed, among other things, to ensure 
all children complete primary education and that an equal number of girls and boys remain in 
school. On the same note the MDGs ensure that every child should be entitled to free basic and 
secondary Education.  
8. Education law and policy framework  
Kenya has ratified most International Treaties that protect the right to education, which form part 
of the Country’s laws. The Constitution of Kenya, in Article 53 (1) (b) state that every child has a 
right to free and Compulsory Basic Education and Article 55 (a) the State shall take measures, 
including Affirmative Action Programmes, to ensure that the youth access relevant education and 
training. Minorities and Marginali sed Groups under Article 56 (b) have a right to b e provided with 
special opportunities in the field of education.  
 
9. The Basic Education Act (No. 14 of 2013) has been passed into law to regulate the 
provision of Basic Education and Adult Basic Education in the Country.  
Hon. Peter Maina :  The law guarantees the implementation of the right to education. In addition, 
Kenya adopted general and specific policies on education. The most recent are the Second Medium 
Plan Term or Vision 2030 and the Policy Framework for the Education and Training (2012).  
10. The 2001 Child’s Act.  
It requires the Government to undertake all the necessary steps to make available free education 
to every child. Article 7 recognizes as follows;  
I. Every child has been entitled to education, the provision of which shall be responsi bility 
of the Government and the parents.  
II. Every child shall be entitled to free basic education which shall be compulsory in 
accordance to Article 28 of the United Nations’ Convention on the Rights of a Child.  
RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE.  
Arising from  the above observations and findings, the Petition is not merited and it is null and 
void. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Chair for Education Committee and maybe we want 
to get it from you and to copy after you that we are going to d eploy the ICT gadgets to our 
advantage so that our work can comply with the ICT standards in this County. That was huge.  
That is the response of the Committee of Education and Vocational Training. We could have two 
Members comment about the response.  
Hon.  Njuguna from Elburgon Ward.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I have read the spirit of the Petition and 
what the petitioner was addressing. What I wanted to ignite was a discourse of law and when the 
petitioner looked at Schedule 4 he had a n oversight as a member of the public. Were it not for the 
affirmative action that we have as a County to make sure that every child has a right to basic 
education, I am afraid to say that the petitioner has a case because the County Governments draw 
their functions from the Schedule 4. If you look at it critically, there are functions that the National 
Government cannot interfere with. Equally, there are functions where the County Government 
should not endeavor to indulge itself into.  
However, I wanted to  amend the recommendation of the Committee and request the Committee to 
further interrogate the recommendation that they gave because there is no Petition that is not 
merited to arrive to this House. However, the response that should go to the petitioner s hould be 
advisory recommendation because this recommendation is deterrent in terms of response and 
therefore, what I would wish in future is that whenever the Committee is coming up with 
recommendations, it should be cognisant that power belongs to the peo ple and the sovereignty of 
this Country belongs to the people and whenever such response comes fourth, let it advise the 
members of the public and perhaps, the recommendation that ought to be there was to advise them 
further; to tell them that that the Cou nty has embarked on affirmative action because even the 
National Government cannot be able to hold the number of students that we have so that we can 
provide such observations that have been provided here.  
However, I know what the bursary does. It is very essential and supportive to the students but also, 
I would wish to say that these people wanted us to dwell further onto our functions of making sure 
that Early Childhood Education has been given enough attention by this County.  
If you go to Kasarani in E lburgon Ward, you will find a child who cannot afford to find herself or 
himself into an ECD. That was the spirit of this Petition. Anytime now, when I meet the 
Chairperson along the corridors, we are going to discuss this because in future, our Act will b e 
caveated so that we can endeavor into our own routes and in our own lines as enshrined by our 
Constitution.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Chairperson for Health. Maybe Chairperson 
let us allow one more Member then have an opportunit y to respond. Hon. Wathiai from Shaabab 
Ward.  
Hon. David Wathiai : Mr. Spika nashukuru sana kwa kunipa hii nafasi ili niweze kuchangia kwa 
hii Ripoti ambayo imekuja kutoka Kamati ya Education. Mwenyekiti na Wanakamati mmefanya 
kazi nzuri sana na tunawashukuru sana kwa hiyo kazi mmefanya.Nimepitia hii Ripoti na 
nimeshangaa kama huyu Mwombaji hana watoto ama watoto wanasoma kwa familia yake ama 
anaishi mahali pale milimani ama pesa anazo kila wakati na watoto wanasoma. Yeye haoni shida 
ambazo hao wa toto wanapitia. Sisi wenyewe kama viongozi tukiwa pale mashinani tunaona watoto 
wakiumia. Kama ningekuwa huyo mwombaji, singewahi sema Kaunti isilipie watoto  bursary kwa 
sababu hii bursary…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honorable Member kindly confin e yourself to the report 
and not the petitioner.  
Hon. David Wathiai : I stand guided Mr. Speaker. Hii Ripoti tumepatiwa na ndugu yetu iko sawa 
kabisa. Hayo matakwa ya Mwombaji kuleta mambo ya kusema Kaunti isilipe bursary  naomba sisi 
kama Waheshimiwa wa hii  Nyumba tupitishe hii Ripoti. Tuseme iko sawa na tufungie Mwombaji 
huko nje kwa sababu ameshinda akitusumbua. Anataka watoto wetu wasisome. Ninashukuru kwa 
hii nafasi umenipa na ninaomba sisi kama hii Nyumba tuseme kuwa mambo ya huyu Petitioner 
aende alete  lalamiko lingine lakini isiwe ya kusema wa toto wetu wasisiomeshwe katika K aunti hii 
yetu ya  Nakuru.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Chairperson... Now issues of precedence. The Hon. Minority 
Leader then the Hon. Chair.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi : Thank you M r. Speaker. I want to agree fully with the Report that has been 
presented by our Chairman the Hon. Peter Maina. Before we came up with this Report, when the 
Petition came up to the Education Committee where we are 18 Members, the Chairman mandated 
each one  of us to go to our Wards and do public participation just to get the feel and a feeling of 
what the members would want and we gave back a Report to the Chair. We were in agreement that 
the 18 Wards that were representing the Education Committee did a publ ic participation and the 
people that voted for us were in agreement and they said that they wanted bursary.  
Therefore, the views that have been read here are not our personal views; these are views that have 
come from various respective Wards. It is true like the Hon. Njuguna has said that the mandate is 
to take care of the ECDs and the Vocational Training Centres but however, if you look at the 
Report that has been presented here we have quoted other laws that are of superior than the County 
laws. We have  international Laws on Education. We have our own Constitution of Kenya. The 
Constitution of Kenya and the International Law supersede the County laws and that is why we 
have quoted all those laws that deal with education.  
We also have a Bursary Regulation that was passed in this Assembly and therefore what we are 
doing is not outside the mandate of this County. There is a policy that mandates that .That policy 
came in 2018 and was passed in this Assembly and therefore if th at law was invalid then somebody 
should have gone to challenge the court of law. It came up in this House, it was passed and that is 
exactly what we are following.  
Looking at all that we have said today, it is true that the International and National law supersedes 
the County law because that is where we borrow the laws of this County. If somebody wants to 
challenge us we can actually go to court and quote the International law and say which one comes 
before which. Therefore my thinking is the Bursary Law should be there and what we are saying 
is that our Vision 2030 which we have not reached, one of the pillars of Vision 2030 is Education.  
As much as they want to say that probably the County Assembly was not following, we are 
following the International L aw, and the laws that are required in regards to the bursaries of this 
Committee. I want to thank my Chair for the nice homework that he gave us and I think all the 
Members of this House are in agreement that we need the bursary to proceed with education i n 
this County. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Chairperson  
Hon. Peter Maina : Mr. Speaker allow me through you to respond to my very good friend Hon. 
Njuguna  from Elburgon. In Elburgon there are 17 young boys and girls who did very well in their 
KCSE examination. They each scored above 350 marks but they had not reported to school because 
they come from very needy homes and they are disadvantaged financially.  
Through the bursaries and through the Office of the Governor, all the 17 students have been 
sponsored to join secondary schools. Now the question is Hon. Njuguna from Elburgon insists that 
we should limit ourselves to ECDs and Vocational Trainings but whe n needy cases arise from his 
area he supports. That shows double standards.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Chair kindly have your seat. The Hon. Njuguna was 
just presenting his views that into the future that the petitioner was looking at the dis course of the 
law and the Schedule 4 of the Constitution about the Devolved functions. At no given time did he 
say that he does not want the members of public from Elburgon to access the bursaries. So, unless 
I did not get that right Mr. Chair, maybe you c ould summarise your submission.  
Hon. Peter Maina : From what I understood, his conclusion was that we should not have dumped 
the Petition or even demerited it as null and void therefore my argument was, or my understanding 
was that he supports the petitione rs that we should only limit ourselves to the ECDs and the 
Technical Training Colleges.  
Mr. Speaker the other point that I needed to make 6 years ago…  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Allow me Mr. Speaker because I have been mentioned Mr. Speaker it 
is true and Hon. Chair is introducing a discourse on top of a discourse. There is nothing short of 
what you said. I have not talked against the findings of the Committee; they are true and they hold 
water.  
However, what I just alluded was the issue of the recommendations of the Committee and that is 
what the Chair is avoiding. This is because I said whenever Petitions arrive here, because of Article 
1 of the Constitution of Kenya which is a Supreme Law, other subsidiary laws including 
International Laws they take the prece dence of the Constitution of the Republic of Kenya and also, 
what I was saying and I was requesting is that whenever the Committees are coming up with 
recommendations they should not deter the members of the public from questioning or coming to 
seek refuge  in this House.  
I did not in fact say that I do not support bursary; even all the County funds can come to Elburgon 
in terms of bursary. What I actually wanted is that the petitioner had seen a certain window of 
supporting our mandate first and giving it the proper support. For instance, we have only one 
ECDE teacher per each ECDE School; we do not actually give our students meals, we do not have 
enough ECDE classrooms and I can quote Her Excellency the Governor said that some of the 
washrooms for our scho ols are in dilapidated status. Some of our schools or polytechnics do not 
meet the standards.  
However, it is true that funds ought to be given and in my conclusion, that it is an affirmative 
action that the County Government of Nakuru is undertaking to ma king sure that they support the 
National Government. Remember Mr. Speaker, that affirmative action is caveated by certain 
periods and limits of time so that they can support the members of the public and they look like 
Government subsidies. Thank you Mr. S peaker and I hope that the Chair is well informed. Thank 
you. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Chairperson.  
Hon. Peter Maina : Mr. Speaker I am well informed, thank you.  
 
 
 
PAPER (s) 
THE REPORT OF HEALTH COMMITTEE SERVICES ON THE VISIT TO LANGA LANGA SUB -
COUNTY HOSPITAL  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): There is a Paper to be laid by the Hon. Chairperson of the Health 
Services Committee.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura : Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I arise to lay a Paper, which is the Report of 
Health Committee Services on t he visit to Langa Langa Sub -County Hospital. I beg to lay  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Njuguna.  
NOTICE(s)  OF MOTION  
HOUSE ADOPTS THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH SERVICES ON THE VISIT 
TO LANGA LANGA SUB -COUNTY  
There is a Notice o f Motion by the Chairperson Committee on Health Services.  
Hon. Njuguna Mwaura:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I arise to give a Notice of Motion that this House 
adopts the Report of the Committee on Health Services on the visit to Langa Langa Sub -County 
Hospital on  28th February 2023. I beg to give a Notice of Motion.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you, the Notice is properly given,  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable Members, this House is adjourned to today 2.30pm  
The House rose at  10.45am  
 
 