COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 26 th  April ,  2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 10:10 AM  
[Temporary Speaker (Hon. Loise Kagecha) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS .  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
NGATA SECONDARY SCHOOL AND BOROR SECONDARY SCHOOL.  
The Temporary S peaker ( Hon. Loise Kagecha ) :  T here is a C ommunication from the C hair .  
Today  we recogni s e  the presence of st udents from two schools in our G allery. Our visitors feel 
welcome and I would like to invite the area MCA  to welcome the  v isitors.  
Hon . Alex Arap Lang’at : Thank you Madam  Temporary Speaker for this opportunity that you 
have given me to address this House. May I this morning introduce to the House s tudent s of two 
s chool s that  happen to be in  Mosop Ward. With us today we have  s tudents who have done very 
well in their s chools ;  they are from Ngata Secondary School and those who have also done well 
from Boror Secondary School .  
Boror is a school that has existed i n Mosop for a very long time and we have been trying to uplift 
it because by virtue of the location and a few other a dministrati ve  issues, the school was 
diminishing. So as part of encouragement we have welcome d  them for l earning, b enchmarking 
and they are here in the Hous e today.  
To the Visitor s, welcome to the Assembly  and I think when you work hard, this is a House  of 
hono u r, House  of rules and a House  of dignity .  When  you work hard in your academics ,  togethe r 
with the rest of you one day  can  also be in this House .  
I want to thank the Teachers  and all those who have o rgani s ed for them to come here ;  thank you 
Hono u rable Speaker .  Let  them feel welcomed to this great A ssembly ;  County Assembly of 
Nakuru. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon . Loise Kagecha ):   Thank you the  L eader of Majority .  Next Order.  
 
 
STATEMENT  
DAIMA DAIRY PLANT  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon . Loise Kagecha ):   There is a Statement to be laid by the honorable 
Majority Leader.  
The Majority Leader (Hon. Alex Arap Langa’t):  Thank you Hono u rable Temporary Speaker for 
this opportunity .  I am here before this Hono u rable  House  to request for a Statement ,  That Pursuant  
to Standing Order 47(2) ( c ), I rise to request for a  Statement from the Chairperson  for the 
Committe e on Energy, Environment, Water  and Natural Resources concerning the  e fflu ents being 
discharged into Molo River by the Daima Dairy Plant.   
Hono u rable Temporary Speaker , Daima Dairy Plant is located o n the boundar y  of Salgaa and 
Sachangwan . It is being managed by a C ompany known as Deviani Food Industries Kenya 
Limited . In the first years ,  the C ompany did well by employing many of our young people both 
across the boundaries, some in Mosop , some from Mol o and some come from Sachangwan  and 
they have been doing a great job as far as employing people is concerned.  
However, in the past years there has been a public outcry regarding the Waste Management from 
the Industr y and in specific, a complain t  from the residents that live in that area. The outcry is 
something that has stayed there for a period of time. These peo ple deal with Dairy Products , th ey  
deal with Milk  and when you look at the size of the Factory ,  it is enourmous in term s  of investment .  
They  have done big investment s  but it seems like they forgot an issue which is very vital , which 
is  dispos al  and discharge of wastes or when the milk get spoiled, on how t hey are going to 
discharge that .  
In th at  case, when we visited the place, we reali s ed that the  Company discharge s  the waste into 
M olo R iver. Molo River is a river that emanates  from Molo  and p asses through Rongai  all the way 
to other places. It is a River that is depended on by many people for irrigation, and others use it 
for drinking  water and other use it for their animals and many more other uses .  Whenever the 
factory discharges the affluen ce to the Rive r, it makes  the water dirty and not good  for 
consumption . The smell around that area is terrible, you will not want to be around that area.  
What beats logic is that this is not something  new because the factory has existed for a long time . 
We have tried to seek audience from the concerned people including the Managemen t .  W e have 
tried to approach the Public Health Officers within the area and at some point we have combined 
both of them in cluding the Public Health Officers of  Molo and Public Health Officers who are 
stationed within  Rongai , and e very time they come up with  a promise that ends up being nothing 
but  hot air because they usually tell us they are going to handle the issue in a we ek, they will handle 
it in  a Month, something is being done and it has now taken more than two to three years.  
This has become hazardous in terms of Health . We do not know the impact of those who are using 
the water , in terms of their Health. We do not know the extent o r  the damage that the affluent being  
discharged into the M olo R iver is causing to our population and the people of Mosop.  
Hono u rable Temporary Speaker, in view of this I wish to request the Chairperson  for the 
Committee on Energy, Environ ment, Water and Natural Resources to respond on the following -  
1.  Whether the Department  of Energy, Environment, Water and Natural Resources and that 
of Public Health are aware of the operations of the aforementioned Industry.  
2.  W hat measures are being put in place by the C ounty G overnment to ensure that the rights 
of the residents to clean environment are protected  
3.  I want to know the steps that have been undertaken  to minimi s e and control the effluents 
being discharged to the natu ral resource by the Companies , Industries  and  Individuals in 
this County.  
Hono u rable Temporary Speaker , I  wish to request for the  Statement , Thank  you.  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon . Loise Kagecha ):  Thank you the L eader of Majority. This 
Statement  stands committed  to the Committee  on Energy, Environment, Water and Natural 
Resources through the Chairperson  and they should respond  back to the House  within two weeks. 
Next order.  
MOTION  
BOREHOLE DRILLING MACHINE  
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon . Loise Kagech a ):  There is a Motion  and I want to call the mover 
Hono u rable Francis Mungai Kuria from Malewa West.  
Hon . Francis Kuria: Thank you Hono u rable Temporary Speaker , I want to move a  Motion 
regarding the purchase of Borehole Drilling Machine in our County. That ,  whereas the County 
Government appropriates funds for various Projects  each Financial Year including drilling of  
Boreholes in various Wards ; Recogni s ing  that Nakuru is a water scarce Count y thus requires 
deliberate interventions to cushion the residents from w ater s hortages; Appreciating  that the 
County Government in the past has made efforts to address water shortages through drilling of 
b orehole s among other measures; Cogni s ant  that an analysis of the cost of drilling and casing of a 
single  Borehole through Tendering Process ranges between Kshs 2.5 Million –  Kshs 3.5 Million 
depending on the depth and the nature of the rock and soil formation; Noting tha t the County 
Government is capable of allocating Financial resources to purchase Borehole Drilling Equipment 
at a relatively affordable price compared to the amount appropriated each Financial Year for such 
projects;  
Now Therefore , this House  resolves tha t as a long term strategy to reduce the cost, the County 
Government allocate resources to purchase Borehole Machines.  
If we can have a Drilling Machine in our  County, it  will reduce the cost, it will speed up  the job. 
If you check the Tendering Process , we have to go the Bill  of  Quantities (BQs) way ,  then from the 
BQ s, first of all the work is a dvertised ,  then the Tendering Process starts .  The  Valuation starts  
Madam Temporary Speaker…  
ERICK  
Hon. Francis Kuria : … and it takes a lot of time. Noting that the County Government is capable 
of allocating financial resources to purchase borehole drilling equipment at a relatively affordable 
price compared to the amount appropriated each Financial Year for such projects.   
If you can look at the Ward Fund that is being given on each Ward and I use my Ward for example; 
I am from Malewa West Ward. The Ward Fund allocated to my Ward was Kshs. 29.7 million. 
Drilling and equipping a borehole to completion is costing between Ksh s. 9 million to Kshs. 10 
million and with the Ward Fund Allocation, you find you can only manage to do maybe 2 boreholes 
to completion through the tendering process but if the drilling can be done through the County, 
you find using the Kshs. 1.2 million or  Kshs. 1.3 million, which is a big margin.  
The Ward Allocation Fund, you reduce the cost of drilling thus making it easy. Using the Ward 
Fund, you will do allocation, equipping and in our term, you will find that you will do 2 or 3 
boreholes to completion.   
I have observed the previous regime, you find one person drill a borehole but due to other projects, 
the borehole is left unfinished. Now, therefore, this House resolves as a long term strategy to 
reduce the cost, the County Government allocates money to  purchase borehole drilling machines.  
I came to realise that in our life, we have 3 types of people and I have come also to observe in this 
House and also to the friends of this House and remember most of us prefer to do work through 
contractors. I categor ise the people in a margin of three people.  
One, we have the weak people who just come into your life and they just pick what they need and 
go. Two, we have the branch people. Those are the people you cannot rely on. They show you they 
are strong and how they need to boost you but once things are tough, they will just go away. We 
have the root people. I observed and I put these Honourable Members to be the root people. These 
are the people who do not want to do things just to be seen but they do things  and they bring impact 
on the ground. They are very supportive and I therefore beg the Honourable Members to support 
this Motion …  
Hon. Leah Serem: Point of Order Madam Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Loice Kagecha): Hon. Leah Serem  
Hon. Leah Serem: Thank you Madam Speaker. I want the Member who is in front to tell us 
whether it is machin or machine because I am not understanding.  
Hon. Francis Kuria: Thank you Madam Speaker. It is called machine.  
Hon. John Maritim: Point of order.  
The Temporary Speak er (Hon. Loice Kagecha): Yes, Hon. Maritim.  
Hon. John Maritim: Madam Temporary Speaker, is Mheshimiwa Leah Serem in order to say 
whether it is machine or machin? We are all Kenyans and we were brought up in this Country and 
we know where we come from. We u nderstand where Hon. Mungai comes from. As long as we 
understand whether it is machine or machin …  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Loice Kagecha): Mheshimiwa Wanjohi  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Thank you Madam Temporary Speaker. Any Member of this Assembly 
rising on a point of order must quote the Standing Order that he wants to provoke. Therefore, the 
Member from Kabazi is out of order. He should have quoted which Standing Order he is referring 
to.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Loice Kagecha): Okay Hon. Wanjohi  
Hon. F rancis Kuria: Thank you Madam Temporary Speaker. I stand to be guided. It is machine 
and I honour that.  
When we have these rig machines, we have able engineers in this County. I know they will do a 
great job where they will deliver with no interest of gain ing something but they are there to make 
sure that they have delivered what they have been assigned to do.  
These drilling machines, after laying my strategy, I have found that if we can have two machines 
in the entire County, a machine can drill one boreh ole in 4 days; that is, drilling, casing, testing the 
pump and also using the Geo Vision Camera to observe the job that has been done.  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Madam Temporary Speaker, I just need to ask the Hon. Member whether 
he can put us into light about th e cost of these drilling machines so that we can start from there as 
we move on and discuss.  
Hon. Francis Kuria: Madam Temporary Speaker, I am coming to that Hon. Muraya. Just take 
your pen, I will give you the breakdown.  
The cost of a rig machine ranges between Kshs. 40 to Kshs. 45 million and I was doing my 
arithmetic and found that using the machine from the County, we can save between Kshs. 1.5 to 
Kshs. 1.6 million using the drilling of the County machines. Therefore if these Honorable Members 
can supp ort, and I beg them to support this Motion.  
We have three categories of areas. We have the Urban Wards. These Wards are very lucky because 
we have the private companies that used to supply water. For example in Naivasha, we have 
NAIVAWASSCO. In Nakuru, we  have NAWASSCO. You find we have the rural Wards. Unless 
those Wards get a source of water from the natural springs, from the river and the dams, they do 
not have other sources of water and the private companies have not been able to reach those Wards 
in t he rural areas.  
Also to take note, the vastness of some of the Wards. A Ward like Eburu Mbaruk which covers 
about 625 km square, you find with allocation of Kshs. 34 million, the area MCA can only do a 
single borehole using the Ward Allocation Fund. Putti ng in mind, we have some locations; from 
one location to another those people need water. Pipes need to be laid and as I do my calculations, 
if we can be assisted using this machine, those locations from one area to another, the Ward Fund 
can be used to la y the pipes so that the water can be moved from one part or can be pumped from 
one area to the other.  
I therefore urge this House in good heart to support. Remember we have other Wards that maybe 
part of them are urban and others are rural. Those parts tha t are in rural areas, the water supplying 
companies have not yet reached those people. I therefore request the Honourable Members to 
support this Motion and I beg Hon. William Mutai to second this Motion. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Loice Kagech a): Hon. Mutai.  
Hon. William Mutai: Thank you Madam Temporary Speaker. Without much articulation and 
elaboration, I stand to second this Motion, bearing in mind that we are looking for possible ways 
of reducing the cost of projects so that we can make a lo t of savings. A lot of savings means that 
we are going to have more revenue and more revenue means more projects.  
This is logical enough that we are going to buy these machines then it will be very possible and 
within the shortest period of time, to make a s many boreholes as possible within our County. We 
do understand that the National Government as well as the County Government is making some 
deliberate efforts to ensure that some dams are made within our County but unfortunately, these 
dams have a lot of  challenges. For example, we have the famous and the popular Itaare Dam which 
is said that we are going to supply a lot of water to our County and particularly to Nakuru City, 
Molo and parts of Rongai.  
Unfortunately, as that one happens, the source of thi s water which is in Kuresoi North and partly 
in Kuresoi South will not benefit. As a remedy to the problems that are prevailing in those areas 
and some of the areas in the County, I do believe that we can get these machines so that they can 
make as many bo reholes as possible, it is going to give us some reprieve and it is going to relieve 
us from a lot of problems.  
I want to say that boreholes are immediate remedy for the escalating water shortages and it calls 
for more allocation of resources and this mea ns that as resources get allocated to this, we can get 
some partly way of salvaging the situation. For instance, the drilling machines and then the rest of 
the savings go to the piping, the better.  
A case example is in my Ward where I come from; Keringet Ward in Kuresoi South. We have 8 
boreholes. Surprisingly, one is operational and the rest are not operational. They have been drilled, 
solar system has been installed but piping has not been done yet, reason being there are no 
resources.  
To me, that one s eems to be a great loss of resources. This one is not going to benefit Mwananchi. 
I think if we can have some drilling machines and then the rest of the money is allocated to the 
supply …  
SHARON  
Hon. William Mutai … It will be better.  In cognisant to the United Nations, the Vision 2030, the 
Millennium Development Goals which anticipate in improving the living standards of our people, 
I do believe that if we can get the most efficient ways of supplying clean suffici ent available water 
to our people, then definitely we are going to meet these goals within the shortest period of time. 
I do here by stand to support my colleague that we buy these machines. It does not require rocket 
science, it is logical and it does not  require a lot of deliberations. If we can support this idea then 
within the shortest period of time we in Nakuru would have gotten sufficient supply of water. I 
rest my case. Thank you.  
 (Question proposed that this H ouse resolves that as a long term str ategy to reduce  cos ts , the 
County G overnment allocate s  resources to purchase borehole drilling machines.)  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Loice Kagecha): The Motion is now open for debate. The Hon. 
Gatuso.  
Hon. Bernard Gatuso : Thank you Madam Temporary Spea ker for giving me this opportunity to 
give my input on this Motion. It is a good observation that Hon. Member Malewa West has been 
able to make  but my question is that the process does not end with the purchase of machines that 
will be used for drilling b ut with personnel that are supposed to be employed by the County. We 
need to have a professional and a personnel who will be handling or doing the manual job as the 
drilling goes on. The history of Government has shown that it has does not have that commit ment 
in terms of servicing machines for example we have Courtesy uses that were bought by the County 
Government and the maintenance of these buses has proven not to be easy for the County 
Government. To some extent when you go ask for the buses for a socia l function within the 
community, you are to  
The other thing is we have machines that have been bought for roads like the ones for Boresha 
Barabara. It has not been easy to service those machines and the competence of the machines that 
were to handle the wo rk within the communities have underserved our communities. It is 
something that is supposed to be observed and evaluated so that we can realise whether to purchase 
these drilling machines for our people to have water because it is their right. We are supp osed to 
extensively evaluate and see whether we can purchase the machines. Thank you. I rest my case.  
 Hon .  Alex Mbugua : Thank you Madam Temporary Speaker. I rise to oppose the Motion that the 
County should go ahead and buy the machines. This County has so  many machines that are not 
functional at the moment. You find that even most of the graders, the people who are operating 
them are just on casual work. If we position ourselves at the gist of what Hon. Member, the mover 
of the Motion and my good friend Fr ancis Kuria is stating that we keep on buying these machines 
then I think we shall not be getting what we really need. Water at Nakuru level has been given to 
different Departments for instance when you go Naivasha you will find that water is under 
NAIVAWA SCO. In Nakuru City it is still under another Department. If these machines come to 
the ground then who will be in possession of these machines? Geographical Information System 
(GIS) is one of the major component in geographical positioning of water and ot her things. Who 
will be in the County to do the thorough investigations of what we need with this water? If we buy 
these machines and look at how other machines have been used like for instance Hon. Gatuso has 
cited an example of the Courtesy Buses within Nakuru County. We have other machines that are 
here;  what has become of them? Recently I informed Hon. Francis Kuria of a machine that has 
broken down in Naivasha and has been left there for the last three years. It is also being sold as a 
scrap metal by t he residents. I have also heard from Hon. Degaulle that he has a County machine 
within his own compound at the moment. What the County Government should start with is come 
up with their own garage and employ people that can repair these machines and not se rvicing these 
machines from elsewhere. If we buy the borehole drilling machine at the moment then this will be 
another hot hair that cannot be sustained within this hard economy  time. It is a noble idea that Hon. 
Francis Kuria has but it belongs to the fut ure not today because today we cannot just afford it. 
Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Loice Kagecha): Hon. Alex are you in support or against the 
Motion?  
Hon. Alex Mbugua : I am against buying any other machine within this County.  
The Temporary Spea ker  (Hon. Loice Kagecha): Hon. Mercy Kilel.  
Hon. Mercy Kilel : Thank  you very much Madam Temporary Speaker for this opportunity and I 
need to tell the gentlemen in this House that what a man can do a woman can do better so 
congratulations Madam Temporary Speaker the seat looks good on you. I also wish to welcome 
th e students in the Gallery.  
Concerning the Motion of the day, indeed it is a noble idea but the time has not yet come for such 
ideas to be brought to the County. As we know that the Counties are governed by the Public 
Finance Regulations and also have some thing called the PPDA Public Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Act which provides procedures for public assets and disposals. That means we cannot 
just go ahead and purchase equipment for Counties yet we have contractors who are supposed to 
do that. Are we su pposed to kill investors within our Counties as we know we have contractors 
that are meant to do specific duties like water drilling and such things?  
Additionally we know that water drilling does not start and end with drilling as my colleagues 
have said.  We have procedures such Hydro Geological Surveys which get to know the water 
potential of an area which is done by somebody who has studied such. Are you saying that we are 
going to employ such people within the County and you know that the County is fina ncially 
strapped? We also have licenses and permits and we have things such as site visits for the area. 
That is a lot of work and it cannot be done within the mandates of the County. I wish to oppose 
this and to ask Mr. ‘machines’ sorry Hon. Kuria to reth ink again and bring the Motion in a more 
palatable way to the Assembly. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Loice Kagecha): Hon. Members, it will be very prudent if we 
refer the Members of the House through their proper names. Thank you. Hon. Muraya.  
Ho n .Joseph Muraya : Thank you Madam Temporary Speaker, first of all I want to welcome our 
great students from the two schools and the teachers; you are very much welcomed here. I also 
rise to oppose this Motion in totality because if we have a County that is  unable to service a lab 
machine in my area how then do you convince me that this County will service a drilling machine? 
Last time here when we were given the Report by the Committee on Health, we heard that there is 
a hospital that the laundry machine is  not functional so if we cannot service a laundry machine 
how then can we service and maintain a drilling machine? The cost that Hon. Kuria is telling us is 
a total lie because that drilling machine can only cost Kshs 110 million plus. We do not even have 
the personnel as my colleague has said; how then are we going to purchase or have a Motion passed 
in this floor of the House? I am opposing until such a time when we shall have the Boresha machine 
functional. We are in five or six clusters and we are not e ven getting the touch of this Imarisha 
Barabara because every machine is at the garage. We have like three Lorries in our area that are 
lying there. It was a noble idea but untimely so I rise to oppose this Motion and I beg to oppose 
again.  
The Temporary S peaker  (Hon. Loice Kagecha):Hon. Michael Gathanwa.  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa : Thank you Madam Temporary Speaker and congratulations. My good 
friend Hon. Mutai before he left he told us that this does not require rocket science so we are going 
to look at it fro m the Bible not from rocket science. In the book of Matthew 13: 12, it tells us that 
those who have little even that little can be taken from them and those who have more can be 
added. But where I want us to concentrate on is in the book of Luke 16: 10 and  it tells us that 
whoever can be trusted with something small can also be trusted with something big. I want to say 
that the problem we have with machines within the County is not a hardware machine but it is the 
software machine. The people who are suppos ed to be running them. I have a roller that is a 
compactor that has been parked at Lady Ann secondary school for I think three years. It only 
requires service. I have a dozer that has been parked there for one month now; it requires one 
hundred litres of f uel. I have an excavator that has been packed in Oljorai for twenty nine days; it 
only requires service. Luke 16: 10 says, if you cannot be trusted with little then you cannot be 
trusted with more and even the little that you have will be taken away from y ou. I think that we 
really need a drilling machine as a County but before that we need to do an overhaul of the software 
that is running this County. It is the one that is letting us down. We need to do an overhaul and 
make sure that people are doing what they are supposed to be doing.  
You cannot tell me that you can be a CEO or a Director in a Department and you cannot account 
where your machines are and cannot procure for a service early enough. I come from an area where 
we have water problems, very chal lenging water problems. We lack water…    
SIELE  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa :  And when it rains the water kills us. Right now, I am receiving a lot 
of calls because we have a problem with flash floods but in a few months, we will be receiving a 
lot of calls beca use we have a problem with drinking water and water for our cattle and other 
livestock. I am torn between agreeing with the fact that we really need a drilling machine; but also 
in my experience and not using rocket science, we cannot agree to add salt on a wound. The County 
has been unable to maintain machines and unable to run them and assign proper operators. 
Therefore, I would have supported the Motion, had we first done a bit of checkup in the software 
that is running this program. So, I have to oppose  this Motion.  
The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Loise Kagecha): So, let us have Hon. Ngeru and then we have 
Hon. Chemutai and then Hon. Maritim in that order.  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere:  Thank you so much Madam Temporary Speaker. I stand to try to save 
the face of my friend by supporting the Motion with some few words. I cannot stand here and 
purport that you know, going by the previous Members of County Assembly that have talked, they 
ha ve shown total incompetence in our Departments and that is not in order. I think somebody is 
sleeping on his or her job because we have Departments and even Committees that are supposed 
to report such cases and we cannot just kill the Motion because somebo dy somewhere has slept on 
their job. I think the spirit of the Motion is clear and timely given that we have a program by the 
name Boresha Barabara  or Imarisha B arabara .  That program by itself does not work but we 
cannot go by the parameters that it does n ot work. It is up to us as Legislators of this House to 
provide and perfect ways but I would like to support the Motion with amendments in that the 
mover of the Motion said that it will be the 3 core business of the County to drill water. Let us not 
be the  core business of the County but instead let us  have it to promote and mitigate on water 
issues but it is not the core business of the County to drill water because I think we need to have 
thorough cost analysis of the program. If we can come up with the cost analysis he has tried given 
that the cost of the machine is Kshs 40 million but if he can go further to do cost analysis on even 
the machine when it breaks down what can cost I think it will be in order. So, I support with 
amendments just to save the face of my friend. Thank you  
( Laughter )  
Hon. John Maritim : Thank you Madam Temporary Speaker I also stand to oppose the Motion. I 
believe he needs to list in a manner that in our lives, you cannot marry another wife if you fail to 
maintain your first wife.  We have been buying machines and they are stalled in many places. Like 
where I come from, there is a school called Koige Secondary school, there has been machine lying 
there since 2017. I do not know whether it has been vandalised so I think the best thin g we can do 
is that let us try to deal with people who deal with water.  
I think there is a Company called Davis and Shirliff ; they are the best in the market and they are 
doing a wonderful job. The cost implication and cost of overhead maintenance all those things are 
way above. The best thing we can do is that we task the contractors to do a good job because these 
contractors,  majority of them may be have taken loans to purchase these machines. Purchase of 
machines will be done once the County shows commitment that they can do it well, there is proper 
maintenance and that is okay.  
Secondly many Companies hire machines external ly; why are they doing so? They know they are 
cheaper. You know purchasing a machine is not expensive, the problem is maintenance and if the 
County decides to buy this machine, they will be doing a shoddy job because they know that it is 
ours and there is nothing you can do with them like you cannot go and raise complain that they 
have done a shoddy job. So, I think the best thing that we can do is to rehabilitate the existing 
machines. Just like what Hon. Gathanwa said, let the machines lying idle be broug ht back and be 
revived to function well. Hon. Member from Malewa West that is the time we can come with this 
request so that we can revisit this issue. You know like now there is a dead stock of these machines 
and I think they are not going to give us any benefit. So, I stand to oppose the Motion. Thank you.  
Hon. Hellen Megek : Thank you, Madam Temporary Speaker for this opportunity. I arise to 
support the Motion sponsored by Hon. Member from Malewa West to buy the drilling machines. 
I think it is very impor tant especially where I come from, there is scarcity of water and it is a matter 
of urgency because many people are facing a lot of challenges without water. With financial 
assistance in this County Government of Nakuru, it is very important that we buy ma chines 
because new machines will improve also livelihood in addressing water shortages. Therefore, I 
support the Motion. Thank you.  
Hon. George Tallam:  Madam Temporary Speaker.  
The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Loise Kagecha): Order Hon Tallam!  
Hon. George  Tallam :  Kindly  
The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Loise Kagecha) :  Hon. Eliud  
Hon Eliud Chege:  Thank you Madam Temporary Speaker. Thank you because your eyes have 
caught me; I have been standing for long. Thank you for giving me this opportunity. I would li ke 
first to congratulate Hon. Kuria for coming up with such a noble idea and I think the Motion is 
good but it is not timely because now when you look at the cost of the machine, I do not think we 
are in a position to adopt such. When you talk about manpow er, you talk about buying these 
machines, do we really have the required personnel?  
Also, when you talk about two machines, I understand very well that we have 55 Wards I do not 
know how many boreholes have been drilled within a year because when we talk about two 
machines and one machine can do a borehole within four or five days, I think it is not achievable. 
Also, the Hon. Member from Malewa, I think he just concentrated on the drilling which is not a 
big issue but the problem is maintaining the machine s. The machines will be accompanied with 
pipes, solarisation and other machines. The problem is how to maintain them. We have so many 
boreholes which are not running; the problem is not about the rings but maintenance. I also arise 
to oppose the Motion. Th ank you.  
The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Loise Kagecha): Hon. Minority  
The Minority Leader  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Thank you Madam Temporary Speaker. I wish to 
propose an adjournment of the debate because the debate that was brought to the floor of the House 
by  the Hon. Member for Malewa is a very nice discussion but however, listening to the Members 
of the House, there are a few facts and findings that the Hon. Member did not put in consideration 
and therefore instead of us killing that good debate that was bro ught to the floor of the House, I 
propose that you invoke Standing Order 95 on the adjournment of a debate if the Hon. Member 
for Malewa is well with that. Therefore, I propose that we adjourn the debate.  
( Applause )  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang’at):  Thank you Madam Temporary Speaker. In 
concurrence with what the Minority Leader has actually articulated; the issue of purchase of 
machineries and equipment is a very noble idea. Any activity that is carried out including the 
drilling of boreholes which w e all know is a key thing in our County and it is very vital. Surely 
going by the mood of the House and the way the debate is taking us, I would want to congratulate 
Hon. Francis for having brought this out. Indeed the idea is very good and indeed we need 
machines and we cannot have water without the drilling machines.  
The heart and the spirit were very much good and as I congratulate him, this debate has also opened 
eyes to these Hon. Members that indeed there is a problem on how we maintain our equipment . 
Imagine this great machine including the ones that have been mentioned are lying in homes, in 
Trading Centrers and are machines which cost millions of money and people who are operating 
these machines are casuals, people who have no assurance as far as e mployment at the County is 
concerned. They do not know whether they are there tomorrow or the day after and we entrust 
them with such great machines with a lot of value in terms of money. Even as they are operating 
these machines, we do not expect much fro m them, they do not care about them because we also 
as a County we have not cared about them and these are among other loopholes that this debate by 
Hon. Francis, as you are aware Madam Temporary Speaker is also the Chair of a Committee that 
deals with roa ds and it involves a lot of machines. When it comes to budgeting, we as an Assembly 
and a House should also think of apportioning more funding so that these machines can be 
maintained and also put in place a proper maintenance unit for that Department.  
Th erefore, as far as I also feel as an Hon. Member who comes from an area where water is a real 
problem, where we are thinking of sinking boreholes and thinking of reducing the costs because 
our Ward Funds are also very limited when it comes to the tendering  system as opposed to when 
we have our own machine because we have seen the results even when we have the I marisha 
B arabara  Programs. When we go to the Public Works and request for machines and maybe we 
fuel in our own ways or even getting partners to fuel, it becomes cheaper than hiring a whole 
company or a person who is on business to come and do roads, it becomes cheaper.  
A ctually, there is no thought about it if we had our own machines because we still use the money, 
it will be cheaper and we will be able to perform more so Madam Temporary Speaker, this debate 
was brought in a bit prematurely and Hon. Member we need to do a  bit of canvasing before the 
House so that Members can see the sense of this. Even as we put in place systems to ensure that 
we have a proper working Department and also put in place systems to learn that you cannot entrust 
a casual worker with machines wo rth millions of money, it will break down because the operators 
do not care about it.  
So, I want to concur with the Leader of Minority Party that we adjourn this debate instead of killing 
this Honourable baby of purchasing of drilling machines to another date so that it can grow a little 
bit so that we can understand this child and let it grow to its fullness. Thank you Madam Temporary 
Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Loise Kagecha): That pursuant to the Standing Order 95 (4), I 
adjourn this debate to  a later date.   
( Applause )  
 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned until 2.30 pm in the afternoon.  
The House rose at  11.20am  
 
 
 
 