COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Tuesday 25 th  July 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03:15 PM  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
PAPER(S)  
THE AUDITOR GENERAL REPORT  ON THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF NAKURU 
MORTGAGE (STAFF) SCHEME FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 TH  JUNE, 2020 .  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  There is a  Paper to be laid by the Leader  of Majority Party 
Honourable  Alex Lang’at .  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang ’ at):  Thank you  Mr. Speaker , I rise on Order  number  5  to 
lay a Paper  on the Auditor General Report  on the County Government of Nakuru Mortgage ( Staff) 
Scheme for the year ended 30 th  June , 202 2 . I wish to lay the Paper  before this Honourable  House. 
Thank you.  
PAPER(S)  
THE AUDITOR GENERAL REPORT  ON THE NAKURU COUNTY RECEIVER OF REVENUE FOR 
THE YEAR ENDED 30 TH  JUNE 2022.  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  T hank you, t he Leader  of Majority  will also have the opportunity 
to lay The Auditor ’s  General Report  on the County  of Nakuru Receiver of Revenu e for the year 
ended 30 th  June, 2022.  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang’at ):  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I wish to lay before this 
Honourable  House the Report  of the Auditor General Report  on the Nakuru County Receiver of 
Revenu e for the year ended 30 th  June ,  2022. I wish to lay the Report  before th is Honourable House .  
Thank  you  Mr .  Speaker.  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  Thank you next Order?  What is it the Leader  of Minority Party?  
The Minority Leader  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi) :  Mr. Speaker , before we move to the next  Order I 
wish to inquire on something;  there are two  Paper s  that have been laid by the Leader  of Majority 
Party  and Mr. Speaker you did not commit them to any  Committee ;  unless they are committed to 
the  Whole House  Mr. Speaker .  
And as far as you make your  declaration ,  I  also have a big concern ,  that in th is  Assembly  since we 
came in there are more than 20 Papers or so that have been laid  before this Committee  and I have 
never heard them give a Report  in this Assembl y . Therefore Mr. Speaker we need to know what 
is happening .  I want to assume you are committ ing  them  to the Committee  on Public Accounts 
and Investment Committee .  T here is no s ingle Report  that has come to the floor of the House  and 
that is a big concern.  Thank you  Mr. Speaker .  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  Thank you the Leader  of Minority Party, I proceed to commit 
the two  Papers to the Committee  on Public Accounts and Investmen t. It is true and we take  your 
sentiments seriously .   Any  Leader ship of that Committe e in the House? Or any Membe r? The 
Honourable  Njaguara take note of that and convey to the Committee Leader ship ;  it is a challenge 
which is a positive challenge. Next order.  
MOTION  
REPORT  OF THE COMMITTEE ON APPOINTMENTS S  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ):  There is a  Motion by the Honourable  Leader  of Majority Party ,  
Honourable  Alex .  
The M ajority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang’at ):  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I rise to move a Motion  that 
this House  adopts the Report  of the Committee  on Appointments . Mr. Speaker, e arly in the 
morning we laid a  Report  before this Honourable  House ;  the Report  on the County Assembly of 
Nakuru Third Edition in the Second Session actually by the Committee on Appointments .  
The Report  specifically was on the vetting of the County Secretary Selection Committee . Mr. 
Speaker , the mandate of the Committee  that was selected wa s very clear .  T h at th e S elected 
Committee on  Appointments  which was established under Standing Order 187 of the County 
Assembly of Nakuru Standing Orders;  that it is the Mandate  to be able to consider for the approval 
by the Assembly Appointments  under Article 179(2) Members of the County Executive 
Committee .   
Mr. Speaker, w hen you  look at the position of the County Secretary which is also established under 
the  County  Government Act, 2012 Sub Section 44 , it talks about the a ppointment  of a County 
Secretary . In Sub Section 1 , talks of there is an establishment in each County  the Office of the 
County Secretary who shall be  the Secretary to the County Executive Committee .  So the position 
Mr. Speaker  is equally that of a County Executive Committee Member by the name of the County 
Secretary . That gives us the authority and power under our Standing Orders .  
T he same Mr. Speaker ,  the County Government Act went ahead to actually describe and give us 
the type of a person that is needed including the qualifications, including of what is supposed to 
be done in Sub Section 2(A),  it is upon the Governor, shall actually for the purposes of competitive 
recruitment,  and if we can remember in the previous deeds and practices ,  the Governor would 
ideally have brought the name s  to this Assembly  for discussion and adoption but for the sake of 
competitiveness, the County Assembly Act mandated the  Governor for the purpose o f competitive 
recruitment of the County Secretary under Sub Section 2, to constitute a Selection Panel and that 
Selection Panel has its own description of who should be in the Selection Panel .  
These include a  Chairperson who is not a Public Officer, one  p erson from the Private Sector ,  an  
Advocate of the High Court ,  an  Accountant who is a  Member of the Institute  of Certified Public 
Accounts of Kenya and the fifth and last one being one person  from the  Association representing 
the Workers.  
We looked at the mandate of the  Committee and in that the Governor expressly did her part by 
forwarding the five names. And t he M essage from the Governo r was exp licit , that pursuant to the 
provisions of Sub Section 44 of the County Government Act, 2012 which was also a mended in 
2020 , Section 6(1) of the Public Appointments  of  the County Assembly , the Governo r forwarded 
the names of the Nominees  for the County Secretary Selection Panel to the Assembly .  Mr. Speaker, 
s he  did  that  on 29 th  June, 2023 .  
 In  accordance with Standing Order 48(2), the County Assembly of Nakuru Standing Orders ,  the 
Speaker  committed the Nominees  to the Committee  on Appointments  for the approval. Mr. 
Speaker , it is the prerogative of the  Speaker to co mmit any public appointments t hat is brought 
before this Honourable  House under Standing Order  48 ;  that you commit to a relevant Committee, 
in this case Mr. Speaker  so that we can iron out the doubt .  They may not have been an express 
direction on this, but as we know the law and the S tanding Orders  of this great House  h as never 
dwelt in a lacuna.  
I f you look at the Standing Order  1 of our Standing Orders , it is  also expressly dictated there that 
in all cases, not hereinafter provided for and subject to the Constitution and any other written law, 
the Speaker  shall decide having regarded to the O rders of the Assembly , the usage, that is in all 
cases not herein provided for and subject to the Co nstitution in any other cases, that we may not 
get a precise direction, or  it is not expressly really put;  the Standing Orders  give the Office  of the 
Speaker  the authority and the ability to be able to decide and make a decision or otherwise. In this 
case the names were committed to the Committee  on A ppointment s .  
Mr. Speaker , I would wish to look at the nomination process and the appointment process. This 
one is found on Section  58 of the County  Government  Act  2012. In the proceedings Mr. Speaker , 
during t he approval of the hearing, the Committee  held sittings to examine and to review the 
nominees ’  certificates and testimonials and actually  went ahead to vet the nominees.  
 Allow me in this juncture Mr. Speaker , to act ually take this opportunity to thank the  Members  of 
this very great Committee  for their inputs and valuable contribution during the vetting process. 
The Committee  wish also to thank the Office  of the Speaker , and the Clerk  to the Assembly , for 
the logistical support during the vetting exercise.  
Further, the Committee  is also thankful to the media for its coverage of the proceeding s , thus 
enhancing the transparency and the accountability of the vetting process.  
So on behalf of the Select Committee , when appointment and pursuant to Section  58 ( a )  of the 
County  Government  Act  of 2012, Section  9 of the P ublic A ppointment County  A pprovals Act  
2017 and also Standing Order  48 (4) of the County  Assembly  of Nakuru Standing Orders . It is my 
pleasant duty Mr. Speaker , to be able to table the Report  of the Committee  on the vetting of the 
N ominees to the County  Secretary P anel for the debate and adoption by the House .  
By that, of course we have what we looked at ,  looking at the legal framework for appointment to 
the po sition of the County  S ecretary which we have been able to see whether it met the threshold .  
And  as per our Standing Orders  and any other L egislation , i t actually met the L egislation.  
One the P ublic A ppointment County  Assembly  A pproval Act  N o .  5 of 2017 ,  S ection  8 of the 
P ublic Act  A ppointment s  provides issues which the County  Assembly  is supposed to consider in 
relation to the nomination. These include the procedures used, the c onstitutional s tatutory 
requirements, and the rest.  
The S chedule of the Public A ppointment s  County  Assembly  Act  No.  5 of 2017 provides for the 
criteria also to guide the Committee . Briefly, these are things to do with education, their 
employment background, deferred income, potential conflicts, pro bono, or charity works and the 
rest Mr. Speaker .  
W e also consider ed  the C hapter S ix matters of Leade rship and Integrity Act of 2012, A r ticle 232 
of the Constitution and V alues of the  P rinciple. Then we came to the notification of the N ominees. 
We had the request for M emorandum also which we actually  looked at.  
 In  this case  we report  that they are in accordance to provision of Section  7 ( 10) of the P ublic 
A ppointment s  that is County  A ssemblies Act  2017, the Clerk  to the County  Assembly  placed an 
advert in the print media on 7th  of July 2023, inviting the public to submit M emoranda. By this 
w e received two M emorandums, one Petition  from Nak uru P rofessionals Kenya P lan, P lantation 
and A gricultural W orkers U nion, M ache H ardware S tores, National Bank of Kenya, H appy 
C ommunity Christian Church, Philipa M ulatti and Cleopas  I siakho ,  Residents Association in 
support of CPK. Clifton Aiyeta O keno.  
In addition  Mr. Speaker , the Committee  received a letter from Nakuru P ublic O pinion C onsultative 
I nitiative and an affidavit from Linda Tesot. However, the Committee  found the Petition s to be  
inadmissible since the Petition  did not adhere to the requirements of the provision for by the 
relevant legislations.  
Mr. Speaker  on the approval of hearings, we were able to look at each Member  individually as 
they presented themselves. Mr. Speaker , we looked at Reverend Father William Muchai Kombo 
whom we present before this Honourable  House  as the C hairperson for the County  Secretary 
S election P anel Committee .  
We looked at his professional experience, knowledge and decision making, and that the N omine e ’ s 
understanding of the development of governance. We looked at the reason why the N ominee is 
best suited together with the rest to be in the P anel of N ominating the Nakuru County  S ecretary.  
The roles of the County  Secretary as expounded in the County  Go vernment  Act,  w e tried to see 
what the ir  understanding  wa s when it comes to the rules ;  do they understand the rules under their 
duty. We looked at the attributes to be considered while nominating the County  S ecretary o f  which 
the N ominee stated that the first requirement will be to ascertain that the candidate possesses the 
relevant academic cr edentials, met the requirements of Chapter Six of the Constitution, a candidate 
to demonstrate good managerial skills, and most importantly, the fear of God.  
Mr. Speaker  i n conclusion ,  the N ominees acknowledged that the amendment to the County  
Government  Act  2012, the mandate to recruit the County  S ecretary was donated to the County  
S ecretary's S election P a nel Committee .  
We looked at the second candidate which was Margaret Chemutai Kibosia .  This one we considered 
her to be a Members  of the P anel. Margaret  Kibo sia holds a D iploma in E ducation. Professionally, 
she has an experience and has been working with the L aw C ourts of Nakuru. She has also 
previously worked with Rift Valley Institute of Science and Technology ( RVIST ) . And the 
N ominee was vetted on the following thematic areas .   
J ust like the previous one ,  we looked at the understanding ,  the reasoning ,  the roles, the 
understanding of the roles of the County  S ecretary, the challenges affecting the County  S ecretary 
and the roles of the County  Public Service Board in the appointment of the S ecretary.  
We looked at the third N ominee Mr. Speaker , Honourable  Samson Matoke Nyagaka also for the  
position of a M ember of County Secretary. Mr. Speaker, we were able to  look at  professional and 
academic qualifications. The Nominee has a Bachelor’s of Law from the University of Nairobi 
and a Diploma of Law from the Kenya School of Law and Certificate from the National Youth 
Service.  
Mr. Speaker, we looked at his net worth; we determined that one; the Nominees understanding of 
development just like the others, the role of the County Secretary as expounded in the County 
Government Act of 2012.  
In conclusion, the Nominee was well acquainted and well versed when it came t o the role and all 
the rest that we were looking for.  
Mr. Speaker, the third one was Cliffton Ayieta Okieno. This was also for the County Secretary 
Selection Panel Nominee. Academically, the Nominee holds a Certificate in Certified Public 
Accounts, just t o meet the requirements as per the County Government Act. Professionally, the 
Nominee is currently the Chief Financial Officer and the Nominee was vetted on the following 
thematics, just as the others.  
1.  The Nominee’s understanding of the Devolved Governance . He began by stating that 
Devolution was a product of the 2010 Constitution which established the National 
Government and the 47 County Governments. He also acknowledged that Devolution had 
tremendously improved service delivery to the citizens.  
2.   On the roles of the County Secretary, we also were able to question him on attributes to 
be considered, the challenges that affects the Public Service and the roles of the County 
Public Service Board in the appointment of the County Secretary.  
3.  In conclusion, his communication and the way he answered was very satisfactory to the 
Committee.  
The fourth one was Redempta Adongo Wayuwere. Mr. Speaker, Wayuwere holds a Primary 
Teacher’s Education Certificate from St. Paul’s Teachers Training College. Professionally, the 
Nominee is currently the Head Teacher at Ng’esumin Primary School.  
Previously, the Nominee held the following positions; s he has been a Head Teacher at Kanga, 
Kiptuno, St. Patrick’s Primary and she has also been a Deputy Head teacher, TSC and Senior 
Teach er at TSC.  
Mr. Speaker, the Nominee demonstrated knowledge with regards with Devolution by articulating 
that Devolution transferred its powers from the National Government to the County Government. 
The reason why the Committee felt that this Nominee is bes t suited to be in the Panel is that the 
Nominee stated that she possesses a wealth of experience, having held the position of the Head 
Teacher for many years, also transiting from various schools, depending with the Curriculum 
Vitae.  
She further stated th at she was a person of impeccable integrity, a team player and a professional 
in undertaking.  
We looked at the other part of understanding Mr. Speaker, and in conclusion, her response was 
satisfactory to the Committee.  
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, having co nducted an approval hearing of the Nominee, pursuant to 
Section 58 of the County Government Act of 2012, the Public Appointments, that is the County 
Assemblies Approval Act of 2017, the Committee recommends as follows;  
a)  That having considered the suitabilit y, capacity and integrity of the Nominee s ,  pursuant to 
S ection 58 of the County Government Act 2012, the Public Appointments , that is the 
County Assemblies Approval Act 2017,  the Committee recommends the County 
Assembly of Nakuru to approve the nomination  of the following ;  
1.  Rev. William Muchai Kombo to position of the Chair of the County Secretary Selection 
Panel.  
2.  Jemutai Margaret Kibosia to the position of a Member of County Secretary Selection 
Panel.  
3.  Samson Matoke Nyagaka to the position of Member of Coun ty Secretary Selection 
Panel.  
4.  CPA (K) Clifton Ayieta Okeno to the position of Member County Secretary Selection 
Panel.  
5.  Redempta Adongo Wayuwere to the position of the Member of the County Secretary 
Selection Panel.  
In that respect Mr. Speaker, we wish to move that this House adopts the Report of the Committee 
on appointment on the vetting of the County Secretary Selection Panel Nominee. I want to request 
Hon. Wanjohi. Leader of Minority to second this Motion so that we can be debate it. Thank you 
Mr. Speak er.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Leader of Minority Party to second.  
Hon. Philip Wanjohi: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the Motion that this House adopts 
the Report of the Committee on Appointments on the vetting of the County Secretary Selection 
Panel for Nakuru County.  
Mr. Speaker, I wish to bring to the attention of the Members, probably they think that this 
Committee has a long life journey for this experience. After we approve this Committee, which I 
know the Members  will approve, the work of that Committee will be to advertise the position for 
the County Secretary. After they have done the advertisement for that position Mr. Speaker, they 
will shortlist those who will have applied and maybe one of us might be interes ted; that is the 
opportunity that will come. They will do the vetting or the interviewing of the candidate or 
candidates who will have applied then after that is done, they will present two names to the 
Governor, then the Governor will forward one name to this Assembly.  
Mr. Speaker, this means that we are not done with the exercise. There was a feeling of the 
Members’ that probably, we are vetting the County Secretary. The process has not yet reached 
there. Once the name reaches in this Assembly, it is us as an Assembly to say who becomes the 
County Secretary and that is after the name that will be presented by Her Excellency the Governor. 
Therefore, the timeframe for that Committee is only 21 days, so it is a short term Committee that 
will be doing that.  
Mr. Speaker, what the Leader of Majority has just presented, we carefully, thoroughly and 
professionally looked at various items that are concerned with that exercise. We looked at the 
Standing Orders and Mr. Speaker there was a feeling amongst some of the  Members that probably, 
this provision was not in the Standing Orders.  
Mr. Speaker, when we are doing an exercise in a forum like this one in the Assembly, we look at 
the County Rules. The County Assembly Standing Orders and in the Standing Orders, there is a 
provision of the Appointment Committee.  
However, I want to bring to the attention of the Members that the Senate introduced this issue of 
the Selection Committee. In the previous Assembly, it was not there and when we look at the law, 
we look at which  law is more superior to the other one. So, the County Government Act provides 
for the Governor to provide a Selection Committee which the names have to be brought to the 
Assembly and that was done by the Speaker.  
So if anybody wanted to object, that woul d have been objected at the time when the Speaker 
committed the names to the Appointment Committee. Thereafter, there is no way you can come to 
the Assembly and say that the Appointment Committee was not supposed to do that exercise. The 
Speaker deemed it fit and that is what is provided in the Standing Orders. Mr. Speaker we looked 
at all the things that the Majority Leader has said. We looked at the mandate of the Committee and 
we realised that it was legally binding; we looked at the nomination and appoi ntment, we looked 
at the memorandum and all those ones in the public hearings, and we realised that all of them were 
done according to the law.  
Mr. Speaker for all the five candidates we looked at their education background, employment, 
their Wards and al l that. In our conclusion Mr. Speaker, those who sat in that Committee, and we 
had time for three consecutive days to go through the Report, we looked at all the above documents 
and we say that they are all suitable, they have the capacity and the integrit y to be the Members of 
the County Secretary Selection Panel. Therefore Mr. Speaker I second and ask the Members to 
pass the five names. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
MOTION(S)  
ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE VETTING OF SELECTION PANEL NOMINEES  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joe l Karuri): Thank you. The Motion has now been dully seconded and so 
this is the Motion; THAT t h is  House adopts the Report of the Committee on Appointment s  on the 
vetting of County Secretary Selection Panel Nominees.  
The Motion is open for debate. The Hon. Member for Lake View Naivasha.  
Hon . Alex Mbugua : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. First I would like to appreciate the level 
headedness of the Select Committee that you had. When I go through the Report of which the 
Leader of the Majority has taken us through, I  find details that many would look for. I find that 
these are true sons that have served this Nation, that the Select Panel that has been brought forward 
to this Assembly have what it takes to give Nakuru what it requires .  
Nakuru has had an acting County  Secretary whereas we know the main roles and the virtues that 
this Office carry Mr. Speaker, we cannot have an acting County Secretary any more. Mr. Speaker, 
you find that we have one of the biggest budget within the Country, we have one of the largest 
po pulation within this Country. Major decisions are made within this County and the only thing 
we can say is that the Select Committee within this Assembly has done its best and it has given 
Nakuru what it requires for us to the next bold step for us to real ise the dreams of many other 
people within Nakuru County. Mr. Speaker, I support this Motion; thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member from Subukia.  
Hon. Isabella Makori:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I also rise to support the Mo tion. I was a 
Member of the Vetting Committee and other than looking at the academics, Nakuru County is a 
cosmopolitan County and in fact the five names show the face of Kenya so if these people are 
passed by this House they will do justice to our County. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for London.  
Hon. Benard Gatuso : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this opportunity so that I can give 
my input. I rise to support this Motion, one looking at how the Select Panel i s, we can see people 
from different fields as per how the Constitution demands from us.  
The other thing is about the people who have been selected so that they can be able to conduct this 
interview or make a representation of this Country in terms of comm unities and where they come 
from. The other thing is the Appointment Committee that has been able to vet the Committee that 
will be in charge of vetting the County Secretary. I believe they are the best brains in this Assembly 
headed by you as the Chair of  the Appointment Committee. Even the representation of the Select 
Committee meets the threshold because they are people from different fields and different 
communities. And that they have been able to go through this list of Select Committee, I believe 
the y will be able to give a just and fair vetting when that particular time comes. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Minority Whip, Member for Karagita; rather 
Hells Gate Ward in Naivasha.  
The Minority Whip  (Hon. Virginia Wamaitha): Thank you Mr. Speaker, you usually talk about 
Karagita; Karagita is a village and not a Ward. I rise to support the Motion. Looking at the 
composition of the members, first of all there is the gender threshold because we have two  ladies 
and three gentlemen and all the Nominees as indicated in the Report have gone through proper 
vetting and they have qualified because they have passed Chapter Six of the Constitution.  
So Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the Report considering the Cha irman of the Committee is a man 
of cloth, a man of God, a Father. And looking at his credentials he seems to be a person who knows 
what he will be doing during the interviews for the position of the County Secretary.  
Also Mr. Speaker, considering the posi tion of the County Secretary, he is like the Secretary to the 
Cabinet of the Executive, and his role should not be on an acting capacity. So we look forward to 
getting the people who will be vetted so that they can be brought to the floor of the House and then 
we shall be able now to have a permanent or as the law dictates, to have a County Secretary not 
on acting basis. I support Mr. Speaker, thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Shabaab and then the Hon. 
Member for Rhon da, in that order.  
Hon. David Wathiai : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I rise to support this Report and I believe you being 
the Chair of the Select Committee, you did your work with due diligence and came up with the list 
of the five Nominees.  
So Mr. Speaker, I would kindly request you to take us to that question where in this House you 
alone are allowed to ask that question, so that we give a chance to the nominees to go and vet the 
County Secretary, so that they can give us the name of their nominee who will be  the County 
Secretary later. Thank you  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you Mheshimiwa; now that the Hon. Member has talked; 
and now he is encouraging the Speaker to put the question without having heard from the other 
Members who also want to give th eir input.  
So the the Honourable Member for Rhonda.  
Hon.John Gachiri : Asante Mheshimiwa S pika, hukukikimbia kuweka swali k wa sababu nilikuwa 
nishasimama na ulikuwa umesema twende katika hiyo Order  lajkini pia n  
Yangu nimesimama kuunga mkono Ripoti  hii na Ripoti  hii ingelifaa tungekuwa tumefanya mambo 
haya kitambo sana kuelekea kwamba County  Secretary  tunahitaji sana katika County  yetu ambaye 
ni mtu wa muhimu sana ksatia County hii. Yeye ni mtu anafanya coordination , ni mtu ambaye 
anafanya mambo makubwa sana katika County .  N i mtu ambaye atakimbia kila mahali na 
tungelipenda ya kwamba Committee  ya Selection  ambayo imechaguliwa , P anel  hii imechaguliwa 
kufanya kazi hii nikiangalia, Mheshimiwa  Spika, ni ya kwamba kama vile mmoja wetu amesema, 
iko combination  ya watu wote, gende r  iko sawa. N i watu ambao wamehitimu katika kimasomo, 
katika hali ya technologia na mambo mengine mengi na hivyo naamini ya kwamba wataleta mtu 
ambaye anayestahili na jambo ambalo litakalo elekeza County  hii yetu mahali ambapo inastahili.  
Kwa hivyo naungana na wenzangu kuunga Ripoti  hii mkono na  hata kama watu wanasinzia, wacha 
tuendelee kudebate kwa sababu ni ya muhimu sana. Naomba ya kwamba tutaamka na kuhakikisha 
kwamba tumepata jambo ambalo linahitajika katika County yetu. Kwa hivyo naunga mkono na 
tunashukuru sana kwa sababu ya Appointment Committee  ambayo ilichaguliwa kati k a Nyumba  
hii ambayo imetuletea Ripoti  kama hii na tunashukuru sana. Asante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you the Hon. Mem ber for Rhonda. The Hon. Member for 
Bahati and then the Hon. Member for Malewa West.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi:  Asante sana Bwana Spika, Majina yangu ni Grace Mwathi  kutoka Bahati 
Ward . Nasimama kuunga mkono Ripoti  hii ambayo mlikaa chini na mkaiwaza na mka amua 
itakuwa vizuri n a  hata kuona ya kwamba hawa watu wamehitimu katika kila jambo.  
Kando na hayo  ambayo wenzangu wamesema, masomo, jins ia n a  hata kuhitimu, nataka kusema 
kuna kitu kingine ambacho hawa watu wako nacho ambacho ni tofauti sana. Ukiangalia u mr i wa 
hawa watu, ni watu ambao wamekomaa kwa hivyo ni watu ambao wako na ujuzi wa mambo ha ta 
pale ambapo wanafanya kazi n a  ni watu ambao hawatakimbilia mambo wakati ambapo 
wataletewa majina ya County  Secretary . Watatup ati a the best  kutokana na hao wote. A sante.  
Hon. Francis Kuria:  Thank you, Hon. Speaker, I arise to support this Motion; it is very good to 
keep or to be in order. You are there Mr. Speaker legally not illegally. So, it is very good we have 
a County Secretary and the Members of this Committee  and the Nominees according to me, are 
up to the task. I therefore support this Motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; we are going to allow one Member from Maai Mahiu 
from this side and then we are going to a Member on my left.  
Hon. Eliud Chege : Asante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa  kunipatia nafasi hii. Jambo la kwanza 
Mheshimiwa  Spika, ningependa nitoe hongera kwa hii Kamati  ambayo ilipatiwa majukumu na 
ikaleta kwa Nyumba  hii ya sh e ria. Mheshikmiwa Spika, ukiwa hapo kwa hii Kamati , na ile i mani 
tuko nayo kwako, mimi bila shaka niko na i mani  kwamba hii kazi imefanyika hap a  ni nzuri.  
Pia ni vizuri hata wakati mwingine tunapokuwa na kazi kama hii ni vizuri tuangalie wanarika 
wetu mahali tunaweka kwa sababu ni jambo nzuri. N a kama penye wazee hapaharibiki neno, 
Mheshimiwa  Spika, ni vizuri tuwe na vijana. Kwa hivyo mahali ningesema ni ya kwamba hata 
kama naunga mkono, wakati mwengine ni vizuri Mheshimiwa  Spika wakati huo mwingine 
tuangalie vijana tumeweka wapi.   
Pia ningesema  ya kwamba hi ch o kit tuko na ch o ch a K atibu wa County  ni sehemu muhimu sana 
na a na majukumu mengi sana na i kiwa atafanya kazi, ak iwa kwa  acting capacity, Mheshimiwa  
Spika hatakuwa na ile nguvu kuu ya kufanya kazi. Kwa hivyo langu ningesema ya kwamba ni vizu ri 
nihimize Nyumba  hii ya kwamba tupatie hii Kamati  nafasi iende ikafanye hiyo kazi ya kuteua ndio 
watuletee jina ndiposa County  yetu iendelee mbele. Nasima n a ung a  mkono ,  nashukuru; asante .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; the Member for Kamara.  
Hon. John Maritim : Thank you Mr. Speaker; I also arise to support the Motion. On the issue of 
age, so that like Father William Mutai Kamboz was born in 1972 and also I saw another gentleman 
was born in 1986. That shows that we do not have more seni or citizens taken as Nominees.  
The second thing is that there is another gentleman he was once an MCA in Kisii County. That 
shows he understands more of the Governance on Devolution and so I believe what you guys did 
was great and I belief that is wonderf ul. On the issue of age also, what Hon. Member for Maai 
Mahiu said is that a young person, of 1986 shows that he is young  blood, a strong blood that he 
can utilise. Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  
The Hon. Member for Barut  
Hon. Bernard Kirui:  Asante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa hi nafasi ambayo umenipatia pia nami 
nimesimama kuunga Ripoti  hii mkono kwa sababu ukiangalia vile hii list  imetoka, inaonyesha sura 
ya Kenya.  Hata mimi naunga mkono na kuomba wakati mwingine list  ingine ikiletwa ionyeshe 
sura mzuri ka ma hii. Asante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member of Barut, so kuna ujumbe ambao unajaribu 
kupitisha.  Thank you. The Leader of Majority Party you can respond  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang’at): Thank you, Mr. Speake r, going by the mood of the 
House of course, it is a reality that now almost one year down the line since this Government came 
into position, we appreciate the fact that the position of a County Secretary plays a big role.  
In fact, the heart of this Count y rotates around that Office; the heart of the Executive and all matters 
of the Cabinet actually rotate around the Office of County Secretary. Mr. Speaker I want to sum it 
by saying this is a process that is going to start, the process of us acquiring a Co unty Secretary. I 
pray that once the Appointments Committee is hopefully passed by this Houser, the…  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Point of Order!  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Which order the Hon Member!  
Hon. Joseph Muraya : Mr. Speaker I think that it is advisable that the Majority Leader when he 
is responding to the Hon. Members, I think he brought the Report into the House and I think it is 
advisable that he responds to Members when he is closer to the mace.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Membe r   
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Alex Lang’at): Much obliged; I wanted to contribute in my capacity 
as an MCA; sorry for that. In my summary of what I had said, it has taken a bit long. It is almost 
one year since this Government came into position and it is very vital that we have a County 
Secretary who is fully accountable and who is fully mandated and not in an acting capacity.  
Mr. Speaker without using many words, I want to give my final submission by urging this very 
Honourable House to adopt this Report  and approve it so that these Kenyans whom we have vetted 
can be given the powers to go and execute this mandate. My urge is that Mr. Speaker, even as they 
go to execute their duties, they may do it within the shortest time possible so that we may not 
cont inue operating with a County Secretary who is on an acting capacity.  
Otherwise allow me Mr. Speaker to request these Hon. Members to actually pass and adopt the 
names as given. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you; I now want to put it to question.  
( Question proposed that this House adopts the R eport of the Committee  on Appointments on the 
vetting of County  Secretary S election P anel N ominees ).  
( Question put and agreed to )  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members, this House stands adjourn ed until tomorrow at 9.30 in the morning.  
The House rose at  4.10PM  
 
 
  
 