COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 22nd February, 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 15:05 PM  
 [Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
MOTION  
CASHLESS PAYMENT SYSTEM AT THE COUNTY HEALTH FACILITIES.  
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  There is a Motion  from honorable William 
Mutai  
Hon. William Mutai: I stand here before the Honorable Members to bring a  Motion on 
implementation of the Cashless Payment System at the County  Health Facilities . Honorable 
Speaker, you will agree with me that change is inevitable and I do believe that as we are 
advancing in our Health  facilities it is prudent enough that we actually adopt the new systems 
that are being used. I have a feeling tha t if we are going to adopt the  Cashless mode of payment, 
we are going to have order and we are going to reduce some risk s that usually take place in our 
Health  facilities concerning money.  
I will give some few examples ; some scrutiny has been done and discovered that many a times 
if you check on the  receipts , the original receipts bearing the same number with the duplicate 
may actually be stating a different amount from the duplicate . In that once a client pays the 
money he or she is offered with the original receipts for example Kshs. 10,000 but checking 
on the duplicate you may discover that it is written Kshs. 1000. If we are going to use the 
Cashless System Methods , I am very sure we are going to remove this vice that is rampant in 
our Hospitals . More so those who go to hospitals are usually weak and here is a scenario where 
a sick person is the one carrying the money and con men have taken advantage;  they 
masq uerade around the Health Facilit ies in pretax that they are clients but in ess ence they have 
some ill motive to steal from the patients.   
If we are going to employ the use of Cashless System I am very sure we are going to eradicate 
this menace. It also removes the temptation because when you have the cash money, it is liquid 
in itse lf and characteristic of liquid money is that it can easily flow and it may flow into wrong 
destinations. I want to urge this honorable House that we support the use of the cashless 
methods in a way of enhancing accountability.  The Members may want to know which method 
we can apply  and in this case we have the common method that is in place which is the Mobile 
Banking System or the use of M -PESA or the Till Nos.  In some advance d stage, like we the 
honorable  Members possibl y we can carry with ourselves the Credit  or Debit Cards . We also 
have the E-Wallets which is also another modern method used in payments and the Pesa -Link.  
There is also another more advance App which is usually in our Mobile Phones . It can be 
downloaded and be used to make some paymen ts. We also  have another one called UPI which 
is the Unified Payment Interface which is more  or less the same as making payment from the 
bank to the account of the Health Facility through transfer. Honorable Speaker , I bese ech the 
Honorable Members to supp ort this Motion  so that we can go the better way.  Thank you very 
much and I request Honorable Jane Gituku from Maille Ward to second the Motio n. 
Hon. Jane Wanjiru Gituku: Honorable Speaker I second the Motion and I would like to make 
some comments. I rise to support the Motion on the implementation of the Cashless mode of 
payment system in our Health Facilities. The Cashless Payment System is aimed at reducing 
cash transact ions and also for revenue in our Health Institutions. The patients will dutiful pay 
as they are required but the problem arises from the Accounting Officers who actually withh old 
this money and are at liberty to do whatever they want. Most people do unders tand that 
transactions of money do require a bit of paper work and this can be tampered with by the 
receiving officers. Once Revenue is collected through the Cashless Sys tems , auditing is 
enhanced an d this revenue is able to reach its destination. And this  will improv e our Medical 
Facilities, and especially in services of our patients.  
I have a very good example in a hospital where I come from in Naivasha. In most instances at 
Naivasha District Hospital you reali se that the Cashiers will always ask patient s to come with 
lose money.  
So when you tender a transaction that is maybe beyond what they have for change, they do not 
like being disturbed. So they will just tell the patient can you go please and come with money 
that is equivalent to what you are being  charged.   
I still believe that as much as a collection of money in our Institution s is part of the services 
rendered, we can change this by ensuring that we have cashless payments . And this money will 
convenience the patient and also those people who are involved especially on finance activities 
of our institutions.  
You remember and you understand that health is very expensive. And especially when a patient 
goes to hospital and you are denied some services and we are forced to go look for these 
services elsewhere . It becomes a burden to our people ; so if you could have systems that are 
really working  and that are able to be accountable to the last coin we will be able to save even 
our communities from these exorbitant prices that are being charged because of seeking for 
services elsewhere. While our Health Institutions if money and finance s are managed properly, 
we could offer these services without any hitch. Thank you, Mr. Temporary Speaker. Sir,  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  I will propose a question that this House 
resolves at the County Government through the Department o f Finance to come up with 
appropriate and convenient cashless mode of payment in all the relevant Health Facilities to 
improve financial accountability . 
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
 The Motion is open for debate . Hon. Gatuso . 
Hon. Bernard Gatuso:  Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I rise to support the Motion. I believe 
there is a concept out there that technology came to replace human in terms of working but I 
believe that is not the reality . It has really expanded the niche whereby we are able to employ 
so many  as we continue advancing.  
 I believe to some extent Mr. Temporary Speaker that we are supposed to have a way on how 
to inform our people so that the y cannot be tempted to go there with  cash and that they can 
have gadgets or phones or money on their phones  and be paying using the M PESA or the 
technology that is there.  
In that regard I believe to some extent the Health Facilities have not been able to service or to 
be able to do their operations well and people usually pay revenues or they pay for the services 
that are there meaning that we are losing much money because we are paying in cash and we 
are supposed to pay via  the technology or via M PESA. That is the reason why we find that 
most of the hospitals have pending bills that of huge amounts in which it is understandable 
where these pending bills or the amounts are arising from and yet the services that are offered 
are paid regularly or are paid by the clients.  
The other thing is lack of drugs within our hospitals, I believe because the services are paid for, 
We are supposed to have monies to buy drugs in hospital. And with the reali sation of that I 
believe with the technology we will be able to curb much of theft that usually happens within 
those facility.  
So mine is to affirm that if we are able to use technology onto how it is supposed, I believe 
even the hiccups within the technology will be able to improve as we  continue going. It is yet 
time for us to be able to use technology so that we can curb this. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
stand to support. the  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  Hon. Fadhili Msuri  
Hon. Fadhili Msuri:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker . As I support this Motion. I want to 
for us to have a rider on that. That the proposal When it comes to payment, we make it more 
optional. Not like a mandatory system. So that the client is not inconvenienced if it happens 
that he or she has gone to seek medical services and it happens that in his or her phone he has 
no cash  yet they have it in cash but they are allowed to pay  in cash .  
Lastly  Mr. Temporary Speaker, I am a bit disturbed because I have listened to the mover of the 
Motion and the subsequent contribution by my brother Gatuso and they seem to preempt the 
service provider that the County should actually engage. Because I have heard them just 
mentioning the word MP ESA . And we know that there are different modes of service 
providers. So if we can actually restrict ourselves in to just be using the word service providers, 
so that you also create a level playing field for those who are not Safaricom users, that they can 
actually have a platform to use other modes of payment not just necessarily M PESA .  
So I do not know if Mheshimiwa Mutai has actually made a courtesy visit to Safaricom or is 
being facilitated by Safaricom because he is appearing to be fronting strongly and have taken 
a cue because he actually invited Mheshimiwa from Maella and she has  taken the same cue, 
and I have seen my brother here from London ward on the same trajectory, I submit, thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Elijah Murage ): Hon. Rose  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sir. I support the Motion that we use the 
cashless, this is because it is very convenient. Somebody can be comfortable with the phone or 
with the money and paid. Another thing is it will save a lot of time. Because maybe in the 
hospital, they might be very many sick people, b ut they can pay the same amount in some 
minutes. And that one is because of security. You might be the accountant in the hospital and 
when you are moving. For example, I have my bag here. You can see this bag of mine and you 
are an Accountant. If you move with that bag somebody might think you have a lot of money 
inside but only to find a handkerchief inside and a lesso.  
Another thing is about dragging spin. All transaction s will be in record and even filing of the 
tax will be easy. Thank you, Mr. Temporary  Speaker, sir  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Mercy Kilel  
Hon. Mercy Kilel: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I rise to support this Motion. I 
believe the world is moving away from traditional methods of payment and for this reason, we 
need to move and support technology as a County. For Example, during the Covid -19 season, 
we were being asked to do away with touching money. Money is known to be dirty and being 
a hospital environment, we understand there is a lot of microbes and bacteria  moving around. 
If we support cashless system, I believe that you are going to reduce that transfer of germs from 
one person to another. Also, Kenya being the Country moving to support technology, I believe 
that we are on the right trajectory and for that reason, I support this. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Robert.  
Hon. Robert Langat: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion. 
First of all, I want to thank the Member for Keringet Ward for bringing thi s Bill. I rise here to 
support the cashless system. I want to highlight four advantages of using the cashless system  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): What is it Hon. Muraya?  
Hon. Mwangi Muraya: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I am standing on a point of 
order, on dress code. Hon. Kajwang’ does not have a tie. He is out of decorum.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Muraya, resume your seat. The 
Majority Leader, can you confirm for us whether the Honorable Member is in decorum.   
Hon. Alex Lang’at: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. Before I do a confirmation, I just 
want to remind the House on matters decorum. This thing has occasionally kept coming before 
this Honorable House and at some point, as an office, you ruled that we  are going to sit down 
as a House so that we are also able to develop rules on matters decorum because it has been a 
bit contradictory and you have been referring to the former House which was there before us. 
Just to remind ourselves is that since the Spe aker made a ruling on matters decorum, we are 
yet to receive a Committee which will sit and determine the right decorum for the County 
Assembly of Nakuru. It may not be so much in order to keep on bringing it before we make a 
ruling and set our own rules o n what is the right dress code, what is the right decorum because 
the Speaker has already made a ruling. I do not see it as an issue today.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): We are going to retreat and we are going to 
give our resolution for tha t next week.  
Hon. Alex  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Alex, a minute then you are going to 
continue.  
Hon. Robert…  
Hon. Robert Langat: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. As I was s aying, first of all, let 
me thank Mheshimiwa Mutai for bringing this timely Motion. The introduction of Cashless 
System has many advantages. It helps in improving revenue. By that, I mean the money is safe. 
Secondly, when the money is paid through Cashless  System, it grows. Number three, when you 
use the Cashless System, you will have a better money management system. By that I mean 
you can track your money very well, you can budget your money very nicely and also it helps 
in flexibility of the same budget.  Another point is that it reduces risks and finally, it also lowers 
stress levels. When you go to a place with money in the pocket, you at times feel unsafe but 
when it is on your phone, it is safe. I stand to support the Motion. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Alex, resume  
Hon. Alex Mbugua: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. First of all is to commend the 
mover of this Motion because this is a noble idea that he has come up with. Indeed, as a County, 
we need to grow our own s ource revenue. I must remind Members here that at the moment, 
Nakuru County is generating Kshs. 1.7 billion in collection revenue collection. When you come 
and look at the generation of revenue, you will find that Health Facilities should be generating 
more. If we move cashless, you will find that we shall be able to hit between Kshs. 2 to Kshs 
3 billion. When the President visited Nakuru County last week, he encouraged Nakuru County 
to come up with ways we can generate our own revenue. In fact according to  His Excellency, 
the estimated revenue collection for Nakuru County should be hitting around Kshs. 5 billion 
and this money  will come and help our people.  
When you go to Naivasha Hospital, you will find that the hospital generates almost Kshs 20 - 
40 million per month. That has been used as Facility Improvement Fund within the hospital. 
We have nurses, doctors and casuals who have been hired there. On the same  as these funds 
grow, there is a caution to the County Government that the autonomy of the hospital and the 
Hospital Bboards should be contained because with this source of revenue growing very fast 
we might find ourselves having cartels within the hospita ls in form of Boards.  
One example that we can give is the Margaret Kenyatta Mother and Baby Care Centre within 
our PGH here in Nakuru. Recently like within the last budget, they had a short on their revenue 
collection to around 120% of what they had claim ed to have collected.This means that if this 
facility is able to only use the online cashless payment then they will be able to generate this. 
If the entire County is able to comply with this then we shall collect enough funds and at the 
same time the auto nomy of the Boards must be contained. I stand to support this Motion Mr. 
Temporary Speaker. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon Elijah Murage): The Hon. Majority Leader.  
The Majority L eader  (Hon Alex Langat): Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I also wish 
to give my contribution on the Motion before us. First of all, I want to thank Hon.Mutai for 
having such a great thought. However, I wish that we can incorporate this Motion so that it ca n 
cater for all Kenyans without infringing on the rights of other Kenyans as it is entrenched in 
the Constitution. I say so because the cashless system as we all know is fully dependent on 
matters technology. When we talk of technology it comes with other added things. It comes 
with equipment which include mobile phones, computers, interlinking systems and programs.  
In Kenya the rate of literacy, as much as we have improved to almost 80%, there is a small 
percentage of Kenyans who are not literate and may not be in a position to use the technology. 
Secondly, the same 20% who seem not to be literate are the ones highly affected. They are the 
ones who get sick most of the time by virtue of their living standards, what they eat and how 
they take care of themse lves. Ensuring that these people must pay using a mobile phone with 
that state of illiteracy might be a challenge to them. Looking at people who are also physically 
challenged, they might not in one way or another be able to use this gadget. We are also lo oking 
for the availability and ability to be able to deposit money in our phones. I am victim being a 
privileged Member of the community sometimes I have money and I want to deposit it on 
Mpesa but you find that shops do not have float. This is a sick pers on that we are actually 
talking about so the essence of making it exclusive  shows that there is a decision that has 
already been made and I have like the way Hon Mutai has put it, it is actually implementation 
of a cashless system.  
When you talk of implem enting something it means a decision has been made or there is 
something coming up somewhere. We have talked of the machineries and the nature. I would 
like to support this Motion with a rider just as Hon Fadhili put it so that in case you are visiting 
the hospital, somebody stole your phone and all the money is in that phone,before you even 
replace the line you have to go customer care. Maybe the money or the identification card has 
also been stolen and this is a sick person and a bread winner of the famil y who does not have 
another source of money.  You went to hospital knowing that you must have all the money in 
the phone. What happens to this Kenyan when he gets to hospital? How long will he take before 
he can access his money in the E -Systems that we ar e proposing today? As we support this 
very good Motion, it is good to give a rider for the sake of those more challenges that might 
come. I have talked vividly about phones being stolen, physically challenged people and 
network. I come from a place where o ur Level 4 Hospital absolutely has no network and we 
know the challenges of network.  
We encourage the implementation of Cashless Payment System but with a consideration of 
those challenged in terms of the matters that I have put forth. With amendments I r ise to support 
the Motion and thank the Hon Member for tabling the Motion. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon Elijah Murage): Hon Gathuita  
Hon James Gathuita : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I rise to support the Motion but 
with amendments. It is g ood that we are looking at this on basis of accountability and I support 
it because it will bring accountability to the facility and bring effectiveness in terms of cash 
used on those facilities. I want to bring to attention as you hear the Hon. Chair for Budget is 
talking very well about the amount of money that will be  collected in those facilities but  on 
equal measure, we want to relook on the issue of where these cash comes from; they come 
from the patients and therefore bearing in mind that they come f rom those patients we need to 
keep good records. When you talk about cashless, let us have registration of patients be 
digitali sed so that these hospitals go electronic in terms of registration of patients, drug records 
be digitalised and also in terms of attendance of doctors and nurses attending those facilities so 
that we can equate the amount of cash collected to the service rendered to mwananchi. On that 
issue I beg to rest my case but with amendments.   
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon Muraya and then Hon. Kayfive then I 
will call the mover of the Motion to reply  
Hon. David Muraya : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker, kwanza ningependa kushukuru 
mheshimiwa Mutai kwa sababu ya kujikakamua na kuja na Mswada huu. Vile vile nikiendelea 
kutoa maoni yangu ni kwamba  systems zetu saa hizi hata kugenerate  receipt ya watu wa  
motorbikes in other institutions ni shida. So we have a problem with the system already. Again, 
nikijiuliza kama tumepanga foleni pale ili tuweze kulipa kwa nj ia ya  cashless, sasa kwa mfano 
watu kumi na kila mmoja ametuma pesa yake na lazima upeleke  receipt kwa Daktari jameni 
itabidi mwenye ako pale pia umuonyeshe hiyo  message yako ndio akutolee.  Itakuwa 
msukumano bado katika ile laini na sasa itakuwa shida zaid i badala ya kusuluhisha na kutafuta 
jinsi ya kuokota kodi.  Nataka niseme hata kama mimi ni  Member wa Committee hi ya  Finance, 
kama vile Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bunge hili, lazima tufanyie Mswada huu mabadiliko ili 
tunapoendelea mbele tukaweze kupata kitu a mbacho hakitatulemea tunapoendelea mbele. Kwa 
hivyo, kwa mabadiliko naunga mkono huu Mswada.  
Hon. Francis Kuria : Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, I arise to support the Motion and 
when we use this cashless means of payment, it will ease and fasten on t he process of payment; 
it will reduce thuggery and in terms of the facility, they can have an extra handset where incase 
the client maybe the phone has been stolen or lost, the handset he or she can deposit the money 
to that handset and the payment can be made. I beg to support. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): I now call the mover of the Motion to reply.  
Hon. William Mutai : Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, Honorable Members, I have seen there is 
quite a number of honorable Members who want ed to contribute more to this Motion. I have 
seen Hon. Maritim he is even restless now because you never gave him time and he kept on 
standing. I think he wanted to support this Motion. He is still restless, look at him Hon. 
Temporary Speaker. However, I r eally want to concur with contributors to this Motion that the 
issues raised are pertinent and I really need to say thank you and especially when you 
mentioned about People Living With Disability. The Majority Leader was abler to explain on 
this but I stil l believe a person with disability will be safer when the money is in a gadget than 
having cash. Secondly, on the issue of lack of devices that are required to facilitate the cashless 
mode, we agree that change is inevitable but the real word that will bri ng change is that we 
embrace gradual change so that our people can embrace this idea slowly by slowly. I want to 
say I am grateful for the support that I have gotten from the members and the critic that has 
also been given, is not it very encouraging so th ank you so much.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  Thank you very much.  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
This House stands adjourned until Tuesday next week 9.30am.  
The House rose at  3.45pm  
 
 