COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Wednesday 8th March, 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 15: 10 PM 
[Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
PAPER  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
ANALAT SECONDARY SCHOOL  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  I wish to welcome Analat Secondary School, 
you are welcomed, karibuni sana.  
STATEMENTS.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  There is a Statement  from Hono urable Anthony 
Kamau .  
Hon. Anthony Kanyere: Honorable Temporary Speaker , Pursuant to the provisions of Standing 
Order 47 (2) ( c) I rise to request for a Statement from the Chairperson  of the Committee  on 
Environment,  Energy , Water  and Natural Resources concerning stalled water pan project at Mzee 
Wanyama, Nakuru East Ward. Hono urable Speaker, the National Government initiated this Project 
way back in 2017 as part of the program me to mitigate on flooding and to provide water for animal 
use and other use i n the surrounding community. It is however worrying that many years later, the 
project remains incomplete and unattended.  
Mr. Temporary  Speaker, it is a great concern to the surrounding community owing to the danger 
it poses to both human beings and domes tic animals. Several cases of animals drowning in the 
water pan have been reported. In addition,  it poses serious threat  to children and the general 
population around since this area has not been fenced off. While we appreciate this was a National 
Government project, there exist s Intergovernmental Relations Framework through which the  
County and the National Governmen t can wor k to resolve issues  of this nature.  I request the 
Chairperson  of the Committee  on Environment, Energy, Water and Natural Resources to urgently 
issue a Statemen t on the measure s taken by the County Government to ensure the stalled water 
pan project does not pose danger to the residents of Mzee Wanyama. Thank you Mr. Temporary  
Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  I commit the Statement to the Committee on 
Environment, Water and Natural Resources and should come up with a reply within 21 calendar 
days. There is another Statement  from Honorable Ali Abdi Hassan . 
STATEMENT  
ACCESS TO GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT OPPORTUNITIES (AGPO)  
Hon. Ali Abdi: Thank you Hono urable Temporary Speaker , Pursuant  to Standing Order 47(2) (C) 
I rise to request for a Statement  from the Chairperson  of the  Committee on Finance  concerning the 
implementation of Access to Government Procurement Opportunities (AGPO) by the County 
Government of Nakuru. The AGPO program  is groun ded in Article 227 of the Constitution  on the 
fair equitable, transparent and cost-effective  Public Procurement of goods and services , Article 55 
on Affirmative Action and the Public Procuremen t and Asset Disposal Act 2015 . As we may be 
aware the aim of th e AGPO program  is to facilitate the enterprise owned by Women, Youths and 
Person s With Disabilities to participate in Government  opportunities.  
Mr. Temporary  Speaker , Section 157 of the Public Procurement and Asset Disposa l Act 2015 
states in clear terms that an Accounting Officer of Procuring Entity shall when processing 
procurement , reserve and prescribe  a percentage of its procurement budget which shall not be less 
than 30% to the Disadvantaged Group and comply with the provisions of the Act.  
Honorable Temporary Speaker, i n this regard, I request the Chairperson Committee on Finance to 
provide a detailed Report on the extent to which the County Government has complied with the 
provision of Section 157 (5) of Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act 2015. Specifically  all 
procurement reserved for youth, women and Persons With Disabilities (PWDs) in Financial Years, 
2020/2021 and 2021/2022. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  Chair Finance.  
Hon.   John Maritim:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think two weeks ; that is 14 days will be okay.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  Your Report to the House be within 14 calendar 
days. Next order.  
MOTION  
RESUMPTION OF DEBATE  
We are going to resume to the debate that we had in the morning. And the floor is open for debate. 
The Honorable Kamwana.  
 
Hon. John Macharia:  Thank you Hon. Speaker, I am not honorable Kamwana, I am Hon. CPA 
John Mwangi the Member for Turi.  
(Laughter)  
So I rise  to support the R eport concerning the Naivasha Sub-County Hospital b ecause if we are 
going to pass the Report as the Assembly then the Department and the County Government will 
be able to implement the Reports and some of the charges that were being identified by the 
Committee when they visited the hospital can now be addressed. For example one of the findings 
that the Committee was able to identify is the issue of negligence as far as the personnel or th e 
Human Resource who work there is concerned and therefore if this particular honorable House is 
going to pass the Report then the issue of negligence can be addressed by the concerned 
Department.  
The other issue was the deficit in facility or infrastruct ural challenges. And therefore also the 
Department can  finance and be able to do away with that.  
Lastly, there was also the deficit in the Human Resource and therefore the facility was not in a 
position to offer quality services. Therefore, I urge this ho norable House to pass the Report so that 
the Naivasha Sub-County Hospital can be accorded the necessary services  and t he major 
challenges of the maternal death s can be brought to an end. Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah M urage):  I think Hono urable Rose you contributed during 
the morning session.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech:  But this is another session Mr. Speaker. I am requesting you to give me 
another chance because I am a woman and today it is Women’s Day. 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  The floor is yours Hon. Rose.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech:  Honorable Temporary S peaker, in the morning we had a l engthy 
deliberation. But again  we have to talk about it b ecause in the issue of maternal deaths, we have 
had many expectant mothers dying . Imagine after being expectant for nine months and later on 
you lose  your child plus yourself. I t is really painful  and t hat is why I am contributing for the 
second time.  
The County G overnment of Nakuru should have proper mechanism s to deal with disciplinary 
issues; emerging issues from Medics in hospital s, when somebody just do es something that is not 
good a nd somebody loses her life. Those people should be dealt with accordi ngly. 
Another thing is about the Department to put clear channels of communication to the members of 
the public on matters affecting the hospital. We have the Committee in our hospital s and they 
should be taught on one or two things about the hospital ; they should be trained and CHVS to be 
trained so that they can help the community so that women do not deliver a t home. Thank you Mr.  
Temporary  Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage):  Hon. Alex Bor  
Hon. Alex Bor:  Asante sana Bwana Spika, naunga mkono na kuwarai waheshimiwa wenzangu 
tuunge mkono Ripoti hii na pia nimpe kongole Mwenyekiti wa Kamati hii ya Afya. na Wanakamati  
wake wote. Ningependa kusema ya kwamba yale mambo ambayo yalikuwa yakitendeka kule 
Naivasha ilikuwa ni kioo cha yale ma mbo ambayo yanafanyika katika hospitali zetu kote Kaunti 
ya Nakuru. Baada ya wiki moja ya yale mambo yalifanyika kule Naivasha, hata mimi pale kwangu 
kulikuwa na changamoto kama hizo. Nakumbuka baada ya wiki moja, tulipoteza wat oto wawili 
katika hospitali ya K uresoi, tukapoteza mama mmoja katika hospitali hiyo hiyo alipokuwa 
akijifungua.  
Kwa hivyo, nataka niombe waheshimiwa wenzangu kwamba tuunge mkono na tuweze kupitisha 
na tuhakikishe ya kwamba hospitali zetu zimeweza kuangalia na kuweka bid i kwa yale ma mbo 
ambayo Ripoti hii imeweza kutuletea kwenye Bunge letu. Nasimama na naunga mkono. Asanteni 
sana.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Mwathi, the floor is yours.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. I also rise to support this Report 
because it has many things that are very important to our mothers. One, I thank the Committee of 
Health which I am part of because by visiting this hospital, we are going to learn so much on                                                                                                                                                                                                    
what is going on, even the hidden things are going to be known. I urge the Committee that we visit 
all the hospita ls because as Mheshimiwa has said, we know that this is just but a mirror of what is 
happening in many hospitals and because these people cannot talk for themselves, they cannot 
represent them anywhere. I wish the Committee will visit all the Hospitals tha t are within the 
County so that we know what is happening to which hospital and the recommendations that are 
given by the Committee are very valid. Let us take our task, let us know what we want to do and 
let us keep women at heart.  
Today being the Intern ational Women’s Day, we have to have women because they are the ones 
who carry souls. They are the ones who give birth. We hold children in our wombs and then we 
bring life to this Country. If we play with our unborn babies, we are going to lose a generati on. I 
want to say that the Report is so good and I want to support it totally and let the County and the 
Committee do what it is mandated to do.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: [ On a Point of information].  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Rose, whom do you want to inform?  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: Mr. Temporary Spoeaker sir, I want to inform Hon. Grace  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Grace, do you want to be informed?  
Hon. Grace Mwathi: Mr. Temporary Speaker sir, let her inform me.  
Hon. Rose Chepkoech: As the Committee of Health, we have a program that we shall be moving 
around within the County. We shall consider your request.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi: Thank you very much Mheshimiwa Rose. I sa id when I started talking that 
I am a Member of the Health Committee and that is a very good thing that we are doing because 
there are many people down there who cannot represent themselves. This is because there was 
something that happened in Naivasha and  raised the alarm. The Committee is doing a very good 
job and we have to commend it for that.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Elijah Murage): Hon. Mutai  
Hon. William Mutai: Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker sir. Let me take this opportunity to 
wish the women in the House a Happy Women’s Day. As we discuss this very important Report, 
I stand to support it and in addition, I have just seen part of the engagement with the 
Management and there is a Report there given by the Hospital Administrator which has a ttracted 
my attention. I h ave always been having in mind issues concerning the Administrators in 
Hospitals. In most cases, most of these people do not have the relevant knowledge and health 
skills. They might just be Administrators that are drawn from othe r Departments and they do not 
have the real managerial skills concerning the arears to do with health. I want to request that one 
of the recommendations that should also be put is to engage people in the administrative duties 
that have knowledge in health.  If we do not do that there will always be a rift between the 
qualified Health Officers and the Management who do not have the required skills in health. That 
is my additional recommendation if it will be accepted by the Committee. Thank you Mr. 
Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon Elijah Murage):Hon. Virginia  
Hon. Virginia Gicanga:  Thank you Mr. Temporary Speaker. I also rise to support the Report 
being a Member of the Health Committee and also a resident of Naivasha. In all our hospitals we 
have issues with Human Resource. In the HR Department we do not have enough staff; like in 
Naivasha we have less by 200. The staff there are being overworked .When we were listening to 
what happened, we had the person in charge of the maternity but she could no t stay with us until 
we were done because she had a work load and she was alone.  
In our Report we are going to include an addition of two or three people in charge of maternity 
because we have maternities which are very busy. It is very painful to carry a  pregnancy for nine 
months then not going back home to family is a very big loss. On the same, it is our duty as a 
Committee and as a Department during this budgeting season we make sure that we allocate money 
for hiring more professionals. I rest my case and I support.  
The T emporary Speaker  (Hon Elijah Murage): I will now call the mover to reply then I will put 
it to question.  
Hon. Njugun a Mwaura : I am much obliged to give a reply to the House on various issues that 
have emerged from this Report. Mr. Tempo rary Speaker on the issue of Beyond Zero Campaign, 
it is true that the former Administration that is the Office of the First Lady had that Program and 
in fact the materials that were used for that program are just within the County. They are at Bondeni 
maternity and they were doing a very good work. Maternal deaths had reduced for the last 10 years 
but currently we are seeing some things bubbling and it is like we are going back to the old days. 
We are going to further engage the Department so that we see w hether they can also fund such 
kind of ventures so that at least we can save our mothers. We usually say a mother carrying a child 
is not a punishment as it has been philosophically been said but it is a gift of nature that our mothers 
have been given and therefore they should not be punished just because they are women.  
On the issue of Community Volunteers, as I mentioned earlier this is the first group of the Health 
Department that usually is the hospital’s number one. Therefore we cannot find them in Le vel 3, 
4 and 5. They can at least be equipped with some information so that they are able to address the 
members of the public on issues post -natal and pre -natal services that we have in our facilities.  
On the issue of the Boards, we are  going to review o n that issue specifically about th e Board that 
was dismissed , we would wish to  also know what it  knew about the issues that were happening 
at the facilities so that we have an informed decision that will address the budget implications  in 
the future as far  as that facility is concerned. The issue of the budget, one of the Member s said we 
have been given Kshs 7 billion as a Department. It is true that the Department has been allocated 
Kshs 7 billion but the need for the services is growi ng day by day and therefore even as we are 
talking today, we are saying the Department is constrained and as I mentioned in the morning, I 
said 50 percent of the Medics who were working in our facilities, are contracted and thus makes 
them to walk on their knees. If the facility can be given enough funds ; if the County G overnment 
of Nakuru can hi re more staff, we can generate enough revenue to even support other Departments 
and that is why we say Kshs  7 billion might not be enough but what could be enough i s the better 
services that the people of Nakuru would wish to have. Allow me to say that a healthy County is 
a wealthy County.  
Therefore if we are going to invest in a better way that we have enough funds for the Department , 
we are going to score. The oth er issues of disease burden in the County, you reali se that due to 
lifestyle disease s which I am also a victim , we really need to invest there and make sure that the 
Public Health Department is working so that we can address our people.  
Finally on the iss ue of Health Administrators , these Health Administrators that we  have in our 
facilities  some of them are Ward Administrators or Sub-County Administrators and they do not 
have any knowledge though they have gone to the Kenya School of Government . It would b e 
prudent for the Department once somebody has been taken to that Department to go and have a 
tailored program where they can understand issues of Health Administration so that when they are 
discussing th ese issues they ca n agree on some of the issues raised.  
Article 46 of our Constitution talks about or describes the rights of a consumer. The standard s of 
service cannot go below the standards given by the Constitution. You know the structures of our 
Constitution is suprem e and therefore service delivery and standard service delivery in our 
Departments ought to be checked and Health Department ought to work efficiently to make sure 
the people of this County are going to have proper services that they deserve.  
If today some body do es not go to the hospital , tomorrow they are going to land in our facilities 
and that is why we need to come up with an approach to make sure that the Committee of 
Implementation and Committee of Lands, because there are some issues that have been r aised here 
today to make a follow -up on these matters. Once this is done they are going to see the 
implementation being tabled as far as these issues are concerned. I wish to request this House to 
consider and pass this Report so that it can be forwarded t o the Department so that they i mplement 
this Report. I beg to move and I am grateful for the contributions of the Members. Thank you Mr. 
Temporary Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Elijah Murage): Thank you  
(Question proposed that this House adopts the Report of the Health Services  Committee on 
maternal deaths at the Naivasha Sub -County Referral Hospital tabled before this House on 
Tuesday 7th March 2023 during the afternoon Plenary ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
The House stands adjourned until Tuesday 9.30am  
The House rose at  3.35pm  
 