COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF NAKURU  
THE HANSARD  
Third Assembly (Second Session)  
Thursday 18 th  July 2023  
Assembly Building  
The House met at 03:30 PM  
[The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri) In the Chair]  
PRAYERS.  
MESSAGES  
NOMINEES TO NAKURU CITY BOARD, NAIVASHA MUNICIPAL BOARD, GILGIL MUNICIPAL 
BOARD AND MOLO MUNICIPAL BOARD  
The Speaker ( Hon . Joel Karuri ): Next Order , there is a  Message from Her  Excellency  the 
Governor , the Reference is “ Nominees for The Position of Nakuru City Board, Gilgil, Molo and 
Naivasha Mu nicipal Boards. Reference is made to the above and our Lette r that was dated 29 th  
June , 2023 that was referenced as indicated (NCG/COUNTY ASSEMBLY/VOL 1).  I hereby 
recall the previous correspondence thereof to the County Assembly pursuant to Section 11 of the 
Urban Areas and Cities Amendment Act , 2019, the County Executive is in the process of filling 
vacancies in the  City Board of Nakuru, Municipal B o ard o f  Naivasha , Municipal Board of  Gilgil 
a nd Municipal Board of  Molo .  
Foll owing the successful completion  of interviews , the following persons have been found suitable 
for the appointment as Members  of these respective Boards. We shall start will Gilgil Municipal 
Board -  
GILGIL MUNICIPAL BOARD  
1.  Teresia Karugi Kuruma -  (Was Appointed Through Competitive Process)  
2.  Shama Wangui Nj uguna -  (Appointed Through Competitive Process)  
3.  Joseph Maina Theuri -  (Appointed Through Competitive Process)  
4.  Fredrick Mbogo Kimani   -  (Representing Professional Associations)  
5.  Stephen Kimani -  (Representing the Private Sector  
6.  Josephat Kiarie -  (Representi ng the Informal Sector)  
7.  Pauline Ndunge Mbuva -  (Representing the Neighborhood Community)  
NAKURU CITY BOARD  
1.  Jore Said Ali -  (Was Appointed Through Competitive Process)  
2.  Chrispas Anthony Wathimba -  (Was Appointed Through Competitive Process)  
3.  George Njenga Mwaniki -  (Was Appointed Through Competitive Process)  
4.  Stephen Muli -  (Representing the Informal Sector)  
5.  James Njau -  (Representing the Neighborhood Community)  
NAIVASHA MUNICIPAL BOARD  
1.  Jonathan Kuria Warothe -  (Appointed Through Competitive Process)  
2.  Joseph Mukoi -  (Was Appointed Through Competitive Process)  
3.  Richard Cheruiyot Langat -  (Was Appointed Through Competitive Process)  
4.  Nancy Mugure Waweru…. Representing the P rofessional B ody.  
      5. Peter Kimani representing the P rivate S ector.  
      6. L ucy Gikara representing the N eighborhood C ommunity  
       7. Rose Njeri representing the I nformal S ector.  
 We progress to M olo M unicipal Bo ard .  
1.  Florence Wairimu Kabii appointment through C ompetitive P rocess  
2.  Wesley Kipkemoi Ruto appointed through C ompetitive P rocess.  
3.  Jemi mah Njeri Kuria appointed through C ompetitive P rocess.  
4.  Kagai Thiongo representing the P rofessional B odies.  
5.  Zahara Tiebo representing the Neighborhood C ommunity.  
6.  Bernard Gitau representing the B usiness C ommunity.  
7.  Evans Ngige representing the P r ivate S ector.  
 And now, Her Excellency the G overnor has appended her signature and also a M essage. Now as 
such, this list has been committed to the C ommittee on L and s, Housing  and Physical Planning.  
MOTION .  
RESUME SITTINGS  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  There is a Motion by Honourable Alex Langat, the Leader of the 
Majority Party.  
The Chief Whip (Hon. Fadhili Msuri):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am standing in for the M ajority 
L eader. And the Motion  is as follows that pursuant to the prov isions of Standing Order  no .  30 and 
31. And further to the Communication  made earlier concerning the House  resumption for Regular 
Sessions . This House  resolves to resume its Sittings , that  is the Regular Sessions  for the year 2023 
on the 25th of July 2023 at 9:30am and proceeds with the rest of the Session s as per the adopted 
Calendar  of 2023. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Okay, thank you. That is the Motion  you have someone to 
second.  
The Chief Whip (Hon. Fadhili Msuri):  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I hereby call the Minority Leader.  
The Minority Leader (Hon. Phillip Wa n johi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, a s t he Majority Party  
whip has said I wish to second the Motion  that Regular Sessions  for this Assembly  proceed from 
25th of July. Mr. Speaker, we have had a break and a  Session . Because as you are aware, Mr. 
Speaker, we formed an A ssociation. There is a body that was born through that period. And 
actually, now we have been nursing that baby now the baby is  of age (AM C A) Mr. Speaker you 
also reali s e that we have Bills  pending in this House . We have Motion s that are pending, we have 
S tatements that are pending and we have other very big businesses to be done in this House . And 
therefore Mr. Speaker, I support  that we proceed the rest of the Session s adopted in the Calendar  
for 2023. Mr. Speaker, I second. Thank you .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri):  Thank you, the Motion  is that pursuant to the provisions of 
Standing Order  30 and 31 and further to the Communicat ion  made earlier concerning the House  
resumption for Regular Sessions,  T his House  resolves to resume its Sittings, that is the Regular 
Sessions  for the year 2023 on 25th July 2023 at 9:30am and proceed with the rest of the Session s 
as per the adopted Calendar . So that is the Motion  and it is open for debate.  
Hono u rable Hassan Hajji.  
Hon. Hassan Abdi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I also wish to support today’s Motion that we resume 
for our regular session from 25 th  July, 2023. As you all know and the Minority Leader has put it 
well, that we formed an association called Association of Members of County Assemblies to 
agitate for the welfare of Members. I wish to Report that we made a good progress and it would 
be good that we resume our sess ions because the matter has been taken up and we expect good 
progress.  
We have pending Bills and Motion that is before us so it would be in order so that we continue 
with the Business of this House. I support.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Th e Honorable Member from Malewa West.  
Hon. Francis Kuria: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support this Motion.  
Knowing very well that previously, we had resumed from Long Recess and due to some 
inconvenience, we halted the Assembly. I find it very wel l we can resume from 25 th  July. 
Remember, we have a big task ahead of us and we are people who are being elected by the great 
people of this Nation and we need to serve them accordingly.  
I therefore rise to support this Motion so that we can do the oversig ht job well and the job will be 
well. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Honorable Member for Shabaab Ward.  
Hon. David Wathiai: Asante sana Bwana Spika. Nimesimama  to second this Motion and huo mda 
wenye tumekuwa kwa  Recess, unaona w engine wetu pia wamerudi lakini bado hawajajielewa 
vizuri.  Ukiangalia Mheshimiwa Kuria  amekaa kwa kiti ya wenyewe .  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member, do you want to insinuate that Honorable Members 
are not aware of themselves or what are you insinuating?  
Hon. David Wathiai: Mr. Speaker sir, because of the hangover of staying away from this House 
for very long, unakuta tunasahau sharia za hii N yumba.  Unaona Mheshimiwa Kuria amekaa kwa 
K iti ya  Majority na hapo hafai kukaa.  Unaona  our Chief Whip amevaa  sweater. Hii sweater sijui 
kama inakubaliwa kwa hii N yumba.  
I second this Motion turudi ndio tuendelee kufanya kazi kwa hii nyumba tukifuatilia sharia na 
maadili ya hii nyumba. Asante sana.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Honourable Member for E buru Mbaruk.  
Hon. Michael Gathanwa: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I also wish to support this Motion first of 
all because we have a lot of pending business but also as Members of County Assembly and having 
formed AMCA, we are aware that once we raise our grie vances and that we know they are being 
looked into, we should go back into serving. The same way and the same spirit that we are using 
to ask the people in Opposition that they have raised their grievances; it is now time to let solutions 
come into place.  
In the spirit of saying that maandamano  cannot give a solution and asking the opposition to give 
Government time to be able to solve that they have listened to their grievances, I believe also as 
Members of County Assembly through AMCA, our grievances hav e been heard and it is time to 
come back, do our duties as solutions are being put in place. Thank you.  
The Speaker (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. Hon. Member for Kamara.  
Hon. John Maritim: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. I rise to support this Motion and also to suggest 
that we are been out for long and I recall where I come from in Kamara, there is a time I was told, 
“Hon. Maritim, what are you doing? You have been here like you have been fired from the 
Assembly.” I told them that I just came to see whether they are okay or something like that. I think 
it is great so that all the pending Bills can be catered for.  
Secondly, I think you can also put into question that we go through it because I know tomorrow 
we shall have a very hard task. We should prepare ourselves psychologically, spiritually and also 
physically to tackle them tomorrow. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): The Hon. Member for Kamara, what are the pr eparations about? 
I heard you talk about preparations. We missed that part.  
 Hon. John Maritim:  Mr. Speaker you know that tomorrow we have maandamano  and I believe 
that majority of us are not part of that maandamano  so we need to prepare psychologically in  a 
manner that if a stone is hulled against you there is a way that you can put it offside and not be 
part of it. That is what I meant when I talked about preparation. Thank you.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Soin, Hon. De gaulle.  
Hon. Degaulle Naburuki : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I rise to support this Motion but before that 
I would like to remind our MCA from Shabaab that he is criticising other MCAs yet he is also 
sitting in the wrong place so I think that before he says anything he should know what he is doing. 
I stand to support this Motion because we have been away for some time and we have so many 
pending Bills which we should tackle so that we can take our County forward. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Tha nk you. The Hon.Member for Naivasha East.  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Thank you Mr. Speaker I will not take long. Let me first of all…  
Hon. Grace Mwathi : Mr. Speaker I have a concern  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Yes Hon. Member for Bahati.  
Hon. Grace Mwathi :  Member for Naivasha East is not properly dressed.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Thank you for the information. The Majority Whip kindly 
confirm and enforce the necessary measures if that is true.  
The Majority Whip  (Hon. Fadhili Msuri): Mr. Speaker sir, in this case even the blind can see that 
the Hon. Member is not dressed appropriately so we kindly urge the Member to step out and come 
back properly dressed.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Hon. Member go do the necessary and come back. Was that the 
same information the Hon.Member or Lari wanted to pass?  
The Minority Leader  (Hon. Philip Wanjohi): Yes, Mr. Speaker the dress code for Member for 
Naivasha East was wanting and that is what I wanted to bring to your attention. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel K aruri): Thank you. The Hon. Member for Naivasha East  
Hon. Stanley Karanja : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I said I will not be long. First, let me thank your 
office and you for the organisation that you have done for us to be back. You know that we left 
this plac e because of some issues which are being addressed as Hon. Members have said. One of 
the things that we want to address is that Members of any County Assembly in this Republic should 
be treated the way Members of the National Assembly and the Senate are tr eated. Anything that is 
lesser than that I do not think that Members will accept that. I also take this chance to thank you 
and your Office because you have been of great assistance to us. We hustled to make sure that 
some of the problems we have are addre ssed. Let me inform Members that the issues we have been 
dealing with has been picked by the Senate. We went to the Senate and I want to thank you 
Members for really supporting us. The Senate heard us and it is pursuing the issue. We also went 
to the Chair  of the Council of Governors Hon. Waiguru, the Governor for Kirinyaga who also 
promised that he will be addressing the president. We also did have a meeting with the SRC and 
the problem that we have is that the SRC thought that we are employees of the Boar d which we 
are not. We told the SRC that when they were doing the job evaluation and when they were getting 
the information they got it from the wrong quarters because we are the ones who employ the Board. 
We come here choose the Speaker who is the Chair o f the Board therefore we have two Members 
in here who form the Board and other Members from outside. Those Members are vetted and 
approved here at the House, t he same the C reator cannot be inferior to the created. That is what 
we said that we are not employees of the board and therefore Mr. Speaker that ids the information 
that we will be working on to move us from job group. Mr. Speaker you can imagine we are placed 
in job group D4 that is why we are being paid Kshs  86,000 and that one the basic salary therefore 
will translate to poor M edical C over because with a job group also determines your M edical C over; 
it will also translate to your Gratuity  therefore when we leave her e, we will have little Gratuity  just 
because we are in the wrong job group. Therefore, Mr. Speaker I know that you  will continue 
fighting for us and I will not fail to say that if in one month the issue will not be dealt with, Mr. 
Speaker, I am sorry to sa y we will go back to where we were until our grievances are heard. Thank 
you, Hon. Members…  
( Applause )  
a nd this one Members,  thank you for your support and I know ,  Mr. Speaker as I leave here ,  I am 
headed to Nairobi and I know I will communicate today ;  I h ave been told that the President has 
called and I know things will be good ;  and therefore Mr. Speaker ,  your salary and us will not be 
like earth and H eaven ;  
( Laughter )  
Whereby  what we require we need an intermediator; it is real ly  wrong when the salary of maybe 
the Speaker is higher; it is as if we are dealing with the roles and the trinit i es when we come to the 
Russians. Mr. Speaker what you need to do ,  you and us we need to come together so that even 
when the Russians and Germans  Mr. Speaker that is why we are saying it was immoral for SRC 
to demean an MCA. The three roles should be paid equally; the R epresentation, O versight and also 
Le gislation. I cannot be here passing a whole budget of Kshs  18 billion yet I am paid like a chic ken. 
Mr. Speaker that is what we were against and thank you for your support; I know you will continue 
supporting us, I know you have something for these Members  keep them happy Mr. Speaker and 
you will also be happy in H eaven. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Hon. Ali Abdi : Point of information Mr. Speaker  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Yes Hon.  Ali  
Hon. Ali Abdi:  Yes, M heshimiwa  Speaker we still have t wo more Members  who are not properly 
dressed; we have Mheshimiwa  S enior Member  from Njoro who is not properly dressed and 
Mheshimiwa from Shabaab W ard who has already left. Th is  is nothing to do with sisikii poa 
Mheshimiwa .  We are all hono u rable Members  and this House is of rules and regulations. Thank 
youMr. Speaker.  
Hon. John Mari tim : Mr Speaker  
The Speaker  (Hon. Joel Karuri): What is it the Hon Members  for Kamara .  
Hon. John Maritim : As a S enior Member  here, what you want to afford is curses; Hon Members  
from ASAL you need you apologi s e to this s enior citizen. Thank you .  
The Speak er  (Hon. Joel Karuri): Before putting it to question., I want to recogni s e the fraternity 
of Tumaini Primary School who are visiting with us amid to understand that the teachers and pupils 
from Tumaini Primary School coming from Visoi W ard; you are most we lcome this your House 
as Hon. Members  and Hon. House, we sit to work on your behalf and to discuss the things that 
affect the whole population of Nakuru County. So Karibuni tena  this your House. Hon Members  
I now want to put it to question  
( Question proposed that pursuant to the provisions of Standing O rder 30 and 31 and further to 
the C ommunication made earlier concerning House resumption for Regular Sessions , this House 
resolves to resume its sittings that  is Regular Sessions  for the year 2023 on 25 th  July 2023 at 9.30 
am and proceed to the rest of the sessions as per for the adopted C alendar for the year 2023 ) .  
( Question put and agreed to )  
( Applause )  
ADJOURNMENT  
This House adjourns from today and resumes o n 25 th  July 2023 at 9.30am  
The House rose at  4.05 pm  
 
 
 
 
 