November 2 8, 2018               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 28th November,  2018  
The House met at 9:24a.m.  
   
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members you may be seated.  Yes 
Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
ADOPTION OF TUK TUK O PERAT ORS  RULES  
 
 Hon. Hatimy Mohamed . 
  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speake r I wish to give the 
following M otion on Adoption of Tuk Tuk o peration r ules:                             
  
WHEREAS  Tuk Tuks are aut horized to operat e under the Traffic Act of the l aws of 
Kenya;  
 
WHEREAS the County g overnment is mandated under Schedule Four of the 
Constitution to regulate road transport under its area of jurisdiction;  
 
WHEREAS there have been increased incidences of ac ts of insecurity and 
malpractices by operators of Tuk Tuk cabs and if left unregulated the public will 
continue to be exposed to security and safety hazards;  
 WHEREAS there is need for legislation to effectively and efficiently regulate this sub  - 
sector fo r greater safety and security;  
 WHEREAS it is the intent that these rules shall be applicable to all Tuk Tuk owners, drivers 
and agents (hereinafter called the operator(s) until otherwise rescinded or amended by the 
County Assembly;  
NOW, therefore be i t RESOLVED  that the County Assembly of M ombasa  adopts the 
following Tuk Tuk operators r ules 2018:  
 
 
 
 
 
  
The County Government of Mombasa to take enforcement measures to ensure that:  

November 2 8, 2018               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 1. Every Tuk Tuk operator shall be a registered member of an Associ ation recognized by the 
County g overnment for the sub  - sector. The Association shall among other things be 
responsible for the training of its members on matters of safety and security of passengers.  
 2. Every Tuk Tuk cab shall:  
 
a. Be painted on the right ha nd side with the full and true name of the owner, his/her 
business address and the total number of passengers allowed to be carried thereof;  
 
b. Have a sticker paid for and issued monthly or such other time as is authorized by the 
County g overnment;  
 
c. Have the  photo of the driver displayed inside the Tuk Tuk;  
 
d. Have installed three safety belts in usable form for use by passengers  
e. Ensure that the Tuk Tuk is washed and cleaned daily or at any time there is dust or dirt 
deposited therein.   3. For purpose of iden tification, every Tuk Tuk cab shall be in one of the following zones:  
 
a. Island Zone  
b. Likoni Zone  
c. Changamwe Zone  
d. Jomvu Zone  
e. Nyali Zone  
f. Kisauni Zone  
   
4. Every Tuk Tuk operating in a particular zone shall be painted with a particular colour. 
Colours painted  for Tuk Tuks operating in each zone shall be:  
 
a. Island Zone – Green  
b. Likoni Zone – Yellow  
c. Changamwe Zone – Red 
d. Jomvu Zone – Orange  
e. Nyali Zone – Blue  
f. Kisauni – Blue and Yellow stripes   5. The colour scheme shall not prevent operators from criss  - crossing or passing through 
another zone.  
 6. The County g overnment shall adopt different number schemes peculiar to each  zone.   
 
November 2 8, 2018               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3  I beg to move Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwali mu): Who is your seconder?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : I request Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani, Leader of Majority 
to second.  
 
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I arise to second the 
Motion.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I now propose  that the M otion on , Adoption 
of Tuk tuk Operators rules  be debated in this House. Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Leo hii kwenye Nyumba hii 
tumejaribu kuleta sheria za Tuk tuk kwani mambo ya Tuk tuk yamekuwa kila siku kun a 
mikasa ambayo inatokea Mheshimiwa Spika na ni lazima au ni majukumu ya Nyumba hii 
kuleta sheria ambazo zitakuwa sheria muafaka ambazo zitaweza kufuatwa na kusema ni 
mambo ya ukosefu wa usalama  ndani ya Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa yamezidi. Kwa hivyo sisi 
kuwe za kusaidia watu wetu muhimu ni kusema kuwa hizi Tuk tuk zijulikane ziwe zatoka 
upande gani ; Changamwe rangi ipakwe rangi yake, Likoni na hali kadhalika katika Sub -
County zote hizi sita zote za Mombasa. Kwa hivyo naomba Nyumba hii Mheshimiwa Spika 
hizi she ria tuziweke ili tufunge mwaka maana sisi twaenda mapumziko hivi sasa tuwe 
tumewapatia hizi sheria na sheria ziwe zitafuatwa . 7. Every Tuk Tuk driver shall while carrying passengers:  
 
a. At all times wear clean official uniform prescribed by the County Govern ment.  
b. Be clean and well groomed;  
c. Refrain from smoking or spi tting while carrying passengers;  
d. Carry his National ID an d valid Driver’s License;  
e. Drive within the prescribed traffic rules as per the law a nd observe required speed 
limit;  
f. Ensure the safety and security of passengers, their luggage, other motorists and 
pedestrians;  
g. Avoid foul and vulgar language against passen gers or other motorists;  
h. Avoid using violenc e or threats against passengers;  
i. Ensure passengers do not leave any personal property before al ighting and where such 
has been left to take reasonable steps to return the same to their owners or surrender at poli ce 
station nearby;  
j. Avoid obstruc ting other vehicles on the road;  
 
 
 8. Tuk Tuk operators and the general public are sensitized on these ru les and those who 
contravene are prosecuted accordingly ; 
 9. The County g overnment shall have powers to enforce these rules and shall include 
prohibition of any Tuk Tuk cab from operating or prosecution in a court of law for violating 
the same ; 
 
 
 
 
 10. Photographic and video evidence of violations of these rules by Tuk Tuk operators shall 
be admissible in court.  
 11. These r ules shall come into force six months after adoption.  
 
 
November 2 8, 2018               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4  Sheria hizi tumesema twawapatia muda wa miezi sita kuzitekeleza. Kwa hivyo 
naomba Nyumba hii tukubaliane kupitisha hizi sheria il i tuweze kuwa na utaratibu na 
heshima ndani ya Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hamida?  
 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Noor : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me thi s opportunity. I support 
the M otion that  has be en brought by my fellow M ember about the Tuk Tuks ; if we adapt this 
operation about the Tuk tuk I think we should have sanity in our roads because there is a lot 
that is happening. In the morning when you leave your house the speedy Tuk Tuks  on the 
road are hitting even small children and I feel personally that there is a lot of Tuk tuks on the 
road. So if we have a bit of sanity on the side of Tuk tuks especially in the morning hours 
when children are going to schools I think we will have a bit of sanity o n the roads. With 
those few remarks I do support the M otion. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes, Hon. Kizito Opeya.  
 
 Hon. Opeya : Thank you Mr. Speak er. Also I rise to support the M otion which has 
been brought by the Hon . Member;  I think there has been a big p roblem as far as the transport 
sector in Mom basa and now that the national g overnment has started the crackdown on the 
Matatus . It is fair we also do it on the Tuk tuks and also the time limit  of six  months is very 
fair to them; t hey cannot complain that we ambush ed them like what Hon. Matiang ' did the 
other day. So at least we have given them time to put the seat belts, the colours and if they 
have any issues they can co me and raise with us. So I think the time limit is very fair and also 
the rules, t hese are not punitive rules, these are just rules which are to bring control and order 
to the s ector. Thank you very much.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwaka Bakari . 
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi nauunga mkono 
hii ho ja kwa sababu mimi mwenyewe ni M emba wa Kamati ya Usafiri  na napenda kutia 
mkazo kwa kuungwa mkono jambo h ili hususan upande huu wa rangi;  ni jambo zuri sana 
kwa sababu Tuk tuk huwa zinapita kila mahali zinaenda za Likoni huenda mpaka 
Changamwe, huenda mpaka Kisauni kubeba abiria lakini jambo hili pengine patokeapo 
pengine ajali ama tukio lolote lile inaweza kujulikana Tuk tuk hii ni ya upande gani. Pia vile 
vile, upande huu Bwana Mwenyekiti amezungumzia mambo na usafi, kwa kusema  kweli 
utapata Tuk tuk nyengine ni chafu sana hata wao wenyewe madereva ni wachafu kwa hilo 
mimi nalitilia mkazo sana tuweze kupitisha hoja hii. Na upande mwengine pia ilikuwa ni 
kumuongezea Bwana Mwenyekiti kuongezea upande pengine wa mavazi kama vile wat u wa 
Matatu ambavyo wanavaa sare zao za buluu pia ningependa Bwana Mwenyekiti kama 
ungeweza kuongeza upande wa sare za hao madereva. Kwa hayo machache nasema ahsante 
na ninauunga mkono Mswada huu . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Mheshimiwa Mwalimu  Mgwisho . 
 
 Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  Ahsante  sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuweza kunipatia 
nafasi hii ili  niweze kuchangia M swada huu. Kwanza n asimama kwa dhati kuunga mkono 
Mswada huu kwa sababu madereva wengi wa tuk tuk hawafuati sheria, nishafikwa na dereva 
wa tuk tuk kugonga gari yangu na yule dereva alikuwa hana hata kita mbulisho wala leseni ya 
kuendesha.  
November 2 8, 2018               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5  Kwa hivyo naunga mkono Mswada huu; hii sheria iweze kufu atiliwa na hii sheria 
hawataweza kulalamika kwa sababu wamepewa mda wa kutosha miezi sita ili waw eze 
kujirekebisha . Hivyo basi M swada huu una  umuhimu sana  na naomba Jumba hili tuweze 
kuunga mkono Mswada huu ili tuweze kusafiri kwa salama katika usafiri huu wakutumia tuk 
tuk, kama unavyoona usafiri mwingi sana hapa kwetu Mombasa ni tuk tuk, kwa hivyo n i 
wajibu wenye tuk tuk, madereva wa tuk tuk waw eze kutambulikana na waweze kufu ata 
sheria, ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Prischillah, Chair on transport.  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.)  Mumba : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, mim i nimesimama pia 
kuunga mkono maana nilipata nafasi muafaka kutokea jana niliweza kuipitia kwa kirefu ile 
nakala yangu ambayo nilichukua jana wakati wa ilipoekelewa kwa mara ya kwanza, na 
nikaona hizi sheria zote ambazo z iko ni sheria muafaka za kuweza kus isitiza madereva 
waweze kuzizingatia kama vile ilivyo wekwa sheria kwa matatu  na magari mengine . Kwa 
hivyo mimi nimeona ni sawa kabisa i li tuweze kuboresha usafiri wa T uk tuk na tuweze 
kuweka vibali maalum kwa sababu hata pia visa tumesikia kadhaa wa kadha a ya watu 
wakilalamika kuwa wamebebwa na tuk tuk wengine wameibiwa, wengine hawajui 
wafuatilizie wapi  kwa sababu ya kuwa kuna wenye tuk  tuk ambao hat a kutambulikana 
hawatambulikani.  
 Kwa hivyo kwa vibali kwa rangi, kupitia kwa  zone ya kujua kuwa kama ni Likoni  
tunajua kibali chake ni rangi hii ili tuweze kujua kwa haraka wakati kutakuwa na matatizo 
yanatakikana kutekelezwa kwa dharura , ikiwa ni eneo f ulani tuk tuk hiyo imefanya maovu, 
hivyo basi  nimesimama kuunga mkono kikamilifu . Hata nao na tulikuwa tumec helewa kuleta 
Mswada kama huu ili uweze kurekebisha mambo mengi, kwa hivyo ninashukuru hata kwa 
aliyeleta M swada huu na mimi kama  Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Uchukuzi  nimeunga mkono 
kikamilifu na nikijua kuwa sio tupitishe hapa tu na ikose kutekelezwa, nitahak ikisha pia 
nimef uatilizia kuhakikisha kuwa haya yote yali yopitishwa hapa leo yameweza kutekelezwa 
kwa wakati muafaka.   
 Hii ni k wa sababu tumepewa mda wa miezi sita itakuwa ni jukumu la Mwenyekiti wa 
Uchukuzi  ambaye ndie mimi niweze kuf uatilizia mpaka niha kikishe haya majukumu ambayo 
yamewekwa katika sehemu tofauti tofauti ya viong ozi wa ma  tuk tuk na wale mashirika 
waweze k uhakikisha mambo yametekelezwa. Kwa hivyo nimeshukuru na ninasema pongezi 
kwa aliyeleta M swada huu ili hata kesho tukiwa tunaangalia ma rekebisho tutaweza kuf uatizia 
kwa vizuri na tukiwa tumeweza kujikinga kikamilifu. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Chair. Y es Hon. Mary  
Osongo.  
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Osongo : Thank you Mr. Speaker for th e opportunity surr endered to me. I 
support the M otion in that we get that kidnapping that is being done in Mombasa, those who 
do the kidnapping mostly they use tuk tuk s so when the colo urs are being placed like when 
the Island zone green, when som ebody is kidnapped the chil d atleast you will know where to 
go to or to follow when the people are doing the follow up for the child or the person who is 
kidnapped. Secondly the tuk tuk drivers are very careless with their driving and when they 
are given the rules I think they will be observing them and will get a lot of safety and they 
will drive carefully and many accidents will not occur , so I stand to support.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Thoya Renson.  
 
November 2 8, 2018               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 6  Hon. Thoya:  Bwana Spika  pia mimi itakuwa vyema nitie pumzi mjadala huu ; naunga 
mkono hususan tukiangazia nidhamu ambazo ziko na hawa waungwana , nafikiri serikali kuu 
imeangazia sana matatu na magari mengineo makubwa makubwa lakini hii se kta wakati 
unatembea kwa barabara unaona kama ambae hawako katika sheria unawe za kuwa unaenda 
mara unaona boda  boda  kanapita huku huku . Kwa hivyo ni Mswada ambao hususan utajenga 
ajenda kubwa ya nidhamu na bila nidhamu japokuwa tunahitaji usafiri wa boda  boda  ama tuk  
tuk ikiwa hawatakuwa na nidhamu ya kutosha , sio vyema wawe barabar ani. Kwa hivyo mbali 
na hapo hususan wale maaskari wetu waweze kutilia nguvu kuhakikisha kwamba wameweza 
kuangazia sheria za nidhamu ambazo ziko hapa na hata sheria za nidhamu ambazo zimeweza 
kutoka kule kwa serikali kuu ni kizungumzia swala zima la rangi. Rangi ni kitu kikubwa 
ambacho swala hilo la nidhamu na usalama wa tuk  tuk barabarani halitakuwa linaachiliwa 
maaskari peke yake itakuwa ni rahisi hata raia ambae yuko Likoni kujua kwamba hii Tuk  tuk 
imetoka Jomvu na imefanya uhalifu nafikiri serikali kuu i mejaribu lakini mpaka usimamishe 
mtu uangalie TLB yake yasema wapi lakini kwa macho hata raia ambae hakwenda shule 
atakuwa anajua hii gari imetoka Jomvu tuk  tuk imetoka Jomvu  ama hii imetoka Likoni . Kwa 
hivyo naunga mkono na mswada huu endapo utapita ambap o mimi nasema moja kwa moja 
ushapita uende kwa wale wanahusika, tunataka hizi sheria ikiwezekana zianze kazi hata kama 
ni wiki ijayo, ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Naam  Mheshimiwa Leila.  
 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Nyache:  Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika ha ta mimi nimesimama kidete 
kuunga mkono M swada huu ; kwanza nampongeza M heshimiwa Hatimy kwa ku tuletea 
Mswada wa maana sana. Haya masu ala ya tuk  tuk ni masu ala nyeti sana ya kuangaziwa ; 
mimi nasema hivyo kwa sababu Mheshimiwa S pika sehemu ya kwangu pale nina koishi mimi 
kuna wakati mmoja tulivamiwa pale usiku na tuk  tuk ndio ilikuwa inatumika wahalifu 
walikuja na wakaingia sehemu ya kuegesha  wakatoa  vioo vya magari y ote na walikuwa 
wamebeba silaha na wakabeba na hiyo tuk  tuk wakaenda nayo wakaenda nazo hivyo v ioo 
vya magari . Kwa hivyo mimi pia naunga mkono sheria ifuatwe na sheria ikifu atwa namna hii 
na hizi rangi zilizowekwa pia wataweza kuogopa kufanya uhalifu ama kutumia hizo tuk  tuk 
zao vi baya na pia watakuwa na nidhamu. Kwa hivyo pia mimi naunga mkono M swada huu, 
ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I can see the Hou se has fully exhausted on 
this M otion I now call upon the mover to  respond, yes Hon . Hatimy.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker I rise under S tanding order 51 as a mov er. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes proceed.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: I wish  to amend paragraph 3 and 4 to consolidate 
Changamwe, Jomvu, c and d to read Changamwe Jomvu and e and f to read Kisauni Nyal i. 
So I think Mr. Speaker this M otion will benef it our C ounty and I think this is a good M otion 
and I take this opportu nity to congratulate my fellow Members for supporting this Motion 
Mr. S peaker, thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Hatimy.  Hon. Members I 
now stand to put a q uestion on adoption of the tuk  tuk operator rules . 
 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
November 2 8, 2018               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 7  
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 There being no other business the House stands adjourned  until Wednesday the 28th at 
2:30p.m. 
 
The House rose at  9:51a.m.  