September  8, 201 6                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         100 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  1 
 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursd ay, 8th September , 2016  
The House met at 2. 33pm. 
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) : Hon.  Members you may s it. Yes 
Hon. Mary.  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Thank Madam Speaker.  Madam S peaker I can see that there is no 
quorum . 
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) : Clerk can you just confirm if 
there's quorum .       
(Clerk confirmed lack of quorum)  
       Sergeant  kindly ring the quorum bell . 
(Sergent At Arms rung quorum bell)  
       Clerk let 's proceed . 
PAPER  
       Well thank you Hon. Ibrahim Kondo Chairperson for Energy, Trade, Industry and  C o 
operative  development;  yes Hon. Hatimy thank you. Any M embe r who has been ...yes Hon. 
Hatimy do you have something ... 
(Laughter ) 
(Hon Mohamed Hatimy  exited the Chambers)  
       I thought Hon.  Hatimy was up to ta lk on behalf of the Chairperson.  Any M ember with 
information ; Committee Members of Energy, any Committee Member? Y es Hon.  Siminyu.  
September  8, 201 6                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         100 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  2 
        Hon. Siminyu:  Thank you Madam Speaker , the C hair is on the way we have communicated 
that we were to take a later date so that we can present the document .  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) :  Is he o n the way or you want a 
later date.  
       Hon. Siminyu : We are seeking a later date.  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) :  You are seeking a later date. Is 
the report ready so that we can allocate it next week?  
       Hon. Siminyu : Yes it is ready.  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) : So if we allocate next week on 
Thursday, yes Hon. Mary.  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Thank you Madam S peaker.  Madam Speaker , the Hon.  Mem ber has 
just told us where the C hairman is of  the trade but I can see with us here we have the report 
which was supposed to be laid , through your permission M adam spe aker, may you please allow 
the Member who is also a Member of this C ommittee to lay this paper.  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs .) Serah Nyamvula) : Hon.  Patrick Siminyu Muriuki 
you are still on, you are still up.  
       Hon. Siminyu : Hon. Speaker according to my C hair he wanted to present this issue himself 
so he asked me to seek for a later date so that it can be done in the simi lar day the laying of paper 
and the report can be table d. on the same day Madam Speaker  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) :  Hon. Zainab .  
       Hon. (Ms.) Zainab Mumba : Ahsante Bi Spika ningependa kusema ya kwamba 
Mheshimiwa aliyes imama sasa amesema ripoti iko kamili lakini mimi naona ripoti haiko kamili 
kwa sababu sahihi ya Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti haijatiwa katika hii stakabadhi . Ahsante sana Bi 
Spika.  
September  8, 201 6                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         100 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  3 
        The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) :  Yes Hon. Patrick Muriu ki. 
       Hon. Siminyu : That’s why I was checking on the report and asked for a later date . 
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) :  Hon.  Members looking at this 
report and the request from the Committee Member Hon. Muriuki for a later date, we will refer  
this report on a later a date of next Thursday same time, as for whether you can table it and you 
can as well lay it. Thank you.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Let's proceed because it was on the same issue on item number 5 . 
MOTION  
       Hon. Duncan Onyango , the Chair for Agriculture and livestock, any M ember from this 
Committee with information ?  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah Mumba : Thank you Madam Speaker, am the Vice Chair of 
Agriculture and livestock; I was with the Chair but the C hair told me that the report is yet to be 
finished so I think after this I will make an effort to see where the report is far. Thank you 
Madam Speaker.  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) :  Thank you Hon. Prischillah so 
can we give you one  more week, the next Thursday to bring the report because I think it has been 
tried several times. Yes Hon.  Prischillah . 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah  Mumba : Thank you Madam Speaker for giving me another chance 
but I would like also ... 
(Interruption)  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) : Can you please use the 
microphone, please can you switch on your microphone .  
September  8, 201 6                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         100 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  4 
        Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah  Mumba : Thank you Madam S peaker for directing me;  I would 
request also before we put the day,  that I s it with my Chair so that we can know when the report  
will be tabled or if I just give....  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Madam Speaker . 
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) :  Yes Hon.  Mary . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika Mheshimiwa ambaye 
anaongea anatukanganya kwa sababu ni sasa hivi ndio amesema ripoti inaendelea kutengenezwa , 
tena s aa hiyo hiyo tena anabadilika anasema ndio anaenda kumtafuta Mwenyekiti wake sasa ndio 
tujue g ani ni gani? Tafadhali naomba Ju mba hili Mheshimiwa ambaye anaongea Jumba hili ni la 
sheria usitukanganye.  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) :  Hon.  Mumba yes .  
       Hon.  (Mrs.)  Prischillah  Mumba : Thank you Madam Speaker ; as I had ear lier said the 
report is in the process being finished but I cannot say the report will be ready by Thursday or 
either Wednesday or either Tuesday but the report in on the way . So I will have to sit with my 
Chair Madam Speaker because I have my Chair so tha t in the time the report will be ready 
maybe on Thursday , maybe in two weeks time I have to sit with my Chair so that I can know the 
duration of the report needed in the House. Thank you Madam Chair.  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ):  I think this report was already 
here what was required is the adoption and that's why we have a Motion so we will give you 
until next week Thursday sorry Wednesday afternoon for the report to come because the report 
has already been table d, so next wee k Wednesday afternoon.  
       Hon.  (Mrs.)  Prischillah  Mumba : Thank you Madam Speaker.  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) :  Yes Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
September  8, 201 6                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         100 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  5 
        Yes this is a Statement , is my statement and I will defer it to next week Thursda y. Yes Clerk .  
STATEMENT  
       I have received a message from Hon.  Zainab Said Ali informing me that she will not be in 
the House today and this statement be deferred to next week Thursday.  
STATEMENT  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvu la): Hon.  Paul Onje . 
       Hon. Onje:  Ahsante sana Bi Spika. Bi  Spika mimi taarifa  yangu ni mambo ya usalama 
kwenye eneo langu kule Wodi ya Junda. Bi Spika tunajua ya kwamba serikali ni kulinda 
wananchi wake na mali yake lakini kule kwangu Wodi ya Junda k una vijana wamejitokeza 
kutatiza shughuli ya wananchi, biashara usalama pale umezorota Bi Spika.  
       Hasa ukiingia eneo la Kadongo steji pale Bi Spika kuna tuta moja kubwa ukielekea huko 
sehemu ya Mishomoroni mkono wa kushoto utaona kuna bomba  kubwa ya  stima na hi lo bomba  
kubwa kuna kibanda chengine hapo pia kikubwa cha mbao ambacho kina mashine ndani yake na 
hilo eneo Bi Spika kuna vijana ambao huwa wanakaa tu kwa jina la kwamba ni manamba 
wanangoja matatu wengine wanakaa hapo hata hujui wanatoka wapi?   
       Kwa hiyo wale ambao wanawaonea sana ni kina mama, mama akipanda kwenye tuktuk 
tayari kipochi kishakatwa na kisu kinaenda ; mara mama anapiga simu, simu ishachukuliwa 
inaenda mpaka kuna juzi Bi Spika kuna mama ametoka Kongowea na ndizi zimeanza kuiv a hizo 
ndizi zilichukuliwa wakakimbia nazo mama akabaki kwenye Tuktuk  akiwa hajui nini cha 
kufanya?  
       Kwa hivyo Bi Spika mimi naomba ikiwa kuna uwezekano wowote vile serikali inaweza 
kufanya ili wale vijana wachukuliwe hatua ningeshukuru ; sababu nyen gine ni kwa mba 
wanafanya kazi yao kuanzia Ijumaa, Jumamosi mpaka J umapili n dio sasa wanamaliza kazi 
kabisa;  kazi wanafanya mpaka saa sita usiku wakukutana na wewe kama wewe kidogo 
unashindana h utaki kitu kidogo wanakukata na panga.  
September  8, 201 6                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         100 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  6 
        Kwa hivyo Bi Spika hata mimi baadhi ya vijana wengine niliweza kupeleka baadhi ya 
majina yao nikampelekea OCPD wetu kule  kituo cha polisi cha  Dog Station , majina mengine pia 
nikapeleka Kituo cha stesheni ya Nyali nikampa OCS lakini mpaka saa hii sijaona mabadiliko 
yeyote wanakaa pale lakini polisi wanawaona pale lakini hakuna hatua yeyote wanachukua lakini 
wewe Bi Spika unatoka kwako unaenda kununua mboga unashikwa tu wewe ambaye ni mtu 
ambaye huna hata hatia unashikwa unaambiwa unaranda randa tu mtaani lakini wale ambao 
wanakosesha raha mtaani hawafanywi lolote.  
       Kwa hiyo mimi naomba mimi kama Mwakilishi wa eneo hilo hao vijana wachukuliwe hatua 
manake ni vijana wadogo sana Mheshimiwa Spika hata ukiwaona utashangaa kazi yao ni kuiba 
na wengi wao wana umri mdogo wa m iaka 14, 12, 13 . 
       Kwa hivyo ni watu hata sio vizuri watu wakae wakiangalia wanatatiza amani naomba Bi 
Spika tupatie mwelekeo tuone watu wangu wanakaa na amani na wafanye biashara zao bila 
tatizo. A hsante sana.  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs .) Serah Nyamvula) : What we will do is to refer this 
statement to the security committee led by Hon.  Ndanda to bring a report because this issue is a 
very urgent issue and I will give it seven  days and the issue is not only in Junda . I think we h ave 
issue of insecurity in the whole of Kisauni and I think it is known but it is the action after this 
issue has come to this House several times.  
STATEMENT  
       Hon.  Mary Akinyi . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante sana Mheshim iwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika ningepen da kuwa 
taarifa hii iweze kurekebishwa hapa haikuwa manhole  bali ni trench ... 
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) :  The amendment is noted, 
continue.  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika katika ene o 
Bunge la Airport kuna trench ambayo imechimbwa;  shimo ambalo limechimbwa kama la maji 
September  8, 201 6                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         100 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  7 
 taka ambayo iko na urefu kidogo na imechimbwa ili kupata mahali pa kupitishia maji na ni 
mahali majumba yako.  
       Majumba yanapakana na hiyo trench  pia ikachimbwa i li yale maji ya mvua yapitie na yawe 
yanaingia katika ile sehemu ya maji taka  ambayo imejengwa pale na katika hiyo shimo ama 
drainage  ambayo imechimbwa mbele ya majumba na haikufin ikwa kumefunikwa tu mahali 
padogo kama daraja ambalo watu wanapitia na katik a pale ambapo kumefunikwa kidogo mahali 
watu wanapitia Bi Spika ni kama ambaye kuna maafa tunangoja kwa sababu iko mlangoni mwa 
pale watu wanapitia na watoto pia wanaishi hapo hapo . 
       Sasa katika hilo shimo watoto wale ambao wanatambaa kuna hatari amb apo wanaweza 
wakatambaa hadi wakai ngia katika lile shimo na hilo shimo ambalo limechimbwa hapo hata 
watoto wanacheza cheza hapo ambapo wanaweza hata kusukumana hata kukiwa kuna mvua 
kubwa wanaweza kusukumana hata mtoto anaweza kuingia ndani akaenda mpaka n a hiyo 
drainage  ambayo inapeleka maji  kwa hivyo mtoto akasukumwa na maji na akapoteza maisha.  
       Kwa hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika ninaomba kuwa Kamati ambayo inahusika ambayo 
imechimba hiyo ninaomba kuwa waende wafunike hapo mahali pote kwa sababu hata hapo hapo 
hilo shimo limechimbwa utapata wakaazi kwa vile liko kilangoni na majumba kadhaa watu 
wamepageuza kama jaa sasa wanatoka na takataka zao pia pale wanatupa tu hapo ndani ya hilo 
shimo ambalo lilikuwa limechimbwa hapo.  
        Kwa hivyo naomba ni jambo  ambalo lina hatari linaweza kutokea wakati wowote kwa 
hivyo naomba Kamati husika ama kitengo husika iweze kuchukulia hilo jambo na uzito ili 
tukaweze kuzuia maafa  isije tukapata maafa ndio sasa tunaanza kusema kuwa kwa nini 
hatukusema? A hsante sana  Bi Spika. 
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) : Thank you Hon.  Mary this is a 
very...., all statement s are very sensitive in this House and need action to be taken and I refer this 
to the Committee of Transport and Infrastructure and come a report of this issue within seven 
days, Hon.  Amir Thoya the  Chairperson is also here.  
MOTION  
September  8, 201 6                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         100 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  8 
        Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Madam Speaker . 
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Madam  Speaker.  Madam Speaker I beg to move a 
Motion to give Notice of Motion ; that all Executive Committee Members to appear before the 
Whole House to give quarterly reports for their departments Madam Speaker , in the Whole 
House.  
(Applause ) 
       Thank you.  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) :  Hon.  Members am just 
consulting, Hon.  Hatimy do you want us to discuss it now ...  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Madam Speaker , this is a M otion which am trying to 
give Notice of M otion so I  want it to be allocated time so that it can come next week .  
       The Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) :  The allocation  of the M otion is 
granted next week any particular date I think it is very urgent from where I am sitting next week 
Tuesday.  
(Applause ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
       This House stands adjourned until next week on Tuesday at 2.30 pm. 
The House rose at 3.05pm.  